florida department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction july num these florida department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction july num are hereby approved for application on highway and related construction contracts as referenced in the contract plans or specifications and they shall apply as noted and amended by those documents .
stefanie maxwell p.e .
manager program management office ________________________________________________ i hereby certify that these standard specifications were prepared by me or under my responsible charge compiled from specifications prepared examined adopted and implemented by the florida department of transportation in accordance with established procedures and as approved by the federal highway administration .
the official record of this document is the electronic file signed and sealed under rule numgnum f.a.c .
dan hurtado p.e .
state specifications engineer ii table of contents division i general requirements and covenants section page num definitions and terms num num proposal requirements and conditions num num award and execution of contract num num scope of the work num num control of the work num num control of materials num num legal requirements and responsibility to the public num num prosecution and progress num num measurement and payment num division ii construction details general construction operations num construction equipment general requirements num num mobilization num num maintenance of traffic num num temporary work structures num num prevention control and abatement of erosion and water pollution num num contractor quality control general requirements num num litter removal and mowing num num monitor existing structures num clearing construction site num clearing and grubbing num earthwork and related operations num excavation and embankment num num flowable fill num num excavation for structures and pipe num num geosynthetic reinforcement num num stabilizing num num prepared soil layer num num cracking and reseating existing concrete pavement num base courses num rock base num num graded aggregate base num num reworking limerock base num iii num limerock stabilized base num num superpave asphalt base num num reclaimed asphalt pavement base num num optional base course num num turnout construction num num asphalt treated permeable base num num cement treated permeable base num num granular subbase num bituminous treatments surface courses and concrete pavement num prime and tack coats num num hot mix asphalts plant methods and equipment num num milling of existing asphalt pavement num num hot mix asphalt general construction requirements num num superpave asphalt concrete num num asphalt concrete friction courses num num value added asphalt pavement num num miscellaneous asphalt pavement num num asphalt membrane interlayer num num portland cement concrete num num portland cement concrete class ns num num cement concrete pavement num num grinding concrete pavement num num concrete pavement slab replacement num num value added portland cement concrete pavement num num bridge approach expansion joints num structures num concrete structures num num threesided precast concrete culvert num num precast concrete box culvert num num epoxy injection of cracks in concrete structures num num sealing cracks and concrete structure surfaces num num reinforcing for concrete num num installation of postinstalled anchor systems and dowels for structural applications in concrete elements num num inlets manholes and junction boxes num num pipe culverts num num pipe liner num num structural plate pipe and pipe arch culverts num num trench drain num num underdrains num num french drains num num edgedrain draincrete num num precast concrete drainage products num num precast prestressed concrete construction num iv num prestressed soil anchors num num precast segmental bridge construction num num structures foundations num num bridge deck joints num num bitumen coating and polyethylene sheeting on concrete piles num num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num num multirotational bearings num num posttensioning num num timber structures num num fiber reinforced polymer fender systems num incidental construction num shear connectors num num steel grid floors num num bridge drainage system num num navigation lights for fixed bridges num num plastic filter fabric geotextile num num metal pedestrianbicycle railings guiderails and handrails num num concrete gutter curb elements and traffic separator num num concrete barriers traffic railings and parapets num num concrete sidewalk and driveways num num patterned pavement num num concrete ditch and slope pavement num num asphalt concrete curb num num architectural pavers num num detectable warnings num num revetment systems num num noise and perimeter walls num num guardrail num num resetting guardrail num num crash cushions num num rumble strips num num retaining wall systems num num fencing num num directional bore num num jack and bore num num coating new structural steel num num coating existing structural steel num num repair of galvanized surfaces num num antigraffiti coatings num num performance turf num num plastic erosion mat num traffic control signals and devices num general requirements for traffic control signals and devices num num manufacturers warranties for traffic control signals and devices num v num acceptance procedures for traffic control signals and devices num num grounding and lightning protection num num conduit num num signal cable num num communication cable num num span wire assembly num num pull splice and junction boxes num num electrical power service assemblies num num prestressed concrete poles num num aluminum poles pedestals and posts num num galvanized steel poles mast arms and monotube assemblies num num vehicular traffic signal assemblies num num pedestrian signal assemblies num num midblock crosswalk enhancement assemblies num num mast arm span wire and pole mounting assemblies num num vehicle detection system num num signal priority and preemption systems num num pedestrian detection system num num traffic controller assemblies num num traffic controllers num num traffic cabinets num num equipment shelter num num traffic controller accessories num num system control equipment num num video equipment num num network devices num num traffic control system auxiliaries num num traffic monitoring site equipment and materials num signing pavement marking and lighting num highway signing num num profiled thermoplastic pavement markings num num object markers and delineators num num raised pavement markers and bituminous adhesive num num two reactive components pavement markings num num painted pavement markings num num thermoplastic pavement markings num num permanent tape pavement markings num num highway lighting system num division iii materials aggregates num coarse aggregate num num fine aggregate num vi flexiblepavement materials including materials for stabilizing num base and stabilized base materials num num stabilization materials num num bituminous materials num num mineral filler num num ground tire rubber num materials for portland cement concrete structural pavement and miscellaneous num portland cement and blended cement num num water for concrete num num admixtures for concrete num num curing materials for concrete num num epoxy compounds num num pozzolans and slag num num materials for concrete repair num accessory materials for concrete pavement and concrete structures num metal accessory materials for concrete pavement and concrete structures num num nonmetallic accessory materials for concrete pavement and concrete structures num num prestressing strand and bar num num nonshrink grout num num postinstalled anchor systems for structural applications in concrete elements num num duct filler for posttensioned structures num drainage materials num precast concrete pipe gaskets num num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch including underdrain num num structural plate steel pipe and pipe arch num num aluminum pipe including underdrain pipe arch and structural plate pipe and pipe arch num num cast iron pipe num num optional drainage products and liner repair systems num num miscellaneous components for manholes inlets and other structures num timber products and materials num inspection of timber products num num structural timber num num timber piling including timber sheet piling num num timber fence posts and braces num num timber treatment including treating materials num vii metal materials and fabrication details for metal items num posttensioning components num num structural steel and miscellaneous metal items other than aluminum num num general provisions for aluminum items including welding num num components for guardrail num pavement markings coatings and recycled material miscellaneous num materials for raised pavement markers bituminous adhesive num num pavement marking materials num num recycled plastic products num num fiber reinforced polymer frp composite structural shapes num num structural coating materials num erosion control materials num turf materials num num fertilizer num num water for grassing num num geosynthetic materials num num soil layer materials num traffic control materials num temporary traffic control device materials num num highway lighting materials num num object markers and delineators num num retroreflective and nonreflective sheeting and sign panel fabrication num vii division i general requirements and covenants section num definitions and terms num general .
these specifications are written to the bidder prior to award of the contract and to the contractor .
within divisions i and ii of the specifications sentences that direct the contractor to perform work are written in the active voiceimperative mood .
these directions to the contractor are written as commands .
in the imperative mood the subject the bidder or the contractor is understood .
all other requirements to be performed by others with the exception of the method of measurement and the basis of payment articles have been written in the active voice but not in the imperative mood .
sentences written in the active voice identify the party responsible for performing the action .
for example the engineer will determine the density of the compacted material .
certain requirements of the contractor may also be written in the active voice rather than active voiceimperative mood .
division iii of the specifications materials is written in the passive voice writing style .
num abbreviations .
the following abbreviations when used in the contract documents represent the full text shown .
aan american association of nurserymen inc. aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc the associated general contractors of america inc. agma american gear manufacturers association aia american institute of architects .
aisi american iron and steel institute ansi american national standards institute inc. area american railway engineering association asce american society of civil engineers asme american society of mechanical engineers astm american society for testing and materials awg american wire gauge awpa american wood preservers association aws american welding society awwa american water works association crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute easa electrical apparatus service association epa environmental protection agency of the united states government fdot florida department of transportation fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards num return to table of contents ieee institute of electrical and electronics engineers ies illuminating engineering society ipcea insulated power cable engineers association iso international organization for standards mash aashto manual for assessing safety hardware mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association nfpa national fire protection association nist national institute for standards and technology noaa national oceanic and atmospheric administration osha occupational safety and health administration sae society of automotive engineers si international system of units sspc society of protective coatings ul underwriters laboratories each of the above abbreviations when followed by a number or letter designation or combination of numbers and letters designates a specification test method or other code or recommendation of the particular authority or organization shown .
use standards specifications test methods or other codes as specified in the current edition at the time of the bid opening .
num definitions .
the following terms when used in the contract documents have the meaning described advertisement .
the public announcement as required by law inviting bids for work to be performed or materials to be furnished usually issued as notice to contractors or notice to bidders .
article .
the numbered prime subdivision of a section of these specifications .
bidder .
an individual firm or corporation submitting a proposal for the proposed work .
bridge .
a structure including supports erected over a depression or over an obstruction such as water highway or railway or for elevated roadway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a length measured along the center of the roadway of more than num feet between the inside faces of end supports .
a multiplespan box culvert is considered a bridge where the length between the extreme ends of the openings exceeds num feet .
calendar day .
every day shown on the calendar ending and beginning at midnight .
num return to table of contents contract .
the term contract means the entire and integrated agreement between the parties thereunder and supersedes all prior negotiations representations or agreements either written or oral .
the contract documents form the contract between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties thereunder including but not limited to the performance of the work and the basis of payment .
contract claim claim .
a written demand submitted to the department by the contractor in compliance with num seeking additional monetary compensation time or other adjustments to the contract the entitlement or impact of which is disputed by the department .
contract documents .
the term contract documents includes advertisement for proposal proposal certification as to publication and notice of advertisement for proposal appointment of agent by nonresident contractors noncollusion affidavit warranty concerning solicitation of the contract by others resolution of award of contract executed form of contract performance bond and payment bond specifications plans including revisions thereto issued during construction standard plans addenda or other information mailed or otherwise transmitted to the prospective bidders prior to the receipt of bids work orders and supplemental agreements all of which are to be treated as one instrument whether or not set forth at length in the form of contract .
note as used in sections num and num only contract documents do not include work orders and supplementary agreements .
as used in section num only contract documents also do not include resolution of award of contract executed form of contract and performance and payment bond .
contract bond .
the security furnished by the contractor and the surety as a guaranty that the contractor shall fulfill the terms of the contract and pay all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the project .
contract letting .
the date that the department opened the bid proposals .
contract time .
the number of calendar days allowed for completion of the contract work including authorized time extensions .
contractor .
the individual firm joint venture or company contracting with the department to perform the work .
contractors engineer of record .
a professional engineer registered in the state of florida other than the engineer of record or his subcontracted consultant who undertakes the design and drawing of components num return to table of contents of the permanent structure as part of a redesign or cost savings initiative proposal or for repair designs and details of the permanent work .
the contractors engineer of record may also serve as the specialty engineer .
the contractors engineer of record must be an employee of a prequalified firm .
the firm shall be prequalified in accordance with the rules of the department of transportation chapter num .
any corporation or partnership offering engineering services must hold a certificate of authorization from the florida department of business and professional regulation .
as an alternate to being an employee of a prequalified firm the contractors engineer of record may be a departmentapproved specialty engineer .
for items of the permanent work declared by the state construction office to be major or structural the work performed by a departmentapproved specialty engineer must be checked by another departmentapproved specialty engineer .
an individual engineer may become a departmentapproved specialty engineer if the individual meets the professional engineer experience requirements set forth within the individual work groups in chapter num rules of the department of transportation florida administrative code .
departmentapproved specialty engineers are listed on the state construction website .
departmentapproved specialty engineers will not be authorized to perform redesigns or cost savings initiative proposal designs of items fully detailed in the plans .
controlling work items .
the activity or work item on the critical path having the least amount of total float .
the controlling item of work will also be referred to as a critical activity .
culverts .
any structure not classified as a bridge that provides an opening under the roadway .
delay .
any unanticipated event action force or factor which extends the contractors time of performance of any controlling work item under the contract .
the term delay is intended to cover all such events actions forces or factors whether styled delay disruption interference impedance hindrance or otherwise which are beyond the control of and not caused by the contractor or the contractors subcontractors materialmen suppliers or other agents .
this term does not include extra work .
department .
state of florida department of transportation .
developmental specification .
see definition for specifications .
engineer .
the director office of construction acting directly or through duly authorized representatives such representatives acting within the scope of the duties and authority assigned to them .
note in order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these specifications it is provided that whenever anything is or is to be done if as or when or num return to table of contents where acceptable accepted approval approved authorized condemned considered necessary contemplated deemed necessary designated determined directed disapproved established given indicated insufficient ordered permitted rejected required reserved satisfactory specified sufficient suitable suspended unacceptable or unsatisfactory it shall be understood as if the expression were followed by the words by the engineer to the engineer or of the engineer .
engineer of record .
the professional engineer or engineering firm registered in the state of florida that develops the criteria and concept for the project performs the analysis and is responsible for the preparation of the plans and specifications .
the engineer of record may be departmental in house staff or a consultant retained by the department .
the contractor shall not employ the engineer of record as the contractors engineer of record or as a specialty engineer .
equipment .
the machinery and equipment together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance thereof and all other tools and apparatus necessary for the construction and acceptable completion of the work .
extra work .
any work which is required by the engineer to be performed and which is not otherwise covered or included in the project by the existing contract documents whether it be in the nature of additional work altered work deleted work work due to differing site conditions or otherwise .
this term does not include a delay .
federal state and local rules and regulations .
the term federal state and local rules and regulations includes any and all federal state and local laws bylaws ordinances rules regulations orders permits or decrees including environmental laws rules regulations and permits .
highway street or road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
holidays .
days designated by the state legislature or cabinet as holidays which include but are not limited to new years day martin luther kings birthday memorial day independence day labor day veterans day thanksgiving day and the following friday and christmas day .
inspector .
an authorized representative of the engineer assigned to make official inspections of the materials furnished and of the work performed by the contractor .
laboratory .
the official testing laboratory used by the department .
num return to table of contents major item of work .
any item of work having an original contract value in excess of num of the original contract amount .
materials .
any substances to be incorporated in the work under the contract .
median .
the portion of a divided highway or street separating the traveled ways for traffic moving in opposite directions .
plans .
the approved plans including reproductions thereof showing the location character dimensions and details of the work .
proposal bid bid proposal .
the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form to perform the work and to furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted .
proposal form .
the official form or the electronically generated bid item sheets on which the department requires formal bids to be prepared and submitted for the work .
proposal guaranty the security furnished by the bidder as guaranty that the bidder will enter into the contract for the work if the department accepts the proposal .
rightofway .
the land that the department has title to or right of use for the road and its structures and appurtenances and for material pits furnished by the department .
roadbed .
the portion of the roadway occupied by the subgrade and shoulders .
roadway .
the portion of a highway within the limits of construction .
secretary .
secretary of transportation state of florida department of transportation acting directly or through an assistant or other representative authorized by him the chief officer of the department of transportation .
section .
a numbered prime division of these specifications .
num return to table of contents special event .
any event including but not limited to a festival fair run or race motorcade parade civic activity cultural activity charity or fund drive sporting event or similar activity designated in the contract documents .
special provisions .
see definition for specifications .
specialty engineer .
a professional engineer registered in the state of florida other than the engineer of record or his subcontracted consultant who undertakes the design and drawing preparation of components systems or installation methods and equipment for specific temporary portions of the project work or for special items of the permanent works not fully detailed in the plans and required to be furnished by the contractor .
the specialty engineer may also provide designs and details repair designs and details or perform engineering analyses for items of the permanent work declared by the state construction office to be minor or nonstructural .
for items of work not specifically covered by the rules of the department of transportation a specialty engineer is qualified if he has the following qualifications num .
registration as a professional engineer in the state of florida .
num .
the education and experience necessary to perform the submitted design as required by the florida department of business and professional regulation .
specifications .
the directions provisions and requirements contained herein together with all stipulations contained in the contract documents setting out or relating to the method and manner of performing the work or to the quantities and qualities of materials and labor to be furnished under the contract .
standard specifications standard specifications for road and bridge construction an electronic book applicable to all department contracts containing adopted requirements setting out or relating to the method or manner of performing work or to the quantities and qualities of materials and labor .
supplemental specifications approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications applicable to all department contracts .
special provisions specific clauses adopted by the department that add to or revise the standard specifications or supplemental specifications setting forth conditions varying from or additional to the standard specifications applicable to a specific project .
technical special provisions specifications of a technical nature prepared signed and sealed by an engineer registered in the state of florida other than the state specifications engineer or his designee that are made part of the contract as an attachment to the contract documents .
developmental specification a specification developed around a new process procedure or material .
num return to table of contents standard plans .
standard plans for road and bridge construction an electronic book describing and detailing aspects of the work .
where the term design standards appears in the contract documents it will be synonymous with standard plans .
standard specifications .
see definition for specifications .
state .
state of florida .
subarticle .
a headed and numbered subdivision of an article of a section of these specifications .
subgrade .
the portion of the roadbed immediately below the base course or pavement including below the curb and gutter valley gutter shoulder and driveway pavement .
the subgrade limits ordinarily include those portions of the roadbed shown in the plans to be constructed to a design bearing value or to be otherwise specially treated .
where no limits are shown in the plans the subgrade section extends to a depth of num inches below the bottom of the base or pavement and outward to num inches beyond the base pavement or curb and gutter .
substructure .
all of that part of a bridge structure below the bridge seats including the parapets backwalls and wingwalls of abutments .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
superstructure .
the entire bridge structure above the substructure including anchorage and anchor bolts but excluding the parapets backwalls and wingwalls of abutments .
supplemental agreement a written agreement between the contractor and the department and signed by the surety modifying the contract within the limitations set forth in these specifications .
supplemental specifications see definition for specifications .
surety .
the corporate body that is bound by the contract bond with and for the contractor and responsible for the performance of the contract and for payment of all legal debts pertaining thereto .
technical special provisions .
see definition for specifications .
num return to table of contents traveled way .
the portion of the roadway providing for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
unilateral payment .
a payment of money made to the contractor by the department pursuant to section num florida statutes num for sums the department determines to be due to the contractor for work performed on the project and whereby the contractor by acceptance of such payment does not waive any rights the contractor may otherwise have against the department for payment of any additional sums the contractor claims are due for the work .
work .
all labor materials and incidentals required to execute and complete the requirements of the contract including superintendence use of equipment and tools and all services and responsibilities prescribed or implied .
work order .
a written agreement between the contractor and the department modifying the contract within the limitations set forth in these specifications .
funds for this agreement are drawn against the initial contingency pay item or a contingency supplemental agreement .
working day .
any calendar day on which the contractor works or is expected to work in accordance with the approved work progress schedule .
num return to table of contents section num proposal requirements and conditions num prequalification of bidders .
except as noted below prequalify with the department to be eligible to bid .
the department publishes regulations covering prequalification of bidders under separate cover .
the department does not require the bidder to be a prequalified contractor if bidding construction contracts of num or less or if constructing buildings .
in addition at its sole discretion the department may waive prequalification requirements on contracts of num or less .
for construction contracts requiring prequalification file an application for qualification using the departments online prequalification application system giving detailed information with respect to financial resources equipment past record personnel and experience .
for qualified applicants the department will issue a certificate fixing the types of work and the aggregate amount of work that the department allows the prequalified bidder to have under contract at any one time .
a person or affiliate who has been placed on the convicted vendor list following a conviction for a public entity crime may not submit the following num .
a bid on a contract to provide any goods or services to a public entity .
num .
a bid on a contract with a public entity for the construction or repair of a public building or public work .
num .
bids on leases of real property to a public entity .
a person or affiliate who has been placed on the convicted vendor list following a conviction for a public entity crime may not be awarded or perform work as a contractor supplier subcontractor or consultant under a contract with any public entity and may not transact business with any public entity in excess of the threshold amount provided in section num f.s .
for category two .
all restrictions apply for a period of num months from the date of placement on the convicted vendor list .
all prequalified contractors bidding on any contract must certify their total dollar amount of work underway and submit form num or a spreadsheet in a similar format prior to submitting a bid .
this information must be submitted at least once during the month the bid is due via the work underway link in the contractor prequalification system .
num proposals .
num obtaining proposal forms obtain proposal forms under the conditions stipulated in the advertisement .
the advertisement states the location and description of the work to be performed the estimate of the various quantities if applicable the pay items of work to be performed if applicable the contract time the amount of proposal guaranty and the date time and place of the opening of proposals .
the plans specifications and other documents designated in the advertisement are part of the proposal whether attached or not .
upon advertising the department will make the proposal forms available for download as an electronic file from the online ordering system or provide the proposal forms on portable electronic media as stipulated in the advertisement .
this file contains the information to be used by the bidder who has ordered and obtained the proposal forms to submit the proposal .
num return to table of contents the department is not responsible for loss of or damage to the portable electronic media after it has been received by or delivered to the bidder .
if loss or damage occurs the bidder may order replacement proposal forms .
if the bidder requests replacement proposal forms the department will attempt to provide the replacement by overnight delivery or by electronic transmittal of the files .
the department will not be held responsible if the bidder can not complete and submit a bid due to failure or incomplete delivery of the files .
unless otherwise indicated in the advertisement the bidder has the option to submit a bid either as an internet bid submittal in accordance with num or as a hard copy bid submittal in accordance with num .
when an internet bid submittal is used the hard copy will not be considered .
num department modifications to contract documents notification of modifications to any contract documents will be posted on the departments website at the following url address httpwww.fdot.govcontractslettingsletting_project_info.shtm and will also be transmitted to the bidder .
the email address provided by the bidder at the time of registration for online ordering will be used to transmit notification of modifications .
follow the instructions provided in the notification of modifications to access the amendment files .
the bidder shall take responsibility for downloading the revised information per the instructions included in the notification of modifications .
num internet bid submittals unless otherwise indicated in the advertisement the bidder shall use the departments bid software to prepare a bid for internet submittal .
the department will accept as the official bid the set of proposal forms generated from the departments bid software along with a complete proposal package submitted via the internet in accordance with num and num .
a digital id is required to submit a bid via the internet .
digital ids may be obtained as outlined in the advertisement .
the department will not be responsible for any communications or machine breakdowns transmission interruptions delays or any other problems that interfere with the receipt of proposals as required above either at the bidders transmitting location at the departments receiving location or anywhere between these locations .
receipt or nonreceipt of proposals will not be considered grounds for a bid protest .
the department will not be held responsible if the bidder can not complete or submit a bid due to failure or incomplete delivery of the files submitted via the internet .
num hard copy bid submittals unless otherwise indicated in the advertisement the bidder shall use the departments bid software to prepare a bid for hard copy submittal .
the department will accept as the official bid this set of proposal forms generated from the departments bid software along with a complete proposal package delivered to the department in hard copy in accordance with the instructions listed below and the requirements of num and num .
print and submit bid item sheets generated from the departments bid software on letter size paper .
ensure that all computer generated sheets are legible .
do not submit computer generated sheets using a font size smaller than num point .
return the departments bid software generated proposal as the official bid with the proposal labeled with the bidders name vendor number letting date revision date if applicable and the proposal id .
num return to table of contents num interpretation of estimated quantities .
num lump sum contracts the bidder is responsible for the determination of the quantities for those items constructed within the authorized plan limits or dimensions .
the department does not assume any responsibility for any incidental information in bid documents that may be construed as a quantity of work andor materials .
num contracts other than lump sum for those items constructed within authorized plan limits or dimensions use the quantities shown in the plans and in the proposal form as the basis of the bid .
the department will also use these quantities for final payment as limited by the provisions for the individual items .
for those items having variable final pay quantities that are dependent on actual field conditions use and measurement the quantities shown in the plans and in the proposal form are approximate and provide only a basis for calculating the bid upon which the department will award the contract .
where items are listed for payment as lump sum units and the plans show estimates of component quantities the department is responsible for the accuracy of those quantities limited to the provisions of num .
where items are listed for payment as lump sum units and the plans do not show estimates of component quantities the bidder is solely responsible for their own estimates of such quantities .
the department may increase decrease or omit the estimated quantities of work to be done or materials to be furnished .
num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work .
examine the contract documents and the site of the proposed work carefully before submitting a proposal for the work contemplated .
investigate the conditions to be encountered as to the character quality and quantities of work to be performed and materials to be furnished and as to the requirements of all contract documents .
the department does not guarantee the details pertaining to borings as shown in the plans to be more than a general indication of the materials likely to be found adjacent to holes bored at the site of the work approximately at the locations indicated .
the bidder shall examine boring data where available and make their own interpretation of the subsoil investigations and other preliminary data and shall base their bid solely on their own opinion of the conditions likely to be encountered .
the bidders submission of a proposal is prima facie evidence that the bidder has made an examination as described in this article .
num preparation of proposals .
num general submit proposals on the proposal form described in num .
any pay item that will be provided free or at no cost to the department shall be indicated as free or .num .
if the pay item is left blank or na is used the bid may be declared irregular .
show the total of the bid on the face of the proposal .
num internet bid submittals the bidder shall execute the proposal under the bidders digital id and enter the firms bidding office street address on the bidders information tab in the departments bid software .
this digital id represents the firm as an individual partnership corporation limited liability company or joint venture .
by entering and submitting the digital id the authorized parties obligate the firm to the bid .
internet bid submittals must acknowledge on behalf of the person firm association or corporation submitting the bid certifying that such person firm association or corporation has not either directly or indirectly entered into any agreement participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free num return to table of contents competitive bidding in connection with the submitted bid by indicating such in the proposal .
the department will not consider any bid unless such acknowledgement is included .
num hard copy bid submittals if the proposal is made by an individual either in the bidders own proper person or under a trade or firm name the bidder shall execute the proposal under the bidders signature and enter the firms bidding office street address .
if the proposal is made by a partnership execute the proposal by setting out in full the names of the partners the firm name of the partnership if any have two or more of the general partners or authorized person sign the proposal and enter the firms bidding office street address .
if the proposal is made by a corporation execute the proposal by setting out in full the corporate name and have the president or other legally authorized corporate officer or agent sign the proposal affix the corporate seal and enter the corporations bidding office street address .
if the proposal is made by a limited liability company execute the proposal by setting out the company name have the manager or authorized member sign the proposal and enter the companys bidding office address .
if the proposal is made by a joint venture execute the proposal by setting out the joint venture name have the authorized parties sign the proposal and enter the bidding offices street address .
file with the department form num contained in the proposal which includes an unsworn statement executed by or on behalf of the person firm association or corporation submitting the bid certifying that such person firm association or corporation has not either directly or indirectly entered into any agreement participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free competitive bidding in connection with the submitted bid .
the department will not consider any bid unless such form is properly completed in accordance with the requirements shown thereon .
num rejection of irregular proposals .
a proposal is irregular and the department may reject such proposal if the proposal shows omissions alterations of form additions not specified or required conditional or unauthorized alternate bids or irregularities of any kind or if the unit prices are obviously unbalanced or if the cost is in excess of or below the reasonable cost analysis values or if the bidder submits a proposal which was not generated using the departments bid software .
when the department provides for alternate bids in the proposal form make only one entry for each alternate .
a proposal that provides for alternative bids is irregular and the department may reject such proposal if the bidder makes entries for more than one alternate .
num guaranty to accompany proposals .
the department will not consider any proposal unless accompanied by a proposal guaranty of the character and amount indicated in the advertisement and unless made payable to the florida department of transportation .
submit the proposal with the understanding that the successful bidder shall furnish a contract bond pursuant to the requirements of num .
the bidders proposal guaranty is binding for all projects included in the contract awarded to the contractor pursuant to the provisions of this subarticle .
num delivery of proposals .
num internet bid submittals unless otherwise indicated in the advertisement the proposal may be submitted via the internet .
the department will not accept responsibility for internet bids not meeting the time requirement stipulated in the advertisement .
num hard copy bid submittals unless otherwise indicated in the advertisement the proposal may be submitted via hard copy .
submit the proposal in a sealed envelope bearing on num return to table of contents the outside the name of the bidder the bidders address and the proposal id of the project for which the bidder submitted the bid .
for proposals that are submitted by mail enclose the proposal in a sealed envelope marked as directed above .
enclose the sealed envelope in a second outer envelope addressed to the department at the place designated in the advertisement .
for a proposal that is not submitted by mail deliver the proposal to the contracts office of the department or to the place as designated in the advertisement .
the department will not consider proposals received after the time set for opening bids .
the department will retain these proposals unopened .
num withdrawal or revision of proposals .
num internet bid submittals a bidder may withdraw a proposal any time prior to the bid submittal deadline specified in the advertisement .
the resubmission of any proposal so withdrawn must be made as a complete proposal subject to the provisions of num .
a bidder may revise a proposal any time prior to the bid submittal deadline specified in the advertisement .
revisions may be made via internet in accordance with num or by fax in accordance with num .
the department will not be responsible for any communications or machine breakdowns transmission interruptions delays or any other problems that interfere with the receipt of revisions to proposals as required above either at the bidders transmitting location at the departments receiving location or anywhere between these locations .
receipt or non receipt of revisions to a proposal will not be considered grounds for a bid protest .
the department will not be held responsible if the bidder can not complete or submit revisions to a bid due to failure or incomplete delivery of the files submitted via the internet .
num hard copy bid submittals a bidder may withdraw or revise a proposal after submission provided the department receives a written request to withdraw or revise the proposal prior to the time set for opening of bids .
the resubmission of any proposal withdrawn under this provision is subject to the provisions of num .
legible facsimile fax proposal changes will be accepted if received in full at the fax number listed in the bid solicitation notice by the time proposals are due on the day of the letting and provided that all of the following conditions are met num .
the bidders name is the same on the faxed proposal change as shown on the original proposal .
num .
the proposal change includes the following a .
the correct proposal id .
b .
the correct bid item number for which the price is being changed and the respective unit price change .
c. the correct revised total per item .
d. the revised total bid amount .
e. the signature of the president or vice president of the company .
faxed proposal changes failing to meet all of these requirements will not be considered and will not change the original bid .
the department will not be responsible for any communications or fax machine breakdowns transmission interruptions delays or any other problems that interfere with the receipt of faxed proposal changes as required above either at the bidders fax location at the departments fax location or anywhere between these locations .
receipt or nonreceipt of a faxed proposal change will not be considered grounds for a bid protest .
num return to table of contents num opening of proposals .
the department will open and publicly announce proposals at the time and place indicated in the advertisement .
the department invites bidders their authorized agents and other interested parties to attend .
num disqualification of bidders .
the department may disqualify any bidder and reject the bidders proposal or proposals for any of the following reasons num .
the submission of more than one proposal for the same work from an individual firm or corporation under the same or a different name .
num .
evidence that one bidder has a financial interest in the firm of another bidder for the same work .
num .
evidence of collusion among bidders .
the department will not recognize a participant in such collusion as a bidder for any future work of the department until the department reinstates such participant as a qualified bidder .
num .
failure to qualify in accordance with num .
num .
uncompleted work on other projects that in the judgment of the department could hinder or prevent the prompt completion of the proposed work .
num .
failure to pay or satisfactorily settle all bills due for labor and material on other contracts in force at the time of advertisement for bids .
num .
default under a previous contract .
num .
employment of unauthorized aliens in violation of section numa e of the immigration and nationality act .
num .
falsification on any form required by the department .
num .
the submission of a proposal that was not solicited by the department .
num material samples and statement .
the department may require that the bidder furnish a statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any and all materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples that may be subjected to the tests provided for in these specifications to determine the materials quality and fitness for the work .
num return to table of contents section num award and execution of contract num consideration of bids .
for the purpose of award after opening and reading the proposals the department will consider as the bid the correct summation of each unit bid price multiplied by the estimated quantities shown in the proposal .
on this basis the department will compare the amounts of each bid and make the results of such comparison available to the public .
until the actual award of the contract however the department reserves the right to reject any or all proposals and to waive technical errors that the department determines in its sole discretion to be in the best interest of the state .
the department reserves the right to delete the bid portion of the utility relocation work from the contract .
when the department deletes utility relocation work from the contract the department will recalculate the contract bid tabulations based on the remaining project quantities .
in the event that the department deletes utility relocation work from the contract the utility owner will relocate such utilities in accordance with the backup utility relocation schedule contained in the contract documents .
num award of contract .
num general if the department decides to award the contract the department will award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder whose proposal complies with all the contract document requirements .
if awarded the department will award the contract within num days after the opening of the proposals unless the special provisions change this time limit or the bidder and the department extend the time period by mutual consent .
prior to award of the contract by the department the bidder must provide proof of authorization to conduct business in the state of florida .
num bids exceeding bidders maximum capacity rating prior to award of the contract the department will address bids exceeding a bidders maximum capacity rating and the resulting impact on the bidders qualification to bid in accordance with florida administrative code rules num and num .
num cancellation of award .
the department reserves the right to cancel the award of any contract at any time before the execution of the contract by all parties with no compensation due any of the bidders .
num release of proposal guaranty .
the department will release all proposal guaranties except those of the two lowest responsible bidders immediately following the opening and checking of the proposals .
the department will immediately release the proposal guaranty of the two lowest responsible bidders after the successful bidder delivers the executed contract and a satisfactory contract bond to the department except that the department will not retain the proposal guaranty of the nexttolowest responsible bidder longer than num days after the opening of the proposals unless the department awards the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder prior to the expiration of this time limit .
num return to table of contents num contract bond required .
num general requirements of the contract bond upon award furnish to the department and maintain in effect throughout the life of the contract an acceptable contract bond in a sum at least equal to the amount of the contract .
execute such contract bond on department form num .
obtain the contract bond from a surety licensed to conduct business in the state of florida meeting all of the requirements of the laws of florida and the regulations of the department and having the departments approval .
ensure that the suretys florida licensed insurance agents name address and telephone number is clearly stated on the contract bond form .
the department may waive the requirement for all or a portion of a contract bond if num .
the contract amount is num or less and the department determines that the project is of a noncritical nature and that nonperformance will not endanger the public health safety or property num .
the contractor is a qualified nonprofit agency for the blind or for the other severely handicapped under section num florida statutes or num .
the contractor uses a subcontractor that is a qualified nonprofit agency for the blind or for the other severely handicapped under section num florida statutes .
however the department may not waive more than the amount of the subcontract .
the department may require alternate means of security if it waives the requirement for a contract bond .
num continued acceptability of surety provide a contract bond that remains acceptable to the department throughout the life of the contract .
in the event that the surety executing the contract bond although acceptable to the department at the time of execution of the contract subsequently becomes insolvent or bankrupt or becomes unreliable or otherwise unsatisfactory due to any cause that becomes apparent after the departments initial approval of the surety then the department may require that the contractor immediately replace the contract bond with a similar contract bond issued by a surety that is reliable and acceptable to the department .
in such an event the department will bear all costs of the premium for the new contract bond after deducting any amounts that are returned to the contractor from their payment of premium on the original contract bond .
num default by contractor in case of default on the part of the contractor the department will charge against the contract bond all expenses for services incidental to ascertaining and collecting losses under the contract bond including accounting engineering and legal services together with any and all costs incurred in connection with renegotiation of the contract .
num surety to furnish legal defense as to payment and performance claims or suits the surety shall indemnify and provide defense for the department when called upon to do so for all claims or suits against the department by third parties pertaining to contractor payment or performance issues arising out of the contract where the contractor has failed to timely provide the department such defense .
it is expressly understood that the monetary limitation on the extent of the indemnification shall be the approved contract amount which shall be the original contract amount as may be modified by subsequent supplemental agreements .
num liability for wrongful or criminal act by contractor the principal and surety executing the contract bond shall be liable to the state in any civil action that might be instituted num return to table of contents by the department or any officer of the state authorized in such cases for double any amount in money or property the state might lose or be overcharged or otherwise be defrauded of by any wrongful or criminal act of the contractor their agent or their employees .
num execution of contract and contract bond .
within num calendar days excluding saturdays sundays and state holidays after receipt of the contract award execute the necessary agreements to enter into a contract with the department and return the contract along with a satisfactory contract bond and documentation evidencing all insurance required by num to the departments contracts office that awarded the contract .
for each calendar day excluding saturdays sundays and state holidays the contractor is late in delivering to the departments contracts office all required documents in properly executed form the department will deduct one day from the contract time .
the department will not be bound by any proposal until the department executes the associated contract .
the department will execute the contract within num calendar days excluding saturdays sundays and state holidays after receipt of the signed contract necessary agreements contract bond and all other required documents from the contractor .
num failure by contractor to execute contract and furnish bond .
in the event that the contractor fails to execute the awarded contract and to submit an acceptable contract bond as prescribed in num and num within num calendar days excluding saturdays sundays and state holidays of receipt of the contract award the department may annul the award causing the contractor to forfeit the proposal guaranty to the department as liquidation of damages sustained .
the department may then award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder readvertise or accomplish the work using alternate resources .
num audit of contractors records .
upon execution of the contract the department reserves the right to conduct an audit of the contractors records pertaining to the project .
the department or its representatives may conduct an audit or audits at any time prior to final payment or thereafter pursuant to num .
the department may also require submittal of the records from either the contractor or any subcontractor or material supplier .
as the department deems necessary records include all books of account supporting documents and papers pertaining to the cost of performance of the work .
retain all records pertaining to the contract for a period of not less than three years from the date of the engineers final acceptance of the project unless a longer minimum period is otherwise specified .
upon request make all such records available to the department or its representatives .
for the purpose of this article records include but are not limited to all books of account supporting documents and papers that the department deems necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the contract documents .
if the contractor fails to comply with these requirements the department may disqualify or suspend the contractor from bidding on or working as a subcontractor on future contracts .
ensure that the subcontractors provide access to their records pertaining to the project upon request by the department .
comply with section num florida statutes and incorporate in all subcontracts the obligation to comply with section num florida statutes .
num return to table of contents num public records .
the contractor shall comply with chapter num florida statutes .
specifically the contractor shall num .
keep and maintain public records required by the department to perform the service .
num .
upon request from the departments custodian of public records provide the department with a copy of the requested records or allow the records to be inspected or copied within a reasonable time at a cost that does not exceed the cost provided in chapter num florida statutes or as otherwise provided by law .
num .
ensure that public records that are exempt or confidential and exempt from public records disclosure requirements are not disclosed except as authorized by law for the duration of the contract term and following completion of the contract if the contractor does not transfer the records to the department .
num .
upon completion of the contract transfer at no cost to the department all public records in possession of the contractor or keep and maintain public records required by the department to perform the service .
if the contractor transfers all public records to the department upon completion of the contract the contractor shall destroy any duplicate public records that are exempt or confidential and exempt from public records disclosure requirements .
if the contractor keeps and maintains public records upon completion of the contract the contractor shall meet all applicable requirements for retaining public records .
all records stored electronically must be provided to the department upon request from the departments custodian of public records in a format that is compatible with the information technology systems of the department .
failure to comply with chapter num florida statutes and the article num shall be grounds for immediate unilateral termination of this contract by the department pursuant to num .
num return to table of contents section num scope of the work num intent of contract .
the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion in every detail of the work described in the contract .
furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the contract documents .
upon execution of the contract conduct all written communication associated with the contract using a paperless electronic means .
when the specifications require a submission of documentation such documents must be submitted and exchanged electronically using the department provided webbased collaboration site .
all documents requiring a signature must be executed electronically by both parties in accordance with chapter num florida statutes and have the same force and effect as a written signature .
all persons requiring access to the collaboration site shall be identified during the preconstruction conference .
persons may be added or removed during the life of the contract on an as needed basis .
all signatories must acquire a digital signature certificate .
num work not covered by standard specifications .
proposed construction and any contractual requirements not covered by these standard specifications may be covered by contract plan notes or by supplemental specifications or special provisions for the contract and all requirements of such supplemental specifications or special provisions shall be considered as a part of these specifications .
num alteration of plans or of character of work .
num general the engineer reserves the right to make at any time prior to or during the progress of the work such increases or decreases in quantities whether a significant change or not and such alterations in the details of construction whether a substantial change or not including but not limited to alterations in the grade or alignment of the road or structure or both as may be found necessary or desirable by the engineer .
such increases decreases or alterations shall not constitute a breach of contract shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety from any liability arising out of this contract or the surety bond .
the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered the same as if it had been a part of the original contract .
the term significant change applies only when num .
the engineer determines that the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or num .
a major item of work as defined in num is increased in excess of num or decreased below num of the original contract quantity .
the department will apply any price adjustment for an increase in quantity only to that portion in excess of num of the original contract item quantity in accordance with num below .
in the case of a decrease below num the department will only apply a price adjustment for the additional costs that are a direct result of the reduction in quantity .
in num above the determination by the engineer shall be conclusive .
if the determination is challenged by the contractor in any proceeding the contractor must establish num return to table of contents by clear and convincing proof that the determination by the engineer was without any reasonable basis .
num increase decrease or alteration in the work the engineer reserves the right to make alterations in the character of the work which involve a substantial change in the nature of the design or in the type of construction or which materially increases or decreases the cost or time of performance .
such alteration shall not constitute a breach of contract shall not invalidate the contract or release the surety .
notwithstanding that the contractor shall have no formal right whatsoever to any extra compensation or time extension deemed due by the contractor for any cause unless and until the contractor follows the procedures set forth in num for preservation presentation and resolution of the claim the contractor may at any time after having otherwise timely submitted a notice of intent to claim or preliminary time extension request pursuant to num and num submit to the department a request for equitable adjustment of compensation or time or other dispute resolution proposal .
the contractor shall in any request for equitable adjustment of compensation time or other dispute resolution proposal certify under oath and in writing in accordance with the formalities required by florida law that the request is made in good faith that any supportive data submitted is accurate and complete to the contractors best knowledge and belief and that the amount of the request accurately reflects what the contractor in good faith believes to be the departments responsibility .
such certification must be made by an officer or director of the contractor with the authority to bind the contractor .
any such certified statements of entitlement and costs shall be subject to the audit provisions set forth in num .
while the submittal or review of a duly certified request for equitable adjustment shall neither create modify nor activate any legal rights or obligations as to the contractor or the department the department will review the content of any duly certified request for equitable adjustment or other dispute resolution proposal with any further action or inaction by the department thereafter being in its sole discretion .
any request for equitable adjustment that fails to fully comply with the certification requirements will not be reviewed by the department .
the monetary compensation provided for below constitutes full and complete payment for such additional work and the contractor shall have no right to any additional monetary compensation for any direct or indirect costs or profit for any such additional work beyond that expressly provided below .
the contractor shall be entitled to a time extension only to the extent that the performance of any portion of the additional work is a controlling work item and the performance of such controlling work item actually extends completion of the project due to no fault of the contractor .
all time related costs for actual performance of such additional work are included in the compensation already provided below and any time extension entitlement hereunder will be without additional monetary compensation .
the contractor shall have no right to any monetary compensation or damages whatsoever for any direct or indirect delay to a controlling work item arising out of or in any way related to the circumstances leading up to or resulting from additional work but not relating to the actual performance of the additional work which is paid for as otherwise provided herein except only as provided for under num .
num allowable costs for extra work the engineer may direct in writing that extra work be done and at the engineers sole discretion the contractor will be paid pursuant to an agreed supplemental agreement or in the following manner num return to table of contents num .
labor and burden the contractor will receive payment for actual costs of direct labor and burden for the additional or unforeseen work .
labor includes foremen actually engaged in the work and will not include project supervisory personnel nor necessary onsite clerical staff except when the additional or unforeseen work is a controlling work item and the performance of such controlling work item actually extends completion of the project due to no fault of the contractor .
compensation for project supervisory personnel but in no case higher than a project managers position shall only be for the prorata time such supervisory personnel spent on the contract .
in no case shall an officer or director of the company nor those persons who own more than num of the company be considered as project supervisory personnel direct labor or foremen hereunder .
payment for burden shall be limited solely to the following table num item rate fica rate established by law futasuta rate established by law medical insurance actual holidays sick vacation benefits actual retirement benefits actual workers compensation rates based on the national council on compensation insurance basic rate tables adjusted by contractors actual experience modification factor in effect at the time of the additional work or unforeseen work .
per diem actual but not to exceed state of floridas rate insurance actual compensation for insurance is limited solely to general liability coverage and does not include any other insurance coverage such as but not limited to umbrella coverage automobile insurance etc .. at the preconstruction conference certify to the engineer the following a .
a listing of onsite clerical staff supervisory personnel and their prorated time assigned to the contract b .
actual rate for items listed in table num c. existence of employee benefit plan for holiday sick and vacation benefits and a retirement plan and d. payment of per diem is a company practice for instances when compensation for per diem is requested .
such certification must be made by an officer or director of the contractor with authority to bind the contractor .
timely certification is a condition precedent to any right of the contractor to recover compensations for such costs and failure to timely submit the certification will constitute a full complete absolute and irrevocable waiver by the contractor of any right to recover such costs .
any subsequent changes shall be certified to the engineer as part of the cost proposal or seven calendar days in advance of performing such extra work .
num return to table of contents num .
materials and supplies for materials accepted by the engineer and used on the project the contractor will receive the actual cost of such materials incorporated into the work including contractor paid transportation charges exclusive of equipment as hereinafter set forth .
for supplies reasonably needed for performing the work the contractor will receive the actual cost of such supplies .
num .
equipment for any machinery or special equipment other than small tools including fuel and lubricant the contractor will receive num of the rental rate blue book for the actual time that such equipment is in operation on the work and num of the rental rate blue book for the time the equipment is directed to standby and remain on the project site to be calculated as indicated below .
the equipment rates will be based on the latest edition as of the date the work to be performed begins of the rental rate blue book for construction equipment or the rental rate blue book for older construction equipment whichever is applicable as published by machinery information division of primedia information inc. version current at the time of bid using all instructions and adjustments contained therein and as modified below .
on all projects the engineer will adjust the rates using regional adjustments and rate adjustment tables according to the instructions in the blue book .
allowable equipment rates will be established as set out below a. allowable hourly equipment rate monthly ratenum x adjustment factors x num. b. allowable hourly operating cost hourly operating cost x num. c. allowable rate per hour allowable hourly equipment rate allowable hourly operating cost .
d. standby rate allowable hourly equipment rate x num .
the monthly rate is the basic machine rate plus any attachments .
standby rates will apply when equipment is not in operation and is directed by the engineer to standby at the project site when needed again to complete work and the cost of moving the equipment will exceed the accumulated standby cost .
standby rates will not apply on any day the equipment operates for eight or more hours .
standby payment will be limited to only that number of hours which when added to the operating time for that day equals eight hours .
standby payment will not be made on days that are not normally considered work days on the project .
the department will allow for the cost of transporting the equipment to and from the location at which it will be used .
if the equipment requires assembly or disassembly for transport the department will pay for the time to perform this work at the rate for standby equipment .
equipment may include vehicles utilized only by labor as defined above .
num .
indirect costs expenses and profit compensation for all indirect costs expenses and profit of the contractor including but not limited to overhead of any kind whether jobsite field office division office regional office home office or otherwise is expressly limited to the greater of either a or b below a .
solely a markup of num on the payments in num through num above .
num return to table of contents num .
bond the contractor will receive compensation for any premium for acquiring a bond for such additional or unforeseen work at the original contract bond rate paid by the contractor .
no compensation for bond premium will be allowed for additional or unforeseen work paid by the department via initial contingency pay item .
num .
the contractor will be allowed a markup of num on the first num and a markup of num on any amount over num on any subcontract directly related to the additional or unforeseen work .
any such subcontractor markup will be allowed only by the prime contractor and a first tier subcontractor and the contractor must elect the markup for any eligible first tier subcontractor to do so .
b .
solely the formula set forth below and only as applied solely as to such number of calendar days of entitlement that are in excess of ten cumulative calendar days as defined below .
b c a d where a original contract amount b original contract time c num d average overhead per day cumulative calendar days is defined as the combined total number of calendar days granted as time extensions due to either extra work excluding overruns to existing contract items that extend the duration of the project or delay of a controlling work item caused solely by the department or the combined total number of calendar days for which a claim of entitlement to a time extension due to delay of a controlling work item caused solely by the department is otherwise ultimately determined to be in favor of the contractor .
no compensation whatsoever will be paid to the contractor for any jobsite overhead and other indirect impacts when the total number of calendar days granted for time extension due to delay of a controlling work item caused solely by the department is or the total number of calendar days for which entitlement to a time extension due to delay of a controlling work item caused solely by the department is otherwise ultimately determined in favor of the contractor to be equal to or less than ten calendar days and the contractor also fully assumes all monetary risk of any and all partial or single calendar day delay periods due to delay of a controlling work item caused solely by the department that when combined together are equal to or less than ten calendar days and regardless of whether monetary compensation is otherwise provided for hereunder for one or more calendar days of time extension entitlement for each calendar day exceeding ten calendar days .
all calculations under this provision shall exclude weather days holidays and special events .
further for a or b above in the event there are concurrent delays to one or more controlling work items one or more being caused by the department and one or more being caused by the contractor the contractor shall be entitled to a time extension for each day that a controlling work item is delayed by the department but shall have no right to nor receive any monetary compensation for any indirect costs for any days of concurrent delay .
num return to table of contents num subcontracted work compensation for the additional or unforeseen work performed by a subcontractor shall be limited solely to that provided for in num num num num and numa .
in addition the contractor compensation is expressly limited to the greater of the total provided in either numa or numb except that the average overhead perday calculation is as follows b c as ds where as original contract amount minus original subcontract amountss b original contract time c num ds average overhead perday deduct original subcontract amounts of subcontractors performing the work the subcontractor may receive compensation for any premium for acquiring a bond for the additional or unforeseen work provided however that such payment for additional subcontractor bond will only be paid upon presentment to the department of clear and convincing proof that the subcontractor has actually submitted and paid for separate bond premiums for such additional or unforeseen work in such amount and that the subcontractor was required by the contractor to acquire a bond .
the contractor shall require the subcontractor to submit a certification in accordance with num num as part of the cost proposal and submit such to the engineer .
such certification must be made by an officer or director of the subcontractor with authority to bind the subcontractor .
timely certification is a condition precedent to any right of the contractor to recover compensation for such subcontractor costs and failure to timely submit the certification will constitute a full complete absolute and irrevocable waiver by the contractor of any right to recover such subcontractor costs .
num no waiver of contract changes made by the engineer will not be considered to waive any of the provisions of the contract nor may the contractor make any claim for loss of anticipated profits because of the changes or by reason of any variation between the approximate quantities and the quantities of work actually performed .
all work shall be performed as directed by the engineer and in accordance with the contract documents .
num conditions requiring a supplemental agreement or unilateral payment a supplemental agreement or unilateral payment will be used to clarify the plans and specifications of the contract to provide for unforeseen work grade changes or alterations in the plans which could not reasonably have been contemplated or foreseen in the original plans and specifications to change the limits of construction to meet field conditions to provide a safe and functional connection to an existing pavement to settle documented contract claims to make the project functionally operational in accordance with the intent of the original contract and subsequent amendments thereto .
num return to table of contents a supplemental agreement or unilateral payment may be used to expand the physical limits of the project only to the extent necessary to make the project functionally operational in accordance with the intent of the original contract .
the cost of any such agreement extending the physical limits of the project shall not exceed num or num of the original contract price whichever is greater .
perform no work to be covered by a supplemental agreement or unilateral payment before written authorization is received from the engineer .
the engineers written authorization will set forth sufficient work information to allow the work to begin .
the work activities terms and conditions will be reduced to written supplemental agreement or unilateral payment form promptly thereafter .
no payment will be made on a supplemental agreement or unilateral payment prior to the departments approval of the document .
num extra work extra work authorized in writing by the engineer will be paid in accordance with the formula in num .
such payment will be the full extent of all monetary compensation entitlement due to the contractor for such extra work .
any entitlement to a time extension due to extra work will be limited solely to that provided for in num for additional work .
num connections to existing pavement drives and walks generally adhere to the limits of construction at the beginning and end of the project as detailed in the plans .
however if the engineer determines that it is necessary to extend the construction in order to make suitable connections to existing pavement the engineer will authorize such a change in writing .
for necessary connections to existing walks and drives that are not indicated in the plans the engineer will submit direction regarding the proper connections in accordance with the standard plans .
num differing site conditions during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the contractor disturbs the conditions or performs the affected work .
upon receipt of written notification of differing site conditions from the contractor the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment will be made excluding loss of anticipated profits and the contract will be modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
the engineer will not allow a contract adjustment for a differing site condition unless the contractor has submitted the required written notice .
the engineer will not allow a contract adjustment under this clause for any effects caused to any other department or nondepartment projects on which the contractor may be working .
num changes affecting utilities the contractor shall be responsible for identifying and assessing any potential impacts to a utility that may be caused by the changes proposed by the contractor and the contractor shall at the time of making the request for a change notify the department in writing of any such potential impacts to utilities .
num return to table of contents department approval of a contractor proposed change does not relieve the contractor of sole responsibility for all utility impacts costs delays or damages whether direct or indirect resulting from contractor initiated changes in the design or construction activities from those in the original contract specifications design plans including traffic control plans or other contract documents and which effect a change in utility work different from that shown in the utility plans joint project agreements or utility relocation schedules .
num cost savings initiative proposal num intent and objective num .
this subarticle applies to any cost reduction proposal hereinafter referred to as a proposal that the contractor initiates and develops for the purpose of refining the contract to increase cost effectiveness or significantly improve the quality of the end result .
a mandatory cost savings initiative workshop will be held prior to contract time beginning for the contractor and department to discuss potential proposals .
this subarticle does not however apply to any such proposal unless the contractor identifies it at the time of its submission to the department as a proposal submitted pursuant to this subarticle .
num .
the department will consider proposals that would result in net savings to the department by providing a decrease in the cost of the contract .
proposals must result in savings without impairing essential functions and characteristics such as safety service life reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance aesthetics and necessary standard design features .
however nothing herein prohibits the contractor from submitting proposals when the required functions and characteristics can be combined reduced or eliminated because they are nonessential or excessive .
the department will not recognize the contractors correction of plan errors that result in a cost reduction as a proposal .
num .
the department reserves the right to reject at its discretion any proposal submitted that proposes a change in the design of the pavement system or that would require additional rightofway .
pending the departments execution of a formal supplemental agreement implementing an approved proposal the contractor shall remain obligated to perform the work in accordance with the terms of the existing contract .
the department may grant time extensions to allow for the time required to develop and review a proposal .
num .
for potential proposals not discussed at the cost savings initiative workshop a mandatory concept meeting will be held for the contractor and department to discuss the potential proposal prior to development of the proposal .
num subcontractors the department encourages the contractor to include the provisions of this subarticle in contracts with subcontractors and to encourage submission of proposals from subcontractors .
however it is not mandatory to submit proposals to the department or to accept or transmit subcontractor proposed proposals to the department .
num data requirements as a minimum submit the following information with each proposal num. a description of the difference between the existing contract requirement including any time extension request and the proposed change and the comparative advantages and disadvantages .
num. separate detailed cost estimates for both the existing contract requirement and the proposed change .
break down the cost estimates by pay item numbers indicating quantity increases or decreases and deleted pay items .
identify additional proposed work not covered by pay items within the contract by using pay item numbers in the basis of num return to table of contents estimates manual .
in preparing the estimates include overhead profit and bond within pay items in the contract .
separate pay items for the cost of overhead profit and bond will not be allowed .
num. an itemization of the changes deletions or additions to plan details plan sheets standard plans and specifications that are required to implement the proposal if the department adopts it .
submit preliminary plan drawings sufficient to describe the proposed changes .
num. engineering or other analysis in sufficient detail to identify and describe specific features of the contract that must be changed if the department accepts the proposal with a proposal as to how these changes can be accomplished and an assessment of their effect on other project elements .
the department may require that engineering analyses be performed by a prequalified consultant in the applicable class of work .
support all design changes that result from the proposal with drawings and computations signed and sealed by the contractors engineer of record .
written documentation or drawings will be submitted clearly delineating the responsibility of the contractors engineer of record .
num. the date by which the department must approve the proposal to obtain the total estimated cost reduction during the remainder of the contract noting any effect on the contract completion time or delivery schedule .
num. a revised project schedule that would be followed upon approval of the proposal .
this schedule would include submittal dates and review time for the department and peer reviews .
num processing procedures submit proposals to the engineer or his duly authorized representative .
the department will process proposals expeditiously however the department is not liable for any delay in acting upon a proposal submitted pursuant to this subarticle .
the contractor may withdraw in whole or in part a proposal not accepted by the department within the period specified in the proposal .
the department is not liable for any proposal development cost in the case where the department rejects or the contractor withdraws a proposal .
the engineer is the sole judge of the acceptability of a proposal and of the estimated net savings in construction costs from the adoption of all or any part of such proposal .
in determining the estimated net savings the department reserves the right to disregard the contract bid prices if in the judgment of the engineer such prices do not represent a fair measure of the value of work to be performed or to be deleted .
prior to approval the engineer may modify a proposal with the concurrence of the contractor to make it acceptable .
if any modification increases or decreases the net savings resulting from the proposal the department will determine the contractors fair share upon the basis of the proposal as modified and upon the final quantities .
the department will compute the net savings by subtracting the revised total cost of all bid items affected by the proposal from the total cost of the same bid items as represented in the original contract .
prior to approval of the proposal that initiates the supplemental agreement submit acceptable contractquality plan sheets revised to show all details consistent with the proposal design .
num computations for change in contract cost of performance if the proposal is adopted the contractors share of the net savings as defined hereinafter represents full compensation to the contractor for the proposal .
num return to table of contents the department will not include its costs to process and implement a proposal in the estimate .
however the department reserves the right where it deems such action appropriate to require the contractor to pay the departments cost of investigating and implementing a proposal as a condition of considering such proposal .
when the department imposes such a condition the contractor shall accept this condition in writing authorizing the department to deduct amounts payable to the department from any monies due or that may become due to the contractor under the contract .
num conditions of acceptance for major design modifications of category num bridges a proposal that proposes major design modifications of a category num bridge as determined by the engineer shall have the following conditions of acceptance all bridge plans relating to the proposal shall undergo an independent peer review conducted by a single independent engineering firm referred to for the purposes of this article as the independent review engineer who is not the originator of the proposal design and is prequalified by the department in accordance with rule num florida administrative code .
the independent peer review is intended to be a comprehensive thorough verification of the original work giving assurance that the design is in compliance with all department requirements .
the independent review engineers comments along with the resolution of each comment shall be submitted to the department .
the independent review engineer shall sign and seal the submittal cover letter stating that all comments have been adequately addressed and the design is in compliance with the department requirements .
if there are any unresolved comments the independent review engineer shall specifically list all unresolved issues in the signed and sealed cover letter .
the contractor shall designate a primary engineer responsible for the proposal design and as such will be designated as the contractors engineer of record for the proposal design .
the department reserves the right to require the contractors engineer of record to assume responsibility for design of the entire structure .
new designs and independent peer reviews shall be in compliance with all applicable department fhwa and aashto criteria requirements including bridge load ratings .
num sharing arrangements if the department approves a proposal the contractor shall receive num of the net reduction in the cost of performance of the contract as determined by the final negotiated agreement between the contractor and the department .
the net reduction will be determined by subtracting from the savings of the construction costs the reasonable documented engineering costs incurred by the contractor to design and develop a proposal .
the reasonable documented engineering costs will be paid by the department .
engineering costs will be based on the consultants certified invoice and may include the costs of the independent review engineer in num .
the total engineering costs to be subtracted from the savings to determine the net reduction will be limited to num of the construction savings and shall not include any markup by the contractor or the costs for engineering services performed by the contractor .
num notice of intellectual property interests and departments future rights to a proposal num notice of intellectual property interests the contractors proposal submittal shall identify with specificity any and all forms of intellectual property rights that either the contractor or any officer shareholder employee consultant or affiliate of the num return to table of contents contractor or any other entity who contributed in any measure to the substance of the contractors proposal development have or may have that are in whole or in part implicated in the proposal .
such required intellectual property rights notice includes but is not limited to disclosure of any issued patents copyrights or licenses pending patent copyright or license applications and any intellectual property rights that though not yet issued applied for or intended to be pursued could nevertheless otherwise be subsequently the subject of patent copyright or license protection by the contractor or others in the future .
this notice requirement does not extend to intellectual property rights as to standalone or integral components of the proposal that are already on the departments approved product list apl or standard plans or are otherwise generally known in the industry as being subject to patent or copyright protection .
num departments future rights to a proposal notwithstanding num nor any other provision of the standard specifications upon acceptance of a proposal the contractor hereby grants to the department and its contractors such grant being expressly limited solely to any and all existing or future department construction projects and any other department projects that are partially or wholly funded by or for the department a royaltyfree and perpetual license under all forms of intellectual property rights to manufacture to use to design to construct to disclose to reproduce to prepare and fully utilize derivative works to distribute display and publish in whole or in part and to permit others to do any of the above and to otherwise in any manner and for any purpose whatsoever do anything reasonably necessary to fully utilize any and all aspects of such proposal on any and all existing and future construction projects and any other department projects .
contractor shall hold harmless indemnify and defend the department and its contractors and others in privity therewith from and against any and all claims liabilities other obligations or losses and reasonable expenses related thereto including reasonable attorneys fees which are incurred or are suffered by any breach of the foregoing grants and regardless of whether such intellectual property rights were or were not disclosed by the contractor pursuant to num unless the department has by express written exception in the proposal acceptance process specifically released the contractor from such obligation to hold harmless indemnify and defend as to one or more disclosed intellectual property rights .
num unforeseeable work .
when the department requires work that is not covered by a price in the contract and such work does not constitute a significant change as defined in num and the department finds that such work is essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope the department will make an adjustment to the contract .
the engineer will determine the basis of payment for such an adjustment in a fair and equitable amount .
num rights in and use of materials found on the site of the work .
num ownership and disposal of existing materials take ownership and dispose of all materials that are not designated as the property of other parties in both roadway and structures found on the rightofway and all material in structures designated for removal .
such materials do not include earth or other excavated material required for the construction of the project .
during construction the contractor may use materials from existing structures that are required to be removed and that are designated to remain the property of the department .
do not cut or otherwise damage such material during removal unless the engineer gives permission to num return to table of contents do so .
store material in an accessible location as the engineer directs .
the department is not responsible for the quality or quantity of any material salvaged .
num ornamental trees and shrubs take ownership of all ornamental trees or shrubs existing in the rightofway that are required to be removed for the construction operations and which are not specifically designated in the plans to be reset or to be removed by others prior to the construction operations .
num final cleaning up of rightofway .
upon completion of the work and before the department accepts the work and makes final payment remove from the rightofway and adjacent property all falsework equipment surplus and discarded materials rubbish and temporary structures restore in an acceptable manner all property both public and private that has been damaged during the prosecution of the work and leave the waterways unobstructed and the roadway in a neat and presentable condition throughout the entire length of the work under contract .
do not dispose of materials of any character rubbish or equipment on abutting property with or without the consent of the property owners .
the engineer will allow the contractor to temporarily store equipment surplus materials usable forms etc .
on a wellkept site owned or leased by the contractor adjacent to the project .
however do not place or store discarded equipment materials or rubbish on such a site .
shape and dress areas adjacent to the project rightofway that were used as plant sites materials storage areas or equipment yards when they are no longer needed for such purposes .
restore these areas in accordance with num and num .
grass these areas when the engineer directs .
num return to table of contents section num control of the work num plans and working drawings .
num contract documents have available the contract documents on the worksite at all times .
num departments plans plans consist of general drawings showing such details as are necessary to give a comprehensive idea of the construction contemplated .
in general roadway plans will show alignment profile grades typical crosssections and general crosssections .
in general structure plans will show in detail all dimensions of the work contemplated .
when the structure plans do not show the dimensions in detail they will show general features and such details as are necessary to give a comprehensive idea of the structure .
grades shown are finished grades and b.m .
datum is north american vertical datum num navdnum national geodetic vertical datum of num ngvdnum or other datum as noted in the plans .
num alterations in plans the department will issue in writing all authorized alterations affecting the requirements and information given on the approved plans .
num shop drawings num .
definitions num .
shop drawings all working shop and erection drawings associated trade literature calculations schedules manuals and similar documents submitted by the contractor to define some portion of the project work .
the type of work includes both permanent and temporary works as appropriate to the project .
num .
permanent works all the permanent structures and parts thereof required of the completed contract .
num .
temporary works any temporary construction work necessary for the construction of the permanent works .
this includes but is not limited to bracing falsework formwork scaffolding shoring temporary earthworks sheeting cofferdams and special erection equipment .
num .
construction affecting public safety construction that may jeopardize public safety such as structures spanning functioning vehicular roadways pedestrian walkways railroads navigation channels of navigable waterways and walls or other structure foundations located in embankments immediately adjacent to functioning roadways .
it does not apply to those areas of the site under the contractors control and outside the limits of normal public access .
num .
major and unusual structures bridges of complex geometry andor complex design .
generally this includes the following types of structures a. bridges with an individual span longer than num feet .
b .
structurally continuous superstructures with spans over num feet .
c. steel box and plate girder bridges .
d. steel truss bridges .
e. concrete segmental and longitudinally posttensioned continuous girder bridges .
f. cable stayed or suspension bridges .
g. arch bridges .
h. tunnels .
num return to table of contents i. movable bridges specifically electrical and mechanical components .
j .
rehabilitation widening or lengthening of any of the above .
num .
special erection equipment includes launching gantries beam and winch equipment form travelers stability towers strongbacks erection trusses launching noses or similar items made purposely for construction of the structure .
it does not apply to commonly available proprietary construction equipment such as cranes .
num .
falsework includes any temporary construction work used to support the permanent structure until it becomes selfsupporting .
falsework includes steel or timber beams girders columns piles and foundations and any proprietary equipment including modular shoring frames post shores and adjustable horizontal shoring .
num .
formwork includes any structure or mold used to retain plastic or fluid concrete in its designated shape until it hardens .
formwork comprises common materials such as wood or metal sheets battens soldiers and walers ties proprietary forming systems such as stayinplace metal forms and proprietary supporting bolts hangers and brackets .
formwork may be either permanent formwork requiring a shop drawing submittal such as stayinplace metal or concrete forms or may be temporary formwork which requires certification by the specialty engineer for construction affecting public safety and for major and unusual structures .
num .
scaffolding is an elevated work platform used to support workmen materials and equipment but not intended to support the structure .
num .
shoring is a component of falsework such as horizontal vertical or inclined support members .
in this section this term is interchangeable with falsework .
num .
bracing is a temporary structural members placed between beams girders piles columns etc .
to provide stability during construction activities .
num .
contractor originated designs items which the contract documents require the contractor to design detail and incorporate into the permanent works .
num work items requiring shop drawings in general the department requires shop drawings for items of work not fully detailed in the plans which require additional drawings and coordination prior to constructing the item including but not limited to num .
bridge components not fully detailed in the plans i.e .
segments steel girder details posttensioning details handrails etc .
num .
retaining wall systems num .
precast box culverts num .
nonstandard structures and components for drainage lighting signalization and signing num .
building structures num .
nonstandard crash cushions and other nonstructural items num .
design and structural details furnished by the contractor in compliance with the contract num .
temporary works affecting public safety additional clarification for certain types of bridge structures is provided in num .
other provisions of the contract documents may waive the requirement for submittals for certain items i.e .
items constructed from standard drawings or those complying with alternate details for prestressed members under section num. review the contract documents to determine the submittals required .
num return to table of contents num schedule of submittals prepare and submit a schedule of submittals that identifies the work for which shop drawings apply .
for each planned submittal define the type and approximate number of drawings or other documents that are included and the planned submittal date considering the processing requirements herein .
submit the schedule of submittals to the departments shop drawing review office and the engineer of record within num days of the start of the contract and prior to the submission of any shop drawings .
coordinate subsequent submittals with construction schedules to allow sufficient time for review approval and resubmittal as necessary .
num style numbering and material of submittals num drawings submit all shop drawings that are necessary to complete the structure in compliance with the design shown in the plans .
prepare all shop drawings using the same units of measure as those used in the contract plans .
consecutively number each sheet in the submittal series and indicate the total number in the series i.e .
num of num num of num . . . num of num .
include on each sheet the following items as a minimum requirement the complete financial project identification number bridge numbers drawing title and number a title block showing the names of the fabricator or producer and the contractor for which the work is being done the initials of the persons responsible for the drawing the date on which the drawing was prepared the location of the items within the project the contractors approval stamp with date and initials and when applicable the documents shall be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer or contractors engineer of record as appropriate .
a resubmittal will be requested when any of the required information is not included .
shop drawings shall be submitted in portable document format pdf files formatted on num inch by num inch sheets .
num other documents submit pdf files of other documents such as trade literature catalogue information calculations and manuals formatted on sheets no larger than num inch by num inches .
clearly label and number each sheet in the submittal to indicate the total number of sheets in the series i.e .
num of num num of num . . . num of num .
prepare all documents using the same units of measure as the contract plans and include a table of contents cover sheet .
list on the cover sheet the total number of pages and appendices and include the complete financial project identification number a title referencing the submittal items the name of the firm and persons responsible for the preparation of the document the contractors approval stamp with date and initials and when applicable the documents shall be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer or contractors engineer of record as appropriate .
submit appropriately prepared and checked calculations and manuals that clearly outline the design criteria .
include on the internal sheets the complete financial project identification number and the initials of the persons responsible for preparing and checking the document .
clearly label trade literature and catalogue information on the front cover with the title financial project identification number date and name of the firm and persons responsible for that document .
num submittal paths num general shop drawings are not required for prequalified items .
for nonprequalified items determine the submittal path to be followed based upon the identity of the engineer of record as shown adjacent to the title block on the structural plan sheets and on the key sheets of roadway plans signing and pavement marking plans andor lighting plans .
num return to table of contents at the preconstruction conference the department will notify the contractor in writing of any changes in the submittal path and whether the departments or the consultants review stamp will signify an officially reviewed shop drawing .
num .
when the florida department of transportation is the engineer of record submit shop drawings to the resident engineer and to the appropriate department shop drawing review office .
include in the submittal other information such as catalog data procedure manuals fabricationwelding procedures and maintenance and operating procedures when required by the work .
submit material certifications and material tests to the resident engineer .
num .
when the engineer of record is a consultant hired by the department submit shop drawings to the consultant the resident engineer and when requested to the appropriate department shop drawing review office .
include in the submittal other documentation such as catalog data procedure manuals fabricationwelding procedures and maintenance and operating manuals when required by the work .
submit material certifications and material tests to the resident engineer .
num building structures submit working shop and erection drawings and all correspondence related to building structures such as rest area pavilions office buildings and maintenance warehouses to the architect of record and the resident engineer for review and approval .
num contractororiginated design submit shop drawings and applicable calculations to the engineer of record for review .
the shop drawings and applicable calculations must be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer or the contractors engineer of record .
submit in accordance with the requirements of num through num as appropriate .
num temporary works for construction affecting public safety submit to the engineer of record shop drawings and the applicable calculations for the design of special erection equipment bracing falsework scaffolding etc .
the shop drawings and applicable calculations must be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer .
submit in accordance with the requirements of num through num as appropriate .
num falsework founded on shallow foundations when vertical displacement limits are provided in the plans for falsework founded on shallow foundations such as spread footings and mats submit to the engineer of record shop drawings and applicable calculations of the falsework system including subsurface conditions and settlement estimates .
the shop drawings and applicable calculations must be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer .
submit in accordance with the requirements of num through num as appropriate .
num formwork and scaffolding the contractor is solely responsible for the safe installation and use of all formwork and scaffolding .
the department does not require any formwork or scaffolding submittals unless such work would be classified as construction affecting public safety .
for formwork scaffolding or other temporary works affecting public safety develop the required designs in accordance with the aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works the aashto construction handbook for bridge temporary works and chapter num of the structures design guidelines sdg using wind loads specified in the sdg .
num beam and girder temporary bracing the contractor is solely responsible for ensuring stability of beams and girders during all handling storage num return to table of contents shipping and erection .
adequately brace beams and girders to resist wind weight of forms and other temporary loads especially those eccentric to the vertical axis of the products considering actual beam geometry and support conditions during all stages of erection and deck construction .
at a minimum provide temporary bracing at each end of each beam or girder .
develop the required bracing designs in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications lrfd and chapter num of the sdg using wind loads specified in the sdg .
for information not included in the sdg or lrfd refer to the aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works and the aashto construction handbook for bridge temporary works .
for construction affecting public safety when temporary bracing requirements are shown in the plans submit plans and calculations signed and sealed by a specialty engineer for the design of temporary bracing members and connections based on the forces shown in the plans .
in addition submit a written certification that construction loads do not exceed the assumed loads shown in the plans .
for construction affecting public safety when temporary bracing requirements are not shown in the plans or an alternate temporary bracing system is proposed submit plans and calculations signed and sealed by a specialty engineer including the stability analysis and design of temporary bracing members and connections .
num erection plan submit for the engineers review an erection plan that meets the specific requirements of sections num num and num and this section .
refer to standard plans index num for construction activities not permitted over traffic .
num other miscellaneous design and structural details furnished by the contractor in compliance with the contract submit to the engineer of record shop drawings and the applicable calculations .
the shop drawings and applicable calculations must be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer .
submit in accordance with the requirements of num through num as appropriate .
num processing of shop drawings num contractor responsibility for accuracy and coordination of shop drawings coordinate schedule and control all submittals with a regard for the required priority including those of the various subcontractors suppliers and engineers to provide for an orderly and balanced distribution of the work .
coordinate review date stamp approve and sign all shop drawings prepared by the contractor or agents subcontractor fabricator supplier etc .
prior to submitting them to the engineer of record for review .
submittal of the drawings confirms verification of the work requirements units of measurement field measurements construction criteria sequence of assembly and erection access and clearances catalog numbers and other similar data .
indicate on each series of drawings the specification section and sheet or drawing number of the contract plans to which the submission applies .
indicate on the shop drawings all deviations from the contract drawings and itemize all deviations in the letter of transmittal .
likewise whenever a submittal does not deviate from the contract plans clearly state so in the submittal .
schedule the submission of shop drawings to allow for a num day review period .
the review period commences upon the engineer of records receipt of the valid submittal or valid resubmittal and terminates upon the transmittal of the submittal back to the contractor .
a valid submittal includes all the minimum requirements outlined in num .
num return to table of contents submit shop drawings to facilitate expeditious review .
the contractor is discouraged from transmitting voluminous submittals of shop drawings at one time .
for submittals transmitted in this manner allow for the additional review time that may result .
only shop drawings distributed with the approval stamps are valid and all work that the contractor performs in advance of approval will be at the contractors risk .
num scope of review by engineer the engineer of records review of the shop drawings is for conformity to the requirements of the contract documents and to the intent of the design .
the engineer of records review of shop drawings which include means methods techniques sequences and construction procedures are limited to the effects on the permanent works .
the engineer of records review of submittals which include means methods techniques sequences and construction procedures does not include an indepth check for the ability to perform the work in a safe or efficient manner .
review by the engineer of record does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for dimensional accuracy to ensure field fit and for conformity of the various components and details .
num special review by engineer of shop drawings for construction affecting public safety for construction affecting public safety the engineer of record or other engineer as the department appoints for this purpose will make an independent review of all relevant shop drawings and similar documents .
do not proceed with construction of the permanent works until receiving the engineer of records written approval .
the review of these shop drawings is for overall structural adequacy of the item to support the imposed loads and does not include a check for economy efficiency or ease of construction .
num other requirements for shop drawings for bridges num shop drawings for structural steel and miscellaneous metals submit shop drawings for structural steel and miscellaneous metals .
shop drawings shall consist of working shop and erection drawings welding procedures and other working plans showing details dimensions sizes of material and other information necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the metal work .
num shop drawings for concrete structures submit shop drawings for concrete components that are not castinplace and are not otherwise exempted from submittal requirements .
also submit shop drawings for all details that are required for the effective prosecution of the concrete work and are not included in the contract documents such as special erection equipment masonry layout diagrams and diagrams for bending reinforcing steel in addition to any details required for concrete components for the permanent work .
num shop drawings for major and unusual structures in addition to any other requirements within num days from the notice to proceed submit information to the engineer outlining the integration of the major and unusual structure into the overall approach to the project .
where applicable to the project include but do not limit this information to num .
the overall construction program for the duration of the contract .
clearly show the milestone dates .
for example the need to open a structure by a certain time for traffic operations .
num .
the overall construction sequence .
the order in which individual structures are to be built the sequence in which individual spans of girders or cantilevers are erected and the sequence in which spans are to be made continuous .
num .
the general location of any physical obstacles to construction that might impose restraints or otherwise affect the construction and an outline of how to deal num return to table of contents with such obstacles while building the structures .
for example obstacles might include road rail and waterway clearances temporary diversions transmission lines utilities property and the contractors own temporary works such as haul roads cofferdams plant clearances and the like .
num .
the approximate location of any special lifting equipment in relation to the structure including clearances required for the operation of the equipment .
for example crane positions operating radii and the like .
num .
the approximate location of any temporary falsework and the conceptual outline of any special erection equipment .
provide the precise locations and details of attachments fixing devices loads etc .
in later detailed submittals .
num .
an outline of the handling transportation and storage of fabricated components such as girders or concrete segments .
provide the precise details in later detailed submittals .
num .
any other information pertinent to the proposed scheme or intended approach .
clearly and concisely present the above information on as few drawings as possible in order to provide an overall integrated summary of the intended approach to the project .
the department will use these drawings for information review planning and to assess the contractors approach in relation to the intent of the original design .
submittal to and receipt by the engineer does not constitute any department acceptance or approval of the proposals shown thereon .
include the details of such proposals on subsequent detailed shop drawing submittals .
submit timely revisions and resubmittals for all variations from these overall scheme proposals .
num modifications for construction where the engineer allows the contractor to make modifications to the permanent works for the purposes of expediting the contractors chosen construction methods the contractor shall submit proposals to the engineer of record for review and approval prior to modifying the works .
submit proposals for minor modifications under the shop drawing process .
indicate on all drawings the deviations from the contract documents and itemize all deviations in the letter of transmittal .
the department will require additional submittals andor submittal under a cost savings initiative proposal for major modifications .
minor modifications are those items that in the opinion of the engineer do not significantly affect the quantity of measured work or the integrity or maintainability of the structure or its components .
for example adjusting concrete dimensions substituting steel plate sizes changing reinforcing bar size and spacing etc .
all within the acceptable limits of the design .
major modifications are any modifications that in the opinion of the engineer significantly affect the quantity of measured work or the integrity or maintainability of the structure or its components .
for example substituting alternative beam sizes and spacings changing material strength or type and the like ..
submit signed and sealed revised sheets to the engineer for any such revisions to the contract plans prior to submitting shop drawings .
the engineers decision on the delineation between a minor and a major modification and the disposition of a proposal is final .
num return to table of contents num cost of shop drawings include the cost of shop and working drawings submittal in the contract prices for the work requiring the shop and working drawings .
the department will not pay the contractor additional compensation for such drawings .
num certifications num special erection equipment prior to its use ensure that the specialty engineer personally inspects the special erection equipment and submits a written certification to the engineer that the equipment has been fabricated in accordance with the submitted drawings and calculations .
in addition after assembly ensure that the specialty engineer observes the equipment in use and submits a written certification to the engineer that such equipment is being used as intended and in accordance with the submitted drawings and calculations .
in each case the specialty engineer must sign and seal the letter of certification .
num falsework and shoring requiring shop drawings after its erection or installation but prior to the application of any superimposed load ensure that a specialty engineer or a designee inspects the falsework and certifies to the engineer in writing that the falsework has been constructed in accordance with the materials and details shown on the submitted drawings and calculations .
the letter of certification must be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer .
where so directed in the shop drawings ensure all welds are performed by welders qualified under aws dnum for the type of weld being performed .
num temporary formwork for construction affecting public safety and for major and unusual structures prior to the placement of any concrete ensure that a specialty engineer or a designee inspects the formwork and submits a written certification to the engineer that the formwork has been constructed to safely withstand the superimposed loads to which it will be subjected .
the specialty engineer must sign and seal the letter of certification .
num erection for construction affecting public safety submit an erection plan signed and sealed by the specialty engineer to the engineer at least four weeks prior to erection commencing .
include as part of this submittal signed and sealed calculations and details for any falsework bracing or other connection supporting the structural elements shown in the erection plan .
unless otherwise specified in the plans erection plans are not required for simple span precast prestressed concrete girder bridges with spans of num feet or less .
at least two weeks prior to beginning erection conduct a preerection meeting to review details of the plan with the specialty engineer that signed and sealed the plan and any specialty engineers that may inspect the work and the engineer .
after erection of the elements but prior to opening of the facility below the structure ensure that a specialty engineer or a designee has inspected the erected member .
ensure that the specialty engineer has submitted a written certification to the engineer that the structure has been erected in accordance with the signed and sealed erection plan .
for structures without temporary supports but with temporary girder bracing systems perform as a minimum weekly inspections of the bracing until all the diaphragms and cross frames are in place .
for structures with temporary supports perform daily inspections until the temporary supports are no longer needed as indicated in the erection plans .
submit written documentation of the inspections to the engineer within num hours of the inspection .
num corrections for construction errors for work that the contractor constructs incorrectly or does not meet the requirements of the contract documents the contractor has the prerogative to submit an acceptance proposal to the engineer for review and disposition .
the acceptance proposal shall describe the error or defect and either describe remedial action for its num return to table of contents correction or propose a method for its acceptance .
in either case the acceptance proposal shall address structural integrity aesthetics maintainability and the effect on contract time .
the department will judge any such proposal for its effect on these criteria and also for its effect on contract administration .
when the engineer judges that a proposal infringes on the structural integrity or maintainability of the structure the contractors engineer of record will perform a technical assessment and submit it to the engineer for approval .
do not take any corrective action without the engineers written approval .
carry out all approved corrective construction measures at no expense to the department .
notwithstanding any disposition of the compensation aspects of the defective work the engineers decision on the technical merits of a proposal is final .
num coordination of contract documents .
these specifications the plans special provisions and all supplementary documents are integral parts of the contract a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
all parts of the contract are complementary and describe and provide for a complete work .
in addition to the work and materials specified in the specifications as being included in any specific pay item include in such pay items additional incidental work not specifically mentioned when so shown in the plans or if indicated or obvious and apparent as being necessary for the proper completion of the work under such pay item and not stipulated as being covered under other pay items .
in cases of discrepancy the governing order of the documents is as follows num .
special provisions .
num .
technical special provisions .
num .
plans .
num .
standard plans .
num .
developmental specifications .
num .
supplemental specifications .
num .
standard specifications .
computed dimensions govern over scaled dimensions .
num conformity of work with contract documents .
perform all work and furnish all materials in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades crosssections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances as specified in the contract documents .
in the event that the engineer finds that the contractor has used material or produced a finished product that is not in reasonably close conformity with the contract documents but that the contractor has produced reasonably acceptable work the engineer will determine if the department will accept the work in place .
in this event the engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification which provides for an appropriate reduction in the contract price for such work or materials included in the accepted work as deemed necessary to conform to the determination based on engineering judgment .
in the event that the engineer finds that the contractor has used material or produced a finished product that is not in reasonably close conformity with the contract documents and that the contractor has produced an inferior or unsatisfactory product the contractor shall remove and replace or otherwise correct the work or materials at no expense to the department .
num return to table of contents for base and surface courses the department will allow the finished grade to vary as much as num foot from the grade shown in the plans provided that the contractors work meets all templates and straightedge requirements and contains suitable transitions .
num errors or omissions in contract documents .
do not take advantage of any apparent error or omission discovered in the contract documents but immediately notify the engineer in writing of such discovery .
the engineer will then make such corrections and interpretations as necessary to reflect the actual spirit and intent of the contract documents .
num authority of the engineer .
perform all work to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the director office of construction will decide all questions difficulties and disputes of whatever nature that may arise relative to the interpretation of the plans construction prosecution and fulfillment of the contract and as to the character quality amount and value of any work done and materials furnished under or by reason of the contract .
num authority and duties of engineers assistants .
the director office of construction may appoint such assistants and representatives as desired .
these assistants and representatives are authorized to inspect all work done and all materials furnished .
such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the manufacture preparation or fabrication of the materials to be used .
such assistants and representatives are not authorized to revoke alter or waive any requirement of these specifications .
rather they are authorized to call to the attention of the contractor any failure of the work or materials to meet the contract documents and have the authority to reject materials or suspend the work until any questions at issue can be referred to and decided by the engineer .
the engineer will immediately submit written notification to the contractor of any such suspension of the work stating in detail the reasons for the suspension .
the presence of the inspector or other assistant in no way lessens the responsibility of the contractor .
num engineering and layout .
num control points furnished by the department the engineer will provide centerline control points begin project end project pis pts etc .
and bench marks at appropriate intervals along the line of the project to facilitate the proper layout of the work .
normally the engineer will furnish only one bench mark for water crossings .
preserve all reference points and bench marks that the department furnishes .
as an exception to the above for projects where the plans do not show a centerline or other survey control line for construction of the work e.g .
resurfacing safety modifications etc .
the engineer will provide only points marking the beginning and ending of the project and all exceptions .
num furnishing of stake materials furnish all stakes templates and other materials necessary for establishing and maintaining the lines and grades necessary for control and construction of the work .
num layout of work utilizing the control points furnished by the department in accordance with num establish all horizontal and vertical controls necessary to construct the work in conformity to the contract documents .
perform all calculations required and set all stakes needed such as grade stakes offset stakes reference point stakes slope stakes and other num return to table of contents reference marks or points necessary to provide lines and grades for construction of all roadway bridge and miscellaneous items .
when performing utility construction as part of the project establish all horizontal and vertical controls necessary to carry out such work .
num specific staking requirements when performing new base construction as part of the project set stakes to establish lines and grades for subgrade base curb and related items at intervals along the line of the work .
if automated machine guidance is utilized set stakes as needed .
if automated machine guidance is not utilized set stakes no greater than num feet on tangents and num feet on curves .
set grade stakes at locations that the engineer directs to facilitate checking of subgrade base and pavement elevations in crossovers intersections and irregular shaped areas .
for bridge construction stakes and other control set references at sufficiently frequent intervals to ensure construction of all components of a structure in accordance with the lines and grades shown in the plans .
for projects where the plans do not show a centerline or other survey control line for construction of the work resurfacing safety modifications etc .
provide only such stakes as necessary for horizontal and vertical control of work items .
for resurfacing and resurfacingwidening type projects establish horizontal controls adequate to ensure that the asphalt mix added matches with the existing pavement .
in tangent sections set horizontal control points at num foot intervals by an instrument survey .
in curve sections set horizontal control points at num foot intervals by locating and referencing the centerline of the existing pavement .
establish by an instrument survey and mark on the surface of the finished pavement at num foot intervals the points necessary for striping of the finished roadway .
as an exception for resurfacing and resurfacingwidening projects establish these points in the same manner as used for horizontal control of paving operations .
mark the pavement with white paint .
if performing striping the engineer may approve an alternate method for layout of striping provided that the contractor achieves an alignment equal to or better than the alignment that would be achieved using an instrument survey .
for projects that include temporary or permanent striping of no passing zones provide the location and length of these zones as shown in the plans except projects where the vertical or horizontal alignment is new or altered from preconstruction alignment .
for projects that consist of new or altered vertical or horizontal alignment the department will provide the location and length of the no passing zones during construction .
for these projects submit written notification to the engineer not less than num calendar days prior to beginning striping .
for all projects set a station identification stake at each rightofway line at num foot intervals and at all locations where a change in rightofway width occurs .
mark each of these stakes with painted numerals of a size readable from the roadway corresponding to the project station at which it is located .
as an exception to the above for projects where plans do not show rightofway lines set station identification stakes at locations and intervals appropriate to the type of work being done .
for resurfacing and resurfacingwidening projects set station identification stakes at num foot intervals .
num personnel equipment and record requirements employ only competent personnel and use only suitable equipment in performing layout work .
do not engage the services of any person or persons in the employ of the department for performance of layout work .
num return to table of contents keep adequate field notes and records while performing as layout work .
make these field notes and records available for the engineers review as the work progresses and submit to the engineer at the time of completion of the project .
the engineers inspection checking or acceptance of the contractors field notes or layout work does not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to achieve the lines grades and dimensions shown in the contract documents .
prior to final acceptance of the project mark in a permanent manner on the surface of the completed work all horizontal control points originally furnished by the department .
num global navigation satellite systems gnss work plan if used submit a comprehensive written gnss work plan to the engineer for department review and acceptance at the preconstruction conference or at least num days before starting work using gnss .
update the plan as necessary during construction and notify the department of all changes .
the gnss work plan shall describe how gnss enabled automated machine guidance technology will be integrated into other technologies employed on the project .
at a minimum the gnss work plan will include the following num .
designate which portions of the contract will be done using gnss enabled automated machine guidance and which portions will be constructed using conventional survey methodology .
num .
describe the manufacturer model and software version of the gnss equipment .
num .
provide information on the qualifications of contractor staff .
include formal training and field experience .
designate a single staff person as the primary contact for gnss technology issues .
num .
describe how project control will be established .
include a list and map showing control points enveloping the site .
num .
describe site calibration procedures .
include a map of the control points used for site calibration and control points used to validate the site calibration .
describe the frequency of site calibration and how site calibration will be documented .
at a minimum verify the site calibration twice daily .
num .
describe the contractors quality control procedures for verifying mechanical calibration and maintenance of construction and guidance equipment .
include the frequency and type of verification performed to ensure the constructed grades conform to the contract documents .
keep on site and provide upon request a copy of the projects most uptodate gnss work plan at the project site .
num payment include the cost of performing layout work as described above in the contract unit prices for the various items of work that require layout .
num contractors supervision .
num prosecution of work give the work the constant attention necessary to ensure the scheduled progress and cooperate fully with the engineer and with other contractors at work in the vicinity .
num contractors superintendent maintain a competent superintendent at the site at all times while work is in progress to act as the contractors agent .
provide a superintendent who is a competent superintendent capable of properly interpreting the contract documents and is thoroughly experienced in the type of work being performed .
provide a superintendent with the num return to table of contents full authority to receive instructions from the engineer and to execute the orders or directions of the engineer including promptly supplying any materials tools equipment labor and incidentals that may be required .
provide such superintendence regardless of the amount of work sublet .
provide a superintendent who speaks and understands english and maintain at least one other responsible person who speaks and understands english on the project during all working hours .
num supervision for emergencies provide a responsible person who speaks and understands english and who is available at or reasonably near the worksite on a num hour basis seven days a week .
designate this person as the point of contact for emergencies and in cases that require immediate action to maintain traffic or to resolve any other problem that might arise .
submit the phone numbers and names of personnel designated to be contacted in cases of emergencies along with a description of the project location to the florida highway patrol and all other local law enforcement agencies .
num general inspection requirements .
num cooperation by contractor do not perform work or furnish materials without obtaining inspection by the engineer .
provide the engineer with safe means of access to the work so the engineer can determine whether the work performed and materials used are in accordance with the requirements and intent of the contract documents .
if the engineer so requests at any time before final acceptance of the work remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as directed .
after examination restore the uncovered portions of the work to the standard required by the contract documents .
if the engineer determines that the work so exposed or examined is unacceptable perform the uncovering or removal and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed at no expense to the department .
however if the engineer determines that the work thus exposed or examined is acceptable the department will pay for the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed in accordance with section num .
num failure of engineer to reject work during construction if during or prior to construction operations the engineer fails to reject defective work or materials whether from lack of discovery of such defect or for any other reason such initial failure to reject in no way prevents the later rejection when such defect is discovered or obligates the department to final acceptance .
the department is not responsible for losses suffered due to any necessary removals or repairs of such defects .
num failure to remove and renew defective materials and work if the contractor fails or refuses to remove and renew any defective materials used or work performed or to make any necessary repairs in an acceptable manner and in accordance with the requirements of the contract within the time indicated in writing the engineer has the authority to repair remove or renew the unacceptable or defective materials or work as necessary all at the contractors expense .
the department will obtain payment for any expense it incurs in making these repairs removals or renewals that the contractor fails or refuses to make by deducting such expenses from any moneys due or which may become due the contractor or by charging such amounts against the contract bond .
num inspection by federal government when the united states government pays a portion of the cost of construction its representatives may inspect the construction work as they deem necessary .
however such inspection will in no way make the federal government a party to the contract .
num return to table of contents num final inspection .
num maintenance until acceptance maintain all work until the engineer has given final acceptance in accordance with num .
num inspection for acceptance upon submittal of written notification that all contract work or all contract work on the portion of the contract scheduled for acceptance has been completed the engineer will make an inspection for acceptance .
the inspection will be made within seven days of such notification .
if the engineer finds that all work has been satisfactorily completed the department will consider such inspection as the final inspection .
if any or all of the work is found to be unsatisfactory the engineer will detail the remedial work required to achieve acceptance .
immediately perform such remedial work .
subsequent inspections will be made on the remedial work until the engineer accepts all work .
upon satisfactory completion of the work the department will submit written notice of acceptance either partial or final to the contractor .
until final acceptance in accordance with num replace or repair any damage to the accepted work .
payment of such work will be as provided in num .
num partial acceptance at the engineers sole discretion the engineer may accept any portion of the work under the provisions of num .
num conditional acceptance the engineer will not make or consider requests for conditional acceptance of a project .
num final acceptance .
when upon completion of the final construction inspection of the entire project the engineer determines that the contractor has satisfactorily completed the work the engineer will submit written notice of final acceptance to the contractor .
num claims by contractor .
num general when the contractor deems that extra compensation or a time extension is due beyond that agreed to by the engineer whether due to delay additional work altered work differing site conditions breach of contract or for any other cause the contractor shall follow the procedures set forth herein for preservation presentation and resolution of the claim .
submission of timely notice of intent to file a claim preliminary time extension request time extension request and the certified written claim together with full and complete claim documentation are each a condition precedent to the contractor bringing any circuit court arbitration or other formal claims resolution proceeding against the department for the items and for the sums or time set forth in the contractors certified written claim .
the failure to provide such notice of intent preliminary time extension request time extension request certified written claim and full and complete claim documentation within the time required shall constitute a full complete absolute and irrevocable waiver by the contractor of any right to additional compensation or a time extension for such claim .
num notice of claim num claims for extra work where the contractor deems that additional compensation or a time extension is due for work or materials not expressly provided for in the contract or which is by written directive expressly ordered by the engineer pursuant to num the contractor shall submit written notification to the engineer of the intention to make a claim for additional compensation before beginning the work on which the claim is based and if seeking a time extension the contractor shall also submit a preliminary request for time extension pursuant to num within ten calendar days after commencement of a delay and a request for num return to table of contents contract time extension pursuant to num within thirty calendar days after the elimination of the delay .
if such written notification is not submitted and the engineer is not afforded the opportunity for keeping strict account of actual labor material equipment and time the contractor waives the claim for additional compensation or a time extension .
such notice by the contractor and the fact that the engineer has kept account of the labor materials and equipment and time shall not in any way be construed as establishing the validity of the claim or method for computing any compensation or time extension for such claim .
on projects with an original contract amount of num or less within num calendar days after final acceptance of the project in accordance with num and on projects with an original contract amount greater than num within num calendar days after final acceptance of the project in accordance with num the contractor shall submit full and complete claim documentation as described in num and duly certified pursuant to num .
however for any claim or part of a claim that pertains solely to final estimate quantities disputes the contractor shall submit full and complete claim documentation as described in num and duly certified pursuant to num as to such final estimate claim dispute issues within num or num calendar days respectively of the contractors receipt of the departments final estimate .
if the contractor fails to submit a certificate of claim as described in num the department will so notify the contractor in writing .
the contractor shall have ten calendar days from receipt of the notice to resubmit the claim documentation without change with a certificate of claim as described in num without regard to whether the resubmission is within the applicable num or num calendar day deadline for submission of full and complete claim documentation .
failure by the contractor to comply with the ten calendar day notice shall constitute a waiver of the claim .
num claims for delay where the contractor deems that additional compensation or a time extension is due on account of delay differing site conditions breach of contract or any other cause other than for work or materials not expressly provided for in the contract extra work or which is by written directive of the engineer expressly ordered by the engineer pursuant to num the contractor shall submit a written notice of intent to the engineer within ten days after commencement of a delay to a controlling work item expressly notifying the engineer that the contractor intends to seek additional compensation and if seeking a time extension the contractor shall also submit a preliminary request for time extension pursuant to num within ten calendar days after commencement of a delay to a controlling work item as to such delay and providing a reasonably complete description as to the cause and nature of the delay and the possible impacts to the contractors work by such delay and a request for contract time extension pursuant to num within thirty calendar days after the elimination of the delay .
on projects with an original contract amount of num or less within num calendar days after final acceptance of the project in accordance with num and on projects with an original contract amount greater than num within num calendar days after final acceptance of the project in accordance with num the contractor shall submit full and complete documentation as described in num and duly certified pursuant to num .
if the contractor fails to submit a certificate of claim as described in num the department will so notify the contractor in writing .
the contractor shall have ten calendar days from receipt of the notice to resubmit the claim documentation without change with a certificate of claim as described in num without regard to whether the resubmission is within the applicable num or num calendar day deadline for submission of full and complete claim num return to table of contents documentation .
failure by the contractor to comply with the ten calendar day notice shall constitute a waiver of the claim .
there shall be no contractor entitlement to any monetary compensation or time extension for any delays or delay impacts whatsoever that are not to a controlling work item and then as to any such delay to a controlling work item entitlement to any monetary compensation or time extension shall only be to the extent such is otherwise provided for expressly under num or num except that in the instance of delay to a noncontrolling item of work the contractor may be compensated for the direct costs of idle labor or equipment only at the rates set forth in num and num and then only to the extent the contractor could not reasonably mitigate such idleness .
num content of written claim as a condition precedent to the contractor being entitled to additional compensation or a time extension under the contract for any claim the contractor shall submit a certified written claim to the department which will include for each individual claim at a minimum the following information num .
a detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations and items of work affected and included in each claim num .
the date or dates on which actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim became evident num .
identification of all pertinent documents and the substance of any material oral communications relating to such claim and the name of the persons making such material oral communications num .
identification of the provisions of the contract which support the claim and a statement of the reasons why such provisions support the claim or alternatively the provisions of the contract which allegedly have been breached and the actions constituting such breach num .
a detailed compilation of the amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of the amount sought as follows a. documented additional job site labor expenses b. documented additional cost of materials and supplies c. a list of additional equipment costs claimed including each piece of equipment and the rental rate claimed for each d. any other additional direct costs or damages and the documents in support thereof e. any additional indirect costs or damages and all documentation in support thereof .
num .
a detailed compilation of the specific dates and the exact number of calendar days sought for a time extension the basis for entitlement to time for each day all documentation of the delay and a breakout of the number of days claimed for each identified event circumstance or occurrence .
further the contractor shall be prohibited from amending either the bases of entitlement or the amount of any compensation or time stated for any and all issues claimed in the contractors written claim submitted hereunder and any circuit court arbitration or other formal claims resolution proceeding shall be limited solely to the bases of entitlement and the amount of any compensation or time stated for any and all issues claimed in the contractors written claim submitted hereunder .
this shall not however preclude a contractor from withdrawing or reducing any of the bases of entitlement and the amount of any compensation or num return to table of contents time stated for any and all issues claimed in the contractors written claim submitted hereunder at any time .
num action on claim the engineer will respond in writing on projects with an original contract amount of num or less within num calendar days of receipt of a complete claim submitted by a contractor in compliance with num and on projects with an original contract amount greater than num within num calendar days of receipt of a complete claim submitted by a contractor in compliance with num .
failure by the engineer to respond to a claim in writing within num or num days respectively after receipt of a complete claim submitted by the contractor in compliance with num constitutes a denial of the claim by the engineer .
if the engineer finds the claim or any part thereof to be valid such partial or whole claim will be allowed and paid for to the extent deemed valid and any time extension granted if applicable as provided in the contract .
no circuit court or arbitration proceedings on any claim or a part thereof may be filed until after final acceptance per num of all contract work by the department or denial hereunder whichever occurs last .
num presettlement and prejudgment interest entitlement to any presettlement or prejudgment interest on any claim amount determined to be valid subsequent to the departments receipt of a certified written claim in full compliance with num whether determined by a settlement or a final ruling in formal proceedings the department shall pay to the contractor simple interest calculated at the prime rate as reported by the wall street journal as the base rate on corporate loans posted by at least num of the nations num largest banks as of the numth calendar day following the departments receipt of a certified written claim in full compliance with num such interest to accrue beginning num calendar days following the departments receipt of a certified written claim in full compliance with num and ending on the date of final settlement or formal ruling .
num compensation for extra work or delay num compensation for extra work notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the contract documents the contractor shall not be entitled to any compensation beyond that provided for in num .
num compensation for delay notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the contract documents the additional compensation set forth in num shall be the contractors sole monetary remedy for any delay other than to perform extra work caused by the department unless the delay shall have been caused by acts constituting willful or intentional interference by the department with the contractors performance of the work and then only where such acts continue after contractors written notice to the department of such interference .
the parties anticipate that delays may be caused by or arise from any number of events during the term of the contract including but not limited to work performed work deleted supplemental agreements work orders disruptions differing site conditions utility conflicts design changes or defects time extensions extra work rightofway issues permitting issues actions of suppliers subcontractors or other contractors actions by third parties suspensions of work by the engineer pursuant to num shop drawing approval process delays expansion of the physical limits of the project to make it functional weather weekends holidays special events suspension of contract time or other events forces or factors sometimes experienced in construction work .
such delays or events and their potential impacts on the performance by the contractor are specifically contemplated and acknowledged by the parties in entering into this contract and shall not be deemed to constitute willful or intentional interference with the contractors performance of the work without clear and convincing proof num return to table of contents that they were the result of a deliberate act without reasonable and goodfaith basis and specifically intended to disrupt the contractors performance .
num compensation for direct costs indirect costs expenses and profit thereon of or from delay for any delay claim the contractor shall be entitled to monetary compensation for the actual idle labor and equipment and indirect costs expenses and profit thereon as provided for in num and solely for costs incurred beyond what reasonable mitigation thereof the contractor could have undertaken .
num mandatory claim records after submitting to the engineer a notice of intent to file a claim for extra work or delay the contractor must keep daily records of all labor material and equipment costs incurred for operations affected by the extra work or delay .
these daily records must identify each operation affected by the extra work or delay and the specific locations where work is affected by the extra work or delay as nearly as possible .
the engineer may also keep records of all labor material and equipment used on the operations affected by the extra work or delay .
the contractor shall once a notice of intent to claim has been timely filed and not less than weekly thereafter as long as appropriate submit the contractors daily records to the engineer and be likewise entitled to receive the departments daily records .
the daily records to be submitted hereunder shall be done at no cost to the recipient .
num claims for acceleration the department shall have no liability for any constructive acceleration of the work nor shall the contractor have any right to make any claim for constructive acceleration nor include the same as an element of any claim the contractor may otherwise submit under this contract .
if the engineer gives express written direction for the contractor to accelerate its efforts such written direction will set forth the prices and other pertinent information and will be reduced to a written contract document promptly .
no payment will be made on a supplemental agreement for acceleration prior to the departments approval of the documents .
num certificate of claim when submitting any claim the contractor shall certify under oath and in writing in accordance with the formalities required by florida law that the claim is made in good faith that the supportive data are accurate and complete to the contractors best knowledge and belief and that the amount of the claim accurately reflects what the contractor in good faith believes to be the departments liability .
such certification must be made by an officer or director of the contractor with the authority to bind the contractor .
num nonrecoverable items the parties agree that for any claim the department will not have liability for the following items of damages or expense num .
loss of profit incentives or bonuses num .
any claim for other than extra work or delay num .
consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities loss of credit standing cost of financing interest paid loss of other work or insolvency num .
acceleration costs and expenses except where the department has expressly and specifically directed the contractor in writing to accelerate at the departments expense nor num .
attorney fees claims preparation expenses and costs of litigation .
num exclusive remedies notwithstanding any other provision of this contract the parties agree that the department shall have no liability to the contractor for expenses costs or items of damages other than those which are specifically identified as payable under num .
in the event any legal action for additional compensation whether on account of delay acceleration num return to table of contents breach of contract or otherwise the contractor agrees that the departments liability will be limited to those items which are specifically identified as payable in num .
num settlement discussions the content of any discussions or meetings held between the department and the contractor to settle or resolve any claims submitted by the contractor against the department shall be inadmissible in any legal equitable arbitration or administrative proceedings brought by the contractor against the department for payment of such claim .
dispute resolution board state arbitration board and claim review committee proceedings are not settlement discussions for purposes of this provision .
num personal liability of public officials in carrying out any of the provisions of the contract or in exercising any power or authority granted to the secretary of transportation engineer or any of their respective employees or agents there shall be no liability on behalf of any employee officer or official of the department for which such individual is responsible either personally or as officials or representatives of the department .
it is understood that in all such matters such individuals act solely as agents and representatives of the department .
num auditing of claims all claims filed against the department shall be subject to audit at any time following the filing of the claim whether or not such claim is part of a suit pending in the courts of this state .
the audit may be performed at the departments sole discretion by employees of the department or by any independent auditor appointed by the department or both .
the audit may begin after ten days written notice to the contractor subcontractor or supplier .
the contractor subcontractor or supplier shall make a good faith effort to cooperate with the auditors .
as a condition precedent to recovery on any claim the contractor subcontractor or supplier must retain sufficient records and provide full and reasonable access to such records to allow the departments auditors to verify the claim and failure to retain sufficient records of the claim or failure to provide full and reasonable access to such records shall constitute a waiver of that portion of such claim that can not be verified and shall bar recovery thereunder .
further and in addition to such audit access upon the contractor submitting a written claim the department shall have the right to request and receive and the contractor shall have the affirmative obligation to submit to the department any and all documents in the possession of the contractor or its subcontractors materialmen or suppliers as may be deemed relevant by the department in its review of the basis validity or value of the contractors claim .
without limiting the generality of the foregoing the contractor shall upon written request of the department make available to the departments auditors or upon the departments written request submit at the departments expense any or all of the following documents num .
daily time sheets and foremans daily reports and diaries num .
insurance welfare and benefits records num .
payroll register num .
earnings records num .
payroll tax return num .
material invoices purchase orders and all material and supply acquisition contracts num .
material cost distribution worksheet num .
equipment records list of company owned rented or other equipment used num .
vendor rental agreements and subcontractor invoices num return to table of contents num .
subcontractor payment certificates num .
canceled checks for the project including payroll and vendors num .
job cost report num .
job payroll ledger num .
general ledger general journal if used and all subsidiary ledgers and journals together with all supporting documentation pertinent to entries made in these ledgers and journals num .
cash disbursements journal num .
financial statements for all years reflecting the operations on this project num .
income tax returns for all years reflecting the operations on this project num .
all documents which reflect the contractors actual profit and overhead during the years this contract was being performed and for each of the five years prior to the commencement of this contract num .
all documents related to the preparation of the contractors bid including the final calculations on which the bid was based num .
all documents which relate to each and every claim together with all documents which support the amount of damages as to each claim num .
worksheets used to prepare the claim establishing the cost components for items of the claim including but not limited to labor benefits and insurance materials equipment subcontractors and all documents that establish which time periods and individuals were involved and the hours and rates for such individuals .
num recovery rights subsequent to final payment .
the department reserves the right if it discovers an error in the partial or final estimates or if it discovers that the contractor performed defective work or used defective materials after the final payment has been made to claim and recover from the contractor or his surety or both by process of law such sums as may be sufficient to correct the error or make good the defects in the work and materials .
num return to table of contents section num control of materials num acceptance criteria .
num general acceptance of materials is based on the following criteria .
all requirements may not apply to all materials .
use only materials in the work that meet the requirements of these specifications .
the engineer may inspect and test any material at points of production distribution and use .
num sampling and testing use the departments current sample identification and tracking system to provide related information and attach the information to each sample .
restore immediately any site from which material has been removed for sampling purposes to the presampled condition with materials and construction methods used in the initial construction at no additional cost to the department .
ensure when a material is delivered to the location as described in the contract documents there is enough material delivered to take samples at no expense to the department .
num pretest by manufacturers submit certified manufacturers test results to the engineer for qualification and use on department projects .
testing will be as specified in the contract documents .
the department may require that manufacturers submit samples of materials for independent verification purposes .
num point of production test test the material during production as specified in the contract documents .
num point of distribution test test the material at distribution facilities as specified in the contract documents .
num point of use test test the material immediately following placement as specified in the specifications .
after delivery to the project the department may require the retesting of materials that have been tested and accepted at the source of supply or may require the testing of materials that are to be accepted by manufacturer certification .
the department may reject all materials that when retested do not meet the requirements of these specifications .
num certification num manufacturer material certification submit material certifications for all materials to the engineer for approval when required by the specifications .
materials will not be considered for payment when not accompanied by a material certification .
sample material certification forms are available on the departments website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govmaterialsadministrationresourceslibrarypublicationscertificationssample forms.shtm .
ensure that the material certification follows the format of the sample form is submitted on the manufacturers letterhead and is signed by a legally responsible person employed by the manufacturer .
num approved product list this list provides assurance to contractors consultants designers and department personnel that specific products and materials are approved for use on department facilities .
the department will limit the contractors use of products and materials that require use of apl items to those listed on the apl effective at the time of placement .
where the terms qualified products list qpl appear in the contract documents they will be synonymous with approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking to have a product evaluated for the apl must submit a request for product consideration application available on the departments website at the following url num return to table of contents httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementproductevaluationdefault.shtm .
applications must include supporting documentation as required by the specifications standard plans and apl approval process .
required test reports must be conducted by an independent laboratory or other independent testing facility and required drawings and calculations must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of florida unless defined otherwise in the specifications standard plans and apl approval process requirements .
applications must be signed by a legally responsible person employed by the manufacturer of the product .
manufacturer name and material designation product name product modelpart numberstyle number etc .
submitted on the application must be as identified on the product product packaging or product labels as required by the specifications .
products that have successfully completed the departments evaluation process are eligible for inclusion on the apl .
unless defined otherwise in the specifications standard plans or apl approval process requirements products listed on the apl must have an associated photograph drawing or product label submitted by the product manufacturer before listing on the apl .
manufacturers are required to submit requests to the department for approval of any modifications or alterations made to a product listed on the apl .
this includes but is not limited to design materials fabrication methods or operational modifications .
modification or alteration requests must be submitted along with supporting documentation that the product continues to meet the specification or standard plans requirements .
a product sample and additional product testing may be required for the modification evaluation .
any marked variations from original test values failure to notify the department of any modifications or alterations or any evidence of inadequate performance of a product as a result of product modification or alteration may result in removal of the product from the apl .
manufacturers must submit supporting documentation to the department for a periodic review and reapproval of their apl products on or before the products original approval anniversary .
apl products that are not reapproved may be removed from the apl .
documentation requirements for the product review and reapproval including schedule and criteria are available on the departments website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementproductevaluationdefault.shtm .
num contractor installation certification submit installation certifications as required by the contract documents .
num applicable documented authorities other than specifications .
num general details on individual materials are identified in various material specific sections of the specifications that may refer to other documented authorities for requirements .
when specified meet the requirements as defined in such references .
num test methods methods of sampling and testing materials are in accordance with the florida methods fm .
if an fm does not exist for a particular test perform the testing in accordance with the method specified in the specification .
when test methods or other standards are referenced in the specifications without identification of the specific time of issuance use the most current issuance including interims or addendums thereto at the time of bid opening .
num construction aggregates aggregates used on department projects must be in accordance with rule num fac .
num return to table of contents num storage of materials and samples .
num method of storage store materials in such a manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for the work to facilitate prompt inspection and to minimize noise impacts on sensitive receivers .
more detailed specifications concerning the storage of specific materials are prescribed under the applicable specifications .
the department may reject improperly stored materials .
num use of rightofway for storage if the engineer allows the contractor may use a portion of the rightofway for storage purposes and for placing the contractors plant and equipment .
use only the portion of the rightofway that is outside the clear zone which is the portion not required for public vehicular or pedestrian travel .
when used restore the rightofway to preconstruction condition at no additional cost to the department or as specified in the contract documents .
provide any additional space required at no expense to the department .
num responsibility for stored materials accept responsibility for the protection of stored materials .
the department is not liable for any loss of materials by theft or otherwise or for any damage to the stored materials .
num storage facilities for samples provide facilities for storage of samples as described in the contract documents and warranted by the test methods and specifications .
num defective materials .
materials not meeting the requirements of these specifications will be considered defective .
the engineer will reject all such materials whether in place or not .
remove all rejected material immediately from the site of the work and from storage areas at no expense to the department .
do not use material that has been rejected until the engineer has approved the materials use .
upon failure to comply promptly with any order of the engineer made under the provisions of this article the engineer has the authority to have the defective material removed and replaced by other forces and deduct the cost of removal and replacement from any moneys due or to become due the contractor .
num engineering analysis as an exception to the above within num calendar days of the termination of the lot or rejection of the material the contractor may submit to the engineer a proposed engineering analysis scope to determine the disposition of the material .
the engineering analysis scope must contain at a minimum num .
description of the defective materials .
num .
supporting information testing or inspection reports with nonconformities pictures drawings and accurately dimensioned deficiency maps as necessary .
for cracked elements provide drawings showing the location average width depth length and termination points of each crack along the surfaces .
provide the distance from each termination point to a fixed reference point on the component such as beam end or edge of flange .
num .
proposed approach of investigation and analysis .
num .
name and credentials of the proposed specialty engineer or contractors engineer of record who will perform the engineering analysis .
num .
proposed testing laboratories qualified in accordance with section num num .
upon approval of the engineering analysis scope by the engineer the specialty engineer or contractors engineer of record may perform the engineering analysis as defined in num return to table of contents the approved scope and submit a signed and sealed engineering analysis report ear to the engineer .
the ear must contain at a minimum num .
the approved engineering analysis scope .
num .
any investigations performed and the associated results obtained .
num .
analysis and conclusion .
num .
proposed disposition of the material addressing the performance and durability of the proposed action .
provide as appropriate num .
written evidence of a previously approved comparable deficiency and its repair .
num .
documented research demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed repair .
num .
engineering calculations .
a specialty engineer who is an independent consultant or the contractors engineer of record as stated within each individual section shall perform any such analysis within num calendar days of the engineers approval of the engineering analysis scope complete and submit the ear .
the ear must be signed and sealed by the specialty engineer or the contractors engineer of record that performed the engineering analysis .
the engineer will determine the final disposition of the material after review of the ear .
no additional monetary compensation or time extension will be granted for the impact of any such analysis or review .
num products and source of supply .
num source of supplyconvict labor federalaid contracts only do not use materials that were produced after july num num by convict labor for federalaid highway construction projects unless the prison facility has been producing convictmade materials for federalaid highway construction projects before july num num .
use materials that were produced prior to july num num by convicts on federalaid highway construction projects free from the restrictions placed on the use of these materials by num u.s.c .
num .
the department will limit the use of materials produced by convict labor for use in federalaid highway construction projects to num .
materials produced by convicts on parole supervised release or probation from a prison or num .
materials produced in a qualified prison facility .
the amount of such materials produced for federalaid highway construction during any nummonth period shall not exceed the amount produced in such facility for use in such construction during the nummonth period ending july num num .
num source of supplysteel use steel and iron manufactured in the united states in accordance with the buy america provisions of num cfr num as amended .
ensure that all manufacturing processes for this material occur in the united states .
as used in this specification a manufacturing process is any process that modifies the chemical content physical shape or size or final finish of a product beginning with the initial melting and continuing through the final shaping and coating .
if a steel or iron product is taken outside the united states for any manufacturing process it becomes foreign source material .
when using steel or iron materials as a component of any manufactured product e.g .
concrete pipe prestressed beams corrugated steel pipe etc .
these same provisions apply .
foreign steel and iron may be used when the total actual cost of such foreign materials does not exceed num of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
these requirements are applicable to num return to table of contents all steel and iron materials incorporated into the finished work but are not applicable to steel and iron items that the contractor uses but does not incorporate into the finished work .
submit a certification from the manufacturer of steel or iron or any product containing steel or iron stating that all steel or iron furnished or incorporated into the furnished product was produced and manufactured in the united states or a statement that the product was produced within the united states except for minimal quantities of foreign steel and iron valued at actual cost .
submit each such certification to the engineer prior to incorporating the material or product into the project .
prior to the use of foreign steel or iron materials on a project submit invoices to document the actual cost of such material and obtain the engineers written approval prior to incorporating the material into the project num contaminated unfit hazardous and dangerous materials do not use any material that after approval andor placement has in any way become unfit for use .
do not use materials containing any substance that has been determined to be hazardous by the state of florida department of environmental protection or the u.s. environmental protection agency epa .
provide workplaces free from serious recognized hazards and to comply with occupational safety and health standards as determined by the u.s. department of labor occupational safety and health administration osha .
num return to table of contents section num legal requirements and responsibility to the public num laws to be observed .
num general become familiar with and comply with all federal state and local rules and regulations that control the action or operation of those engaged or employed in the work or that affect material used .
pay particular attention called to the safety regulations promulgated by the u.s. department of labor occupational safety and health administration osha .
in addition comply with chapter num of the florida statutes regarding control of air pollution .
direct special attention to that portion of chapter num rules of the department of environmental protection florida administrative code pertaining to open burning in land clearing operations .
where work or structures included in the contract are in navigable waters of the u.s. reference num of the code of federal regulations part num waters of the u.s. reference num of the code of federal regulations parts num and num or waters of the state reference part num chapters num and num of the florida statutes and section num of the florida administrative code comply with the regulatory provisions of section num of the federal clean water act of num sections num and num of the federal river and harbor act of num chapter num of the florida statutes and any local authority having jurisdiction over such waters .
comply with part iv chapter num of the florida statutes regarding land reclamation .
direct special attention to chapters numcnum and numcnum of the florida administrative code .
submit the notice of intent to mine to department of environmental protection collins building num east dirac drive tallahassee florida num with a copy to the engineer .
the engineer will determine consistency with the environmental documents prior to commencement of mining .
obtain certification from the construction industry licensing board as required by part i chapter num of the florida statutes regardless of exemptions allowed by subsection num prior to removing underground pollutant storage tanks .
dispose of tanks and pollutants in accordance with the requirements and regulations of any federal state or local agency having jurisdiction .
prior to building construction or renovation submit current registrations or certifications issued by the florida construction industry licensing board in accordance with chapter num for the appropriate category of construction .
corporations must be registered with the state of florida department of state division of corporations and hold a current state corporate charter number in accordance with chapter num florida statutes .
the contractor or the authorized subcontractor applying the roofing material must be licensed or be an approved dealer and applicator of the proposed roofing material .
indemnify defend and save harmless the department and all of its officers agents and employees in the amount of the contract price against all claims or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such federal state and local rules and regulations whether by himself or his employees .
num return to table of contents the contractor shall comply with all environmental permits including measures identified in the national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes stormwater pollution prevention plan and sediment and erosion control plan for the work .
the contractor shall exert every reasonable and diligent effort to ensure that all labor employed by the contractor and his subcontractors for work on the project work harmoniously and compatibly with all labor used by other building and construction contractors now or hereafter on the site of the work covered by this contract .
include this provision in all subcontracts and require all subcontractors to include it in their subcontracts with others .
however do not interpret or enforce this provision so as to deny or abridge on account of membership or nonmembership in any labor union or labor organization the right of any person to work as guaranteed by article i section num of the florida constitution .
comply with chapter num of the florida statutes during the performance of excavation or demolition operations .
the executive order num electronic version dated september num num is posted on the departments website at the following url address httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecsfilesdeonum.pdf take responsibility to obtain the information posted on this website up through five calendar days before the opening of bids and comply with the provisions contained in executive order num .
if the departments website can not be accessed contact the departments specifications office web coordinator at num num .
num plant quarantine regulations the u.s. department of agriculture and the florida department of agriculture and consumer services have issued quarantine regulations pertaining to control of the nematodes of citrus rule numbnum florida administrative code and other plant pests .
contact the local or other available representatives of the animal and plant health inspection service of the u.s. department of agriculture and the division of plant industry of the florida department of agriculture and consumer services to ascertain all current restrictions regarding plant pests that are imposed by these agencies .
keep advised of current quarantine boundary lines throughout the construction period .
these restrictions may affect operations in connection with such items as clearing and grubbing earthwork grassing and mulching sodding landscaping and other items which might involve the movement of materials containing plant pests across quarantine lines .
obtain quarantine regulations and related information from the following animal and plant health inspection service u.s. department of agriculture num lake alfred road winter haven florida num director division of plant industry florida department of agriculture and consumer services post office box num gainesville florida num num introduction or release of prohibited aquatic plants plant pests or noxious weeds do not introduce or release prohibited aquatic plants plant pests or noxious weeds into num return to table of contents the project limits as a result of clearing and grubbing earthwork grassing and mulching sodding landscaping or other such activities .
immediately notify the engineer upon discovery of all prohibited aquatic plants plant pests or noxious weeds within the project limits .
do not move prohibited aquatic plants plant pests or noxious weeds within the project limits or to locations outside of the project limits without the engineers permission .
maintain all borrow material brought onto the project site free of prohibited aquatic plants plant pests noxious weeds and their reproductive parts .
refer to rule numcnum and rule numbnum of the florida administrative code for the definition of prohibited aquatic plants plant pests and noxious weeds .
num compliance with federal endangered species act and other wildlife regulations the federal endangered species act requires that the department investigate the potential impact to a threatened or endangered species prior to initiating an activity performed in conjunction with a highway construction project .
if the departments investigation determines that there is a potential impact to a protected threatened or an endangered species the department will conduct an evaluation to determine what measures may be necessary to mitigate such impact .
when mitigation measures andor special conditions are necessary these measures and conditions will be addressed in the contract documents or in permits as identified in num .
in addition in cases where certain protected threatened or endangered species are found or appear within close proximity to the project boundaries the department has established guidelines that will apply when interaction with certain species occurs absent of any special mitigation measures or permit conditions otherwise identified for the project .
these guidelines are posted at the following url address httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecsfilesendangeredwildlifegu idelines.pdf .
take responsibility to obtain this information and take all actions and precautions necessary to comply with the conditions of these guidelines during all project activities .
prior to establishing any offproject activity in conjunction with a project notify the engineer of the proposed activity .
covered activities include but are not necessarily limited to borrow pits concrete or asphalt plant sites disposal sites field offices and material or equipment storage sites .
include in the notification the financial project id a description of the activity the location of the site by township range section county and city a site location map including the access route the name of the property owner and a person to contact to arrange a site inspection .
submit this notification at least num days in advance of planned commencement of the offsite activity to allow for the department to conduct an investigation without delaying job progress .
do not perform any offproject activity without obtaining written clearance from the engineer .
in the event the departments investigation determines a potential impact to a protected threatened or endangered species and mitigation measures or permits are necessary coordinate with the appropriate resource agencies for clearance obtain permits and perform mitigation measures as necessary .
immediately notify the engineer in writing of the results of this coordination with the appropriate resource agencies .
additional compensation or time will not be allowed for permitting or mitigation associated with contractor initiated offproject activities .
num occupational safety and health requirements the contractor shall take all precautions necessary for the protection of life health and general occupational welfare of all persons including employees of both the contractor and the department until the contractor has completed the work required under the contract as provided in num and num .
num return to table of contents comply at all times with applicable federal state and local laws provisions and policies governing safety and health including num cfr num including all subsequent revisions and updates .
num discovery of an unmarked human burial when an unmarked human burial is discovered immediately cease all activity that may disturb the unmarked human burial and notify the engineer .
do not resume activity until specifically authorized by the engineer .
num insecticides herbicides and fertilizers num insecticides and herbicides use products found on the following website httpstate.ceris.purdue.edu approved by the florida department of agriculture and consumer services .
the use of restricted products is prohibited .
do not use any products in the sulfonylurea family of chemicals .
herbicide application by broadcast spraying is not allowed .
procure any necessary licenses pay all charges and fees and give all notices necessary for lawful performance of the work .
ensure that all insecticides and herbicides are applied in accordance with chapter numenum florida administrative code .
submit a copy of current certificates to the engineer upon request .
ensure that employees who work with herbicides comply with all applicable federal state and local regulations .
comply with all regulations and permits issued by any regulatory agency within whose jurisdiction work is being performed .
post all permit placards in a protected conspicuous location at the work site .
acquire any permits required for work performed on the rightsofway within the jurisdiction of national forests in florida .
contact the local national forest ranger district or the united states department of agriculture usda office for the proper permits and subsequent approval .
acquire all permits required for aquatic plant control as outlined in chapter numcnum florida administrative code rules of the florida department of environmental protection .
contact the regional field office of bureau of invasive plant management of the florida department of environmental protection for proper permits and subsequent approval .
if application of synthetic organoauxin herbicides is necessary meet the requirements of chapter numenum florida administrative code .
num fertilizer ensure that all employees applying fertilizer possess a current florida department of agriculture and consumer services commercial applicator license in accordance with section num f.s .
upon request submit the current certificates to the engineer .
num compliance with section numf of the usdot act section numf of the usdot act prohibits the u. s. secretary of transportation from approving a project which requires the use of publicly owned land of a public park recreation area or a wildlife and waterfowl refuge or of any historic site of national state or local significance unless there is no prudent or feasible alternative to using that land and the program or project includes all possible planning to minimize the harm to the site resulting from the use .
before undertaking any offproject activity associated with any federally assisted undertaking ensure that the proposed site does not represent a public park recreation area wildlife or waterfowl refuge or a historic site according to the results of the cultural resources survey discussed in num .
if such a site is proposed notify the engineer and provide a num return to table of contents description of the proposed offsite activity the financial project id the location of the site by township range section a county or city map showing the site location including the access route and the name of the property .
it is the contractors responsibility to submit justification for use of section numf property that is sufficient for the florida department of transportation and the federal highway administration to make a section numf determination .
submit this notification sufficiently in advance of planned commencement of the offsite activity to allow a reasonable time for the engineer to conduct an investigation without delaying job progress .
do not begin any offproject activity without obtaining written clearance from the engineer .
num florida minority business loan mobilization program the loan mobilization program is established by section num of the florida statutes and has as its goal to assist minority business enterprises by facilitating working capital loans to those eligible businesses that are contractors or subcontractors on department contracts .
the limits of such advances under this program shall be as specified in section num of the florida statutes .
in the case of a subcontractor the amount of the advance will be based on the subcontract unit prices not the contract unit prices .
all prime contractor vendors shall be required to incorporate the designated loan mobilization payment procedures in subcontract agreements with minority business enterprise vendors participating in this program and to cooperate in the release of designated loan mobilization payments to achieve the objective of providing working capital for minority business enterprise subcontract vendors .
when the contract has been awarded or in the case of a subcontractor a subcontract has been signed with the prime contractor application for participation in this program will be submitted in writing to the engineer .
such application must be made prior to commencement of the work .
if the application is made on behalf of a subcontractor it shall be considered incomplete if the subcontract with the unit prices of the work clearly delineated is not included in the submittal .
when all applicable conditions have been met approval for participation will be made by the office of the comptroller and the applicant will be notified of the approval action taken .
once approval has been obtained and the notice to proceed has been issued disbursement of the monies will be made at the request of the applicant .
the designated loan mobilization payment may be paid prior to the commencement of work on the contract .
however if the work on the contract has not commenced and the payment has not been made then the contract time may not commence until the payment is made .
all designated loan mobilization payments will be made payable jointly to the prime contractor and the participating financial institution .
when a subcontractor is the participant in the program such payments shall be paid to the participant within num business days after receipt of the funds from the department .
repayment of monies advanced through this program will be made after the value of the work accomplished by the participant reaches num percent .
contractors are encouraged to make weekly or biweekly payments to subcontractors participating in this program .
num permits and licenses .
num general except for permits procured by the department as incorporated by special provision expanding this subarticle if any procure all permits and licenses pay all num return to table of contents charges and fees and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
the department will also acquire any modifications or revisions to an original permit incorporated by special provision to this subarticle when the contractor requires such modifications or revisions to complete the construction operations specified in the plans or special provisions and within the rightofway limits .
acquire all permits for work performed outside the rightofway or easements for the project .
in carrying out the work in the contract when under the jurisdiction of any environmental regulatory agency comply with all regulations issued by such agencies and with all general special and particular conditions relating to construction activities of all permits issued to the department as though such conditions were issued to the contractor .
post all permit placards in a protected location at the worksite .
in case of a discrepancy between any permit condition and other contract documents the more stringent condition shall prevail .
num work or structures in navigable waters of the u.s .
waters of the u.s. and waters of the state in general one or more governmental agencies will exercise regulatory authority over work or structures including related construction operations in all tidal areas channelward of the mean high water lines on the atlantic and gulf coast in the ocean and gulf waters to the outer limits of the continental shelf in all rivers streams and lakes to the ordinary high water line in marshes and shallows that are periodically inundated and normally characterized by aquatic vegetation capable of growth and reproduction in all artificially created channels and canals used for recreational navigational or other purposes that are connected to navigable waters and in all tributaries of navigable waters up to their headwaters .
whenever the work under or incidental to the contract requires structures or dredgefillconstruction activities in navigable waters of the u.s .
waters of the u.s. and waters of the state the federal state county and local regulatory agencies may require the department to obtain a permit .
for such dredgefill construction specified in the plans to be accomplished within the limits of the project or for any dredgefillconstruction within the limits of departmentfurnished borrow areas the department will procure the necessary permits prior to advertising for bids .
num asbuilt drawings and certified surveys num surface water management systems for water management districts as a condition precedent to final acceptance of the project submit to the engineer the asbuilt drawings and a certified survey verifying the asbuilt conditions for all installed and constructed surface water management systems .
the asbuilt drawings and certified survey must be pdf files in the same scale as the contract plans formatted on num inch by num inch sheets and satisfy all the requirements and special conditions listed in the water management districts environmental resource permit erp and any applicable local permit .
the asbuilt drawings and certified survey must be signed and sealed by an appropriately licensed professional registered in the state of florida .
if the erp does not contain specific requirements submit asbuilt drawings with the following information as a minimum num return to table of contents num .
discharge structures structure identification number type locations latitude and longitude dimensions and elevations of all including weirs bleeders orifices gates pumps pipes and oil and grease skimmers .
num .
side bank and underdrain filters or exfiltration trenches locations dimensions and elevations of all including cleanouts pipes connections to control structures and points of discharge to receiving waters .
num .
storage areas for treatment and attenuation storage area identification number dimensions elevations contours or crosssections of all sufficient to determine stagestorage relationships of the storage area and the permanent pool depth and volume below the control elevation for normally wet systems .
num .
system grading dimensions elevations contours final grades or crosssections to determine contributing drainage areas flow directions and conveyance of runoff to the system discharge points .
num .
conveyance dimensions elevations contours final grades or crosssections of systems utilized to divert offsite runoff around or through the new system .
num .
water levels existing water elevations and the date determined .
num .
benchmarks location and description minimum of one per major water control structure .
num bridge clearances for projects under the authority of a u.s. coast guard permit as a condition precedent to final acceptance of the project submit to the engineer a certified survey verifying the asbuilt clearances described in the u.s. coast guard owners certification of bridge completion .
the certified survey must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or professional surveyor and mapper registered in the state of florida .
num projects under the authority of a u.s. army corps of engineers permit as a condition precedent to final acceptance of the project submit to the engineer the asbuilt drawings and a certified survey verifying the asbuilt conditions .
the asbuilt drawings and certified survey must be submitted in pdf files formatted in the same scale as the contract plans formatted on num inch by num inch sheets and satisfy all of the requirements and special conditions listed in the u.s. army corps of engineers permit .
the asbuilt drawings and certified survey must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or professional surveyor and mapper registered in the state of florida .
num patented devices materials and processes .
include all royalties and costs arising from patents trademarks and copyrights in any way involved in the work in the contract price .
whenever using any design device material or process covered by letters patent or copyright obtain the right for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner of the copyright .
file a copy of such agreement with the engineer .
however whether or not such agreement is made or filed as noted the contractor and the surety in all cases shall indemnify defend and save harmless the department from all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material or process on work under the contract and shall indemnify the department for all costs expenses and damages that it may be obliged to pay by reason of any such infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work .
num return to table of contents num rightofway furnished by the department .
except as otherwise stipulated in these specifications or as shown in the plans the department will furnish all rightsofway necessary for the proper completion of the work at no expense to the contractor .
should departmentfurnished areas for obtaining borrow material contain limerock material do not remove such material from the pit unless the engineer gives specific approval .
use of department owned rightofway for the purpose of equipment or material storage laydown facilities precast material fabrication sites batch plants for the production of asphalt concrete or other construction related materials or other similar activities shall require advance written approval by the department prior to making use of said department owned right of way .
use of department owned right of way for these purposes is expressly limited to the storage of equipment and materials for the project or production of materials or products for the project .
num restoration of surfaces opened by permit .
upon the presentation of a duly authorized and satisfactory permit that provides that all necessary repair work will be paid for by the party holding such permit the engineer may authorize the contractor to allow parties bearing such permits to make openings in the highway .
upon the engineers written order perform in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings and such necessary work that the engineer orders subject to the same conditions as the original work performed .
the department will pay the contractor for such work either under applicable contract items or in accordance with num when contract items are not applicable .
num sanitary provisions .
the contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat and sanitary condition such accommodations for the use of his employees as are necessary to comply with the requirements and regulations of the state and local boards of health .
commit no public nuisance .
num control of the contractors equipment .
num traffic interference do not allow equipment while it is on or traversing a road or street to unreasonably interfere with traffic .
num overloaded equipment do not operate on any road street or bridge including a department owned temporary bridge any hauling unit or equipment loaded in excess of num. the maximum weights specified in the florida highway patrol commercial motor vehicle manual trucking manual or num. lower weight limits legally established and posted for any section of road or bridge by the department or local authorities .
the governmental unit having jurisdiction over a particular road or bridge may provide exceptions by special permit under the provisions of num .
this restriction applies to all roads and bridges inside and outside the contract limits as long as these roads and bridges are open for public use .
the contractor may overload roads and bridges which are to be demolished after they are permanently closed to the public .
the contractor is responsible for all loss or damages resulting from equipment operated on a structure permanently closed to the public .
num crossings where it is necessary to cross an existing road or street including specifically the existing traveled lanes of a divided highway within the limits of the project num return to table of contents obtain permits from the department for crossing overloaded or oversized equipment .
cross existing roads or streets only at engineerdesignated points .
the engineer may require the contractor to protect the pavement or roadway at the crossing by using lumber planks or fill .
movement of equipment around the project site must be in accordance with requirements of the standard plans and not create an undue hazard to the traveling public or workers .
provide flagging and watchman service or approved signal devices for the protection of traffic at all such crossings in accordance with an approved written plan for that activity .
num protection from damage by tractortype equipment take positive measures to ensure that tractortype equipment does not damage the road .
if any such damage should occur repair it without delay at no expense to the department and subject to the engineers approval .
num contractors equipment on bridge structures the contractors engineer of record shall analyze the effect of imposed loads on bridge structures within the limits of a construction contract resulting from the following operations num .
overloaded equipment as defined in num a .
operating on or crossing over completed bridge structures .
b .
operating on or crossing over partially completed bridge structures .
num .
equipment within legal load limits a .
operating on or crossing over partially completed bridge structures .
num .
construction cranes a .
operating on completed bridge structures .
b .
operating on partially completed bridge structures .
any pipe culverts or box culverts qualifying as a bridge under num is excluded from the requirements above .
a completed bridge structure is a bridge structure in which all elemental components comprising the load carrying assembly have been completed assembled and connected in their final position .
the components to be considered shall also include any related members transferring load to any bridge structure .
the contractors engineer of record shall determine the effect that equipment loads have on the bridge structure and develop the procedures for using the loaded equipment without exceeding the structures design load capacity .
submit to the department for approval the design calculations layout drawings and erection drawings showing how the equipment is to be used so that the bridge structure will not be overstressed .
the contractors engineer of record shall sign and seal the drawings and the cover sheet of the calculations for the departments record set .
num posting of the legal gross vehicular weight display the maximum legal gross weight as specified in the florida uniform traffic code in a permanent manner on each side of any dump truck or dump type tractortrailer unit hauling embankment material construction aggregates road base material or hot bituminous mixture to the project over any public road or street .
display the weight in a location clearly visible to the scale operator in numbers that contrast in color with the background and that are readily visible and readable from a distance of num feet .
num return to table of contents num structures over navigable waters .
num compliance with federal and other regulations when working on structures in adjacent to or over navigable waters observe all regulations and instructions of federal and other authorities having control over such waters .
do not obstruct navigation channels without permission from the proper authority and provide and maintain navigation lights and signals in accordance with the federal requirements for the protection of the structure of false work and of navigation .
when working on moveable bridges requests for temporarily changing the operating requirements for the moveable bridge must be submitted in writing to the appropriate coast guard district bridge branch num days before the start of any action .
for all other bridges notify the appropriate coast guard district bridge branch at least num days prior to the start of any operations including construction and num days prior to any channel operations closures or opening restrictions .
when work platforms are indicated in the permit for construction submit work platform construction plans to the appropriate coast guard district for approval .
obtain approval prior to beginning construction on the platform .
num maintenance of channel where the work includes the excavation of a channel or other underwater areas to a required section maintain the section from shoaling or other encroachment until final acceptance of the project .
in the event of accidental blocking of the navigation channel immediately notify the u.s. coast guard of the blockage and upon removal of the blockage .
num use of explosives .
when using explosives for the prosecution of the work exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property including new work .
the contractor is responsible for all damage resulting from the use of explosives .
store all explosives in a secure manner in compliance with all laws and ordinances and clearly mark all such storage places with the words dangerous explosives .
place such storage in the care of a competent watchman .
where no local laws or ordinances apply provide storage satisfactory to the engineer and in general not closer than num feet from the road or from any building camping area or place of human occupancy .
notify each public utility company having structures in proximity to the site of the work of the intention to use explosives .
give such notice sufficiently in advance to enable the companies to take precautionary steps to protect their property from injury .
num forest protection .
num compliance with state and federal regulations in carrying out work within or adjacent to state or national forests or parks comply with all of the regulations of the state or federal authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of and the carrying out of work in forests or parks and observe all sanitary laws and regulations with respect to the performance of work in these areas .
keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse and obtain permits for the construction installation and maintenance of any construction camps living quarters stores warehouses sanitary facilities and other structures all in accordance with the requirements of the forest or park official .
num prevention and suppression of forest fires take all reasonable precautions to prevent and suppress forest fires .
require employees and subcontractors both independently and num return to table of contents at the request of forest officials to do all reasonably within their power to prevent and suppress forest fires .
assist in preventing and suppressing forest fires and make every possible effort to notify a forest official at the earliest possible moment of the location and extent of all fires .
extinguish the fire if practicable .
num preservation of existing property .
num general preserve from damage all existing property within the project limits of or in any way affected by the work the removal or destruction of which is not specified in the plans .
this applies to but is not limited to public and private property public and private utilities except as modified by the provisions of num trees shrubs crops sod signs monuments fences guardrail pipe and underground structures intelligent transportation systems its facilities traffic control signals and devices highway lighting and public highways except natural wear and tear of highway resulting from legitimate use thereof by the contractor .
department owned underground facility locations shown in the plans are approximate .
unless otherwise shown in the plans department owned underground facilities will not be located by the department nor through notification to sunshine num .
whenever the contractors activities damage such existing property immediately restore it to a condition equal to or better than that existing at the time such damage occurred at no expense to the department .
temporary repairs may be used to immediately restore its facilities and traffic control signals and devices .
permanent repairs to its facilities and traffic control signals and devices shall be made within num days of any temporary repairs and prior to final acceptance of the project .
submit permanent its facility repair plans to the engineer prior to beginning repair work .
protect existing bridges during the entire construction period from damage caused by the work .
immediately repair at no expense to the department all damage to existing bridges caused by the work prior to continuing the work .
the department will not require the contractor to provide routine repairs or maintenance for such structures .
direct special attention to the protection of all geodetic monuments horizontal or vertical and public land survey corners located within the project .
if any geodetic monument or public land survey corner located within the project is at risk of being damaged or destroyed immediately notify the engineer .
locate and replace any damaged or destroyed geodetic monuments or public land survey corners under the direction of a professional surveyor and mapper registered in the state of florida .
whenever the actions of a third party damage such existing property and is not otherwise due to any fault or activities of the contractor either restore it to a condition equal to or better than that existing at the time such damage occurred or provide access and coordinate with the departments maintenance contractor in accordance with num as directed by the engineer .
the department will compensate the contractor for the costs associated with the repairs for restoring the existing property in accordance with num .
theft and vandalism are considered damage caused by a third party .
num failure to restore damaged existing property in case of failure on the part of the contractor to restore such property bridge road or street or to make good such damage or injury the engineer may upon num hours notice proceed to repair rebuild or otherwise restore such property road or street as may be deemed necessary and the department will deduct the num return to table of contents cost thereof from any monies due or which may become due the contractor under the contract .
nothing in this clause prevents the contractor from receiving proper compensation for the removal damage or replacement of any public or private property not shown in the plans that is made necessary by alteration of grade or alignment .
the engineer will authorize such work provided that the contractor or his employees or agents have not through their own fault damaged such property .
num contractors use of streets and roads num on systems other than the state highway system when hauling materials or equipment to the project over roads and bridges on the state park road system county road system or city street system and such use causes damage immediately at no expense to the department repair such road or bridge to as good a condition as before the hauling began .
the department may modify the above requirement in accordance with any agreement the contractor might make with the governmental unit having jurisdiction over a particular road or bridge provided that the contractor submits written evidence of such agreement to the engineer .
num on the state highway system the department is responsible for the repair of any damage that hauling materials to the site causes to roads outside the limits of the project that are either on the state highway system roads under the jurisdiction of the department or specifically designated in the plans as haul roads from departmentfurnished material pits except in the event damage is due to failure to comply with num .
the contractor is responsible for all damages to any road or bridge caused by the contractors failure to comply with num .
num within the limits of a construction project the department will not allow the operation of equipment or hauling units of such weight as to cause damage to previously constructed elements of the project including but not necessarily limited to bridges drainage structures base course and pavement .
do not operate hauling units or equipment loaded in excess of the maximum weights specified in num on existing pavements that are to remain in place including pavement being resurfaced cementtreated subgrades and bases concrete pavement any course of asphalt pavement and bridges .
the engineer may allow exceptions to these weight restrictions for movement of necessary equipment to and from its worksite for hauling of offsite fabricated components to be incorporated into the project and for crossings as specified in num .
num operations within railroad rightofway num notification to the railroad company notify the superintendent of the railroad company as shown in the plans and the engineer at least num hours before beginning any operation within the limits of the railroad rightofway any operation requiring movement of employees trucks or other equipment across the tracks of the railroad company at other than an established public crossing and any other work that may affect railroad operations or property .
num contractors responsibilities comply with whatever requirements an authorized representative of the railroad company deems necessary in order to safeguard the railroads property and operations .
the contractor is responsible for all damages delays or injuries and all suits actions or claims brought on account of damages or injuries resulting from the contractors operations within or adjacent to railroad company rightofway .
num return to table of contents num watchman or flagging services the railroad company will furnish protective services i.e .
watchman or flagging services to ensure the safety of railroad operations during certain periods of the project .
the department will reimburse the railroad company for the cost thereof .
schedule work that affects railroad operations so as to minimize the need for protective services by the railroad company .
num utilities num arrangements for protection or adjustment do not commence work at points where the construction operations are adjacent to utility facilities until all necessary arrangements have been made for removal temporary removal relocation deenergizing deactivation or adjustment with the utility facilities owner to protect against damage that might result in expense loss disruption of service or other undue inconvenience to the public or to the owners .
the contractor is solely and directly responsible to the owners and operators of such properties for all damages injuries expenses losses inconveniences or delays caused by the contractors operations .
do not request utility removal temporary removal relocation de energizing deactivation or adjustment when work can be accomplished within the utility work schedules .
in the event that removal temporary removal relocation deenergizing deactivation or adjustment of a utility or a particular sequence of timing in the relocation of a utility is necessary and has not been addressed in a utility work schedule the engineer will determine the necessity for any such utility work .
coordinate such work as to cause the least impediment to the overall construction operations and utility service .
the department is not responsible for utility removal temporary removal relocation deenergizing deactivation or adjustment work where such work is determined not necessary by the engineer or done solely for the benefit or convenience of the utility owner or its contractor or the contractor .
num cooperation with utility owners cooperate with the owners of all underground or overhead utility lines in their removal and rearrangement operations in order that these operations may progress in a reasonable manner that duplication or rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by the utility owners will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
in the event of interruption of water or other utility services as a result of accidental breakage exposure or lack of support promptly notify the proper authority and cooperate with the authority in the prompt restoration of service .
if water service is interrupted and the contractor is performing the repair work the contractor shall work continuously until the service is restored .
do not begin work around fire hydrants until the local fire authority has approved provisions for continued service .
num utility adjustments certain utility adjustments and reconstruction work may be underway during the progress of the contract .
cooperate with the various utility construction crews who are maintaining utility service .
exercise due caution when working adjacent to relocated utilities .
the contractor shall repair all damage to the relocated utilities resulting from his operations at no expense to the department .
the requirements of num and num outline the contractors responsibility for of protecting utility facilities .
the department will include in the contract the utility authorities who are scheduled to perform utility work on the project .
num return to table of contents num weekly meetings conduct weekly meetings on the job site with all the affected utility companies and the engineer in attendance to coordinate project construction and utility relocation .
submit a list of all attendees one week in advance to the engineer for approval .
submit the approved work progress schedule and work plan for the project as specified in num to document the schedule and plan for road construction and utility adjustments .
when utility relocations no longer affect construction activities the contractor may discontinue the meetings with the engineers approval .
num responsibility for damages claims etc .
num contractor to provide indemnification the contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the department its officers and employees from liabilities damages losses and costs including but not limited to reasonable attorneys fees to the extent caused by the negligence recklessness or intentional wrongful misconduct of the contractor and persons employed or utilized by the contractor in the performance of the construction contract .
it is specifically agreed between the parties executing this contract that it is not intended by any of the provisions of any part of the contract to create in the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary hereunder or to authorize anyone not a party to this contract to maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the terms or provisions of this contract .
num guaranty of payment for claims the contractor guaranties the payment of all just claims for materials supplies tools or labor and other just claims against him or any subcontractor in connection with the contract .
the departments final acceptance and payment does not release the contractors bond until all such claims are paid or released .
num insurance .
num workers compensation insurance provide workers compensation insurance in accordance with floridas workers compensation law for all employees .
if subletting any of the work ensure that the subcontractors have workers compensation insurance for their employees in accordance with floridas workers compensation law .
if using leased employees or employees obtained through professional employer organizations peos ensure that such employees are covered by workers compensation insurance through the peos or other leasing entities .
ensure that any equipment rental agreements that include operators or other personnel who are employees of independent contractors sole proprietorships or partners are covered by insurance required under floridas workers compensation law .
num commercial general liability insurance carry commercial general liability insurance providing continuous coverage for all work or operations performed under the contract .
such insurance shall be no more restrictive than that provided by the latest occurrence form edition of the standard commercial general liability coverage form iso form cg num num as filed for use in the state of florida .
cause the department to be made an additional insured as to such insurance .
such coverage shall be on an occurrence basis and shall include productscompleted operations coverage .
the coverage afforded to the department as an additional insured shall be primary as to any other available insurance and shall not be more restrictive than the coverage afforded to the named insured .
the limits of coverage shall not be less than num for each occurrence and not less than a num annual general num return to table of contents aggregate inclusive of amounts provided by an umbrella or excess policy .
the limits of coverage described herein shall apply fully to the work or operations performed under the contract and may not be shared with or diminished by claims unrelated to the contract .
the policyies and coverage described herein may be subject to a deductible .
pay all deductibles as required by the policy .
no policyies or coverage described herein may contain or be subject to a retention or a selfinsured retention .
prior to the execution of the contract and at all renewal periods which occur prior to final acceptance of the work the department shall be provided with an acord certificate of liability insurance reflecting the coverage described herein .
the department shall be notified in writing within ten days of any cancellation notice of cancellation lapse renewal or proposed change to any policy or coverage described herein .
the departments approval or failure to disapprove any policyies coverage or acord certificates shall not relieve or excuse any obligation to procure and maintain the insurance required herein nor serve as a waiver of any rights or defenses the department may have .
num insurance required for construction at railroads when the contract includes the construction of a railroad grade crossing railroad overpass or underpass structure or any other work or operations within the limits of the railroad rightofway including any encroachments thereon from work or operations in the vicinity of the railroad rightofway you shall in addition to the insurance coverage required pursuant to num above procure and maintain railroad protective liability coverage iso form cg num num where the railroad is the named insured and where the limits are not less than num combined single limit for bodily injury andor property damage per occurrence and with an annual aggregate limit of not less than num .
the railroad shall also be added along with the department as an additional insured on the policyies procured pursuant to subsection num above .
prior to the execution of the contract and at all renewal periods which occur prior to final acceptance of the work both the department and the railroad shall be provided with an acord certificate of liability insurance reflecting the coverage described herein .
the insurance described herein shall be maintained through final acceptance of the work .
both the department and the railroad shall be notified in writing within ten days of any cancellation notice of cancellation renewal or proposed change to any policy or coverage described herein .
the departments approval or failure to disapprove any policyies coverage or acord certificates shall not relieve or excuse any obligation to procure and maintain the insurance required herein nor serve as a waiver of any rights the department may have .
num insurance for protection of utility owners when the contract involves work on or in the vicinity of utilityowned property or facilities the utility shall be added along with the department as an additional insured on the policyies procured pursuant to subsection num above .
num contractors responsibility for work .
the contractor will take charge and custody of the work and take every necessary precaution against damage to the work by the action of the elements or from any other cause whatsoever until the departments final acceptance of the work .
the contractor will rebuild repair restore and make good all damage to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance of the contract .
num return to table of contents the department will have no obligation to pay any reimbursement for damage caused by the execution or nonexecution of the work by the contractor or its subcontractors or damage the contractor was negligent in preventing .
for damage to installed material caused by third parties the contractor may pursue recovery from the third party or seek reimbursement from the department but not both .
the department will not reimburse the contractor for repair costs due to damage to installed material caused by third parties unless the contractor has contacted law enforcement within num days of the damage filed a report and provided the report to the department within num calendar days of receiving the report from law enforcement .
upon submission of the report to the department the department solely retains the right to pursue recovery from the known third party .
if damage to installed material is caused by a known third party the department will reimburse the contractor for costs associated with the repair after reducing the amount of the repair cost by a num deductible for each occurrence borne solely by the contractor .
if the department is successful in recovery the contractor may be reimbursed proportionally up to the amount of the deductible .
if damage to installed material is caused by an unknown third party the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the cost of the repair after reducing the amount of the repair cost by a num deductible for each occurrence borne solely by the contractor .
theft and vandalism are considered damage caused by an unknown third party .
repair cost will be determined in accordance with num .
the department may at its discretion reimburse the contractor for the repair of damage to the work not caused by a third party and due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god of the public enemy or of governmental authorities .
num opening sections of highway to traffic .
whenever any bridge or section of roadway is in acceptable condition for travel the engineer may direct the contractor to open it to traffic .
the departments direction to open a bridge or roadway does not constitute an acceptance of the bridge or roadway or any part thereof or waive any contract provisions .
perform all necessary repairs or renewals on any section of the roadway or bridge thus opened to traffic under instructions from the engineer due to defective material or work or to any cause other than ordinary wear and tear pending completion and the engineers acceptance of the roadway or bridge or other work at no expense to the department .
num wage rates for federalaid projects .
for all projects that include federalaid participation the special provisions contain requirements with regard to payment of predetermined minimum wages .
predetermined wage rate decisions u.s. department of labor provided wage rate tables exist for heavy highway and building construction projects .
num supplemental agreements .
section num of the florida statutes as amended which prescribe certain limitations on the use of supplemental agreements are a part of the contract .
num scales for weighing materials .
num applicable regulations when determining the weight of material for payment use scales meeting the requirements of chapter num of florida statutes pertaining to num return to table of contents specifications tolerances and regulations as administered by the bureau of weights and measures of the florida department of agriculture .
num base for scales place such scales on a substantial horizontal base to provide adequate support and rigidity and to maintain the level of the scales .
num protection and maintenance maintain all scale parts in proper condition as to level and vertical alignment and fully protect them against contamination by dust dirt and other matter that might affect their operation .
num source of forest products .
as required by section num of the florida statutes where price fitness and quality are equal and when available use only timber timber piling or other forest products that are produced and manufactured in the state of florida .
this provision does not apply to federalaid projects .
num regulations of air pollution from asphalt plants .
num general perform all work in accordance with all federal state and local laws and regulations regarding air pollution and burning .
in particular pay attention to chapters num num and num rules of the department of environmental protection florida administrative code and to any part of the state implementation plan applicable to the project .
see also num regarding burning of debris .
num dust control control dust during the storage and handling of dusty materials by wetting covering or other means as approved by the engineer .
num asphalt material use only emulsified asphalt unless otherwise stated in the plans and allowed by chapter num rules of the department of environmental protection florida administrative code .
store and handle asphalt materials and components so as to minimize unnecessary release of hydrocarbon vapors .
num asphalt plants operate and maintain asphalt plants in accordance with chapter num rules of the department of environmental protection florida administrative code .
provide the plant site with a valid permit as required under chapter num prior to start of work .
num dredging and filling .
section num of the florida statutes requires that all persons who engage in certain dredge or fill activities in the state of florida obtain a certificate of registration from the florida department of environmental protection tallahassee florida num and that they keep accurate logs and records of all such activities for the protection and conservation of the natural resources .
obtain details as to the application of this law from the department of environmental protection .
num available funds .
for contracts in excess of num or a term for more than one year comply with the following provisions of chapter num of the florida statutes the department will not during any fiscal year expend money incur any liability or enter into any contract that by its terms involves the expenditures of money in excess of the amounts budgeted as available for expenditure during such fiscal year .
if the department enters into such a contract verbal or written in violation of this subsection such contract is null and void and the department will not make any payments thereon .
the department will require a num return to table of contents statement from the departments comptroller that funds are available prior to entering into any such contract or other binding commitment of funds .
nothing herein contained prevents the department from executing contracts for a period exceeding one year but the department will make such contracts executory only for the value of the services to be rendered or agreed to be paid for in succeeding fiscal years .
the department will incorporate this paragraph verbatim in all contracts in excess of num or having a term for more than one year .
num contractors motor vehicle registration .
the contractor shall provide the department with proof that all motor vehicles operated or caused to be operated by such contractor are registered in compliance with chapter num of the florida statutes .
submit such proof of registration in the form of a notarized affidavit to the department .
the department will not make payment to the contractor until the required proof of registration is on file with the department .
if the contractor fails to register any motor vehicle that he operates in florida pursuant to chapter num of the florida statutes the department may disqualify the contractor from bidding or the department may suspend and revoke the contractors certificates of qualification .
num disadvantaged business enterprise program .
num disadvantaged business enterprise affirmative action plan prior to award of the contract have an approved disadvantaged business enterprise dbe affirmative action program plan filed with the equal opportunity office .
update and resubmit the plan every three years .
no contract will be awarded until the department approves the plan .
the dbe affirmative action program plan is incorporated into and made a part of the contract .
num required contract and subcontract dbe assurance language in accordance with num cfr num b the contract fdot signs with the contractor and each subcontract the prime contractor signs with a subcontractor must include the following assurance the contractor subrecipient or subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
the contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of num cfr part num in the award and administration of dotassisted contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the recipient deems appropriate which may include but is not limited to num .
withholding monthly progress payments num .
assessing sanctions num .
liquidated damages andor num .
disqualifying the contractor from future bidding as nonresponsible .
num plan requirements include the following in the dbe affirmative action program plan num .
a policy statement signed by an authorized representative president chief executive officer or chairman of the contractor expressing a commitment to use dbes in all aspects of contracting to the maximum extent feasible outlining the various levels of responsibility and stating the objectives of the program .
circulate the policy statement throughout the contractors organization .
num .
the designation of a liaison officer within the contractors organization as well as support staff necessary and proper to administer the program and a description of the num return to table of contents authority responsibility and duties of the liaison officer and support staff .
the liaison officer and staff are responsible for developing managing and implementing the program on a dayto day basis for carrying out technical assistance activities for dbes and for disseminating information on available business opportunities so that dbes are provided an equitable opportunity to participate in contracts let by the department .
num .
utilization of techniques to facilitate dbe participation in contracting activities which include but are not limited to a .
soliciting price quotations and arranging a time for the review of plans quantities specifications and delivery schedules and for the preparation and presentation of quotations .
b .
providing assistance to dbes in overcoming barriers such as the inability to obtain bonding financing or technical assistance .
c. carrying out information and communication programs or workshops on contracting procedures and specific contracting opportunities in a timely manner with such programs being bilingual where appropriate .
d. encouraging eligible dbes to apply for certification with the department .
e. contacting minority contractor associations and city and county agencies with programs for disadvantaged individuals for assistance in recruiting and encouraging eligible dbe contractors to apply for certification with the department .
num dbe records and reports submit the following through the equal opportunity compliance system num .
dbe commitments at or before the preconstruction conference .
num .
report monthly through the equal opportunity compliance system on the departments website actual payments including retainage made to dbes for work performed with their own workforce and equipment in the area in which they are certified .
report payments made to all dbe and minority business enterprise mbe subcontractors and dbe and mbe construction material and major suppliers .
the equal opportunity office will provide instructions on accessing this system .
develop a record keeping system to monitor dbe affirmative action efforts which include the following num. the procedures adopted to comply with these specifications num. the number of subordinated contracts on department projects awarded to dbes num. the dollar value of the contracts awarded to dbes num. the percentage of the dollar value of all subordinated contracts awarded to dbes as a percentage of the total contract amount num. a description of the general categories of contracts awarded to dbes and num. the specific efforts employed to identify and award contracts to dbes .
upon request provide the records to the department for review .
maintain all such records for a period of five years following acceptance of final payment and have them available for inspection by the department and the federal highway administration .
num return to table of contents num counting dbe participation and commercially useful functions num cfr part num specifies when dbe credit shall be awarded for work performed by a dbe .
dbe credit can only be awarded for work actually performed by dbes themselves for the types of work for which they are certified .
when reporting dbe commitments only include the dollars that a dbe is expected to earn for work they perform with their own workforce and equipment .
update dbe commitments to reflect changes to the initial amount that was previously reported or to add dbes not initially reported .
when a dbe participates in a contract the value of the work is determined in accordance with num cfr part num for example num .
the department will count only the value of the work performed by the dbe toward dbe goals .
the entire amount of the contract that is performed by the dbes own forces including the cost of supplies equipment and materials obtained by the dbe for the contract work will be counted as dbe credit .
num .
the department will count the entire amount of fees or commissions charged by the dbe firm for providing a bona fide service such as professional technical consultant or managerial services or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance of a departmentassisted contract toward dbe goals provided that the department determines the fees to be reasonable and not excessive as compared with fees customarily followed for similar services .
num .
when the dbe subcontracts part of the work of its contract to another firm the department will count the value of the subcontracted work only if the dbes subcontractor is itself a dbe .
work that a dbe subcontracts to a nondbe firm does not count toward dbe goals .
num .
when a dbe performs as a participant in a joint venture the department will count the portion of the dollar value of the contract equal to the distinct clearly defined portion of the work the dbe performs with its own forces toward dbe goals .
num .
the contractors shall ensure that only expenditures to dbes that perform a commercially useful function cuf in the work of a contract may be counted toward the voluntary dbe goal .
num .
a dbe performs a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved .
to perform a commercially useful function the dbe must also be responsible with respect to materials and supplies used on the contract for negotiating price determining quality and quantity ordering the material and installing where applicable and paying for the material itself .
num .
contractors wishing to use joint checks involving dbe credit must provide written notice to the district contract compliance office prior to issuance of the joint check .
the contractor must also provide a copy of the notice to the dbe subcontractor and maintain a copy with the project records .
num .
to determine whether a dbe is performing a commercially useful function the department will evaluate the amount of work subcontracted industry practices whether the amount the firm is to be paid under the contract is commensurate with the work it is actually performing and the dbe credit claimed for its performance of the work and other relevant factors .
num .
a dbe does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is num return to table of contents limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction contract or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the appearance of dbe participation .
num .
if a dbe does not perform or exercise responsibility for at least num of the total cost of its contract with its own workforce or if the dbe subcontracts a greater portion of the work of a contract than would be expected on the basis of normal industry practice for the type of work involved the dbe has not performed a commercially useful function .
num prompt payments meet the requirements of num for payments to all dbe subcontractors .
num onthejob training requirements .
as part of the contractors equal employment opportunity affirmative action program training shall be provided as follows the contractor shall provide onthejob training aimed at developing full journeymen in the type of trade or job classification involved in the work .
in the event the contractor subcontracts a portion of the contract work it shall determine how many if any of the trainees are to be trained by the subcontractor provided that the contractor shall retain the primary responsibility for meeting the training requirements imposed by this section .
ensure that when feasible num of trainees in each occupation are in their first year of training .
the contractor shall incorporate the requirements of this section into such subcontract .
the number of trainees will be estimated on the number of calendar days of the contract the dollar value and the scope of work to be performed .
the trainee goal will be finalized at a postpreconstruction trainee evaluation meeting and the goal will be distributed among the work classifications based on the following criteria num .
determine the number of trainees on federal aid contract a .
no trainees will be required for contracts with a contract time allowance of less than num calendar days .
b .
if the contract time allowance is num calendar days or more the number of trainees shall be established in accordance with the following chart estimated contract amount trainees required num or less num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num num return to table of contents estimated contract amount trainees required over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to num num over num to one additional trainee per num of estimated construction contract amount over num further if the contractor or subcontractor requests to utilize banked trainees as discussed later in this section a banking certificate will be validated at this meeting allowing credit to the contractor for previously banked trainees .
banked credits of prime contractors working as subcontractors may be accepted for credit .
the contractors project manager the construction project engineer and the departments district contract compliance manager will attend this meeting .
within ten days after the postpreconstruction training evaluation meeting the contractor shall submit to the department for approval an onthejob training schedule indicating the number of trainees to be trained in each selected classification and the portion of the contract time during which training of each trainee is to take place .
this schedule may be subject to change if any of the following occur num .
when a start date on the approved onthejob training schedule has been missed by num or more days num .
when there is a change in previously approved classifications or num .
when replacement trainees are added due to voluntary or involuntary termination the revised schedule will be resubmitted to and approved by the departments district contract compliance manager .
the following criteria will be used in determining whether or not the contractor has complied with this section as it relates to the number of trainees to be trained num. credit will be allowed for each trainee that is both enrolled and satisfactorily completes training on this contract .
credit for trainees over the established number for this contract will be carried in a bank for the contractor and credit will be allowed for those surplus trainees in subsequent applicable projects .
a banked trainee is described as an employee who has been trained on a project over and above the established goal and for which the contractor desires to preserve credit for utilization on a subsequent project .
num. credit will be allowed for each trainee that has been previously enrolled in the departments approved training program on another contract and continues training in the same job classification and completes their training on a different contract .
num. credit will be allowed for each trainee who due to the amount of work available in their classification is given the greatest practical amount of training on the contract regardless of whether or not the trainee completes training .
num return to table of contents num. credit will be allowed for any training position indicated in the approved onthejob training schedule if the contractor can demonstrate that a good faith effort to provide training in that classification was made .
num .
no credit will be allowed for a trainee whose employment by the contractor is involuntarily terminated unless the contractor can clearly demonstrate good cause for this action .
training and upgrading of minorities women and economically disadvantaged persons toward journeyman status is a primary objective of this section .
accordingly the contractor shall make every effort to enroll minority trainees and women e.g .
by conducting systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority and women trainees to the extent such persons are available within a reasonable area of recruitment .
if a nonminority male is enrolled into the onthejob training program the onthejob training notification of personnel action form notifying the district contract compliance manager of such action shall be accompanied by a disadvantaged certification or a justification for such action acceptable to the departments district contract compliance manager .
the contractor will be given an opportunity and will be responsible for demonstrating the steps that it has taken in pursuance thereof prior to a determination as to whether the contractor is in compliance with this section .
this training is not intended and shall not be used to discriminate against any applicant for training whether a minority woman or disadvantaged person .
no employee shall be employed as a trainee in any classification in which they have successfully completed a training course leading to journeyman status or have been employed as a journeyman .
the contractor may satisfy this requirement by including appropriate questions in the employee application or by other suitable means .
regardless of the method used the contractors records should document the findings in each case .
the minimum length and type of training for each classification will be as established at the postpreconstruction trainee evaluation meeting and approved by the department .
graduation to journeyman status will be based upon satisfactory completion of a proficiency demonstration set up at the completion of training and established for the specific training classification completion of the minimum hours in a training classification range and the employers satisfaction that the trainee does meet journeyman status in the classification of training .
upon reaching journeyman status the following documentation must be forwarded to the district contract compliance office num .
trainee enrollment and personnel action form num .
proficiency demonstration verification form indicating completion of each standard established for the classification signed by representatives of both the contractor and the department .
the department and the contractor shall establish a program that is tied to the scope of the work in the project and the length of operations providing it is reasonably calculated to meet the equal employment opportunity obligations of the contractor and to qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in the classifications concerned by at least the minimum hours prescribed for a training classification .
furthermore apprenticeship programs registered with the u.s. department of labor bureau of apprenticeship and training or with a state apprenticeship agency recognized by the bureau and training programs approved but not necessarily sponsored by the u.s. department of labor manpower administration bureau of apprenticeship and training shall also be considered acceptable provided it is being administered in a manner consistent with the equal employment obligations of federal aid highway construction contract .
num return to table of contents approval or acceptance of a training schedule shall be obtained from the department prior to commencing work on the classifications covered by the program .
a voluntary onthejob training program is available to a contractor which has been awarded a state funded project .
through this program the contractor will have the option to train employees on state funded projects for banked credit as discussed previously in this provision to be utilized on subsequent federal aid projects where training is required .
those contractors availing themselves of this opportunity to train personnel on state funded projects and bank trainee hours for credit shall comply with all training criteria set forth in this section for federal aid projects voluntary banking may be denied by the department if staff is not available to monitor compliance with the training criteria .
it is the intention of these provisions that training is to be provided in the construction crafts rather than clerktypists or secretarial type positions .
training is permissible in lower level management positions such as office engineers estimators etc .
where the training is oriented toward construction applications .
training in the laborer classifications except commongeneral laborer may be permitted provided that significant and meaningful training is provided and approved by the district contract compliance office .
when approved in advance by the district contract compliance manager credit will be given for training of persons in excess of the number specified herein under the current contract or a contractor will be allowed to bank trainees who have successfully completed a training program and may apply those trainees to a training requirement in subsequent projects upon approval of the departments district contract compliance manager .
this credit will be given even though the contractor may receive training program funds from other sources provided such other source do not specifically prohibit the contractor from receiving other form of compensation .
offsite training is permissible as long as the training is an integral part of an approved training program and does not compromise a significant part of the overall training .
credit for offsite training indicated above may only be made to the contractor when it does one or more of the following and the trainees are concurrently employed on a federal aid project num .
contributes to the cost of the training num .
provides the instruction to the trainee num .
pays the trainees wages during the offsite training period .
the contractor shall compensate the trainee at no less than the laborer rate established in the contract at the onset of training .
the compensation rate will be increased to the journeymans wage upon graduation from the training program for the remainder of the time the trainee works in the classification in which they were trained .
the contractor shall furnish the trainee a copy of the program they will follow in providing the training .
the contractor shall provide each trainee with a certification showing the type and length of training satisfactorily completed .
the contractor shall enroll a trainee in one training classification at a time to completion before the trainee can be enrolled in another classification on the same project .
the contractor shall maintain records to document the actual hours each trainee is engaged in training on work being performed as a part of this contract .
the contractor shall submit to the district contract compliance manager a copy of an onthejob training notification of personnel action form no later than seven days after the effective date of the action when the following actions occur a trainee is transferred on the project transferred from the project to continue training on another contract completes training num return to table of contents is upgraded to journeyman status or voluntary terminates or is involuntary terminated from the project .
the contractor shall furnish to the district contract compliance manager a copy of a monthly time report for each trainee .
the monthly time report for each month shall be submitted no later than the tenth day of the subsequent month .
the monthly time report shall indicate the phases and subphases of the number of hours devoted to each proficiency .
highway or bridge carpenter helper mechanic helper rodmanchainman and timekeeper classifications will not be approved for the onthejob training program .
the number of trainees may be distributed among the work classifications on the basis of the contractors needs and the availability of journeymen in the various classifications within a reasonable area of recruitment .
the contractor will have fulfilled the responsibilities of this specification when acceptable training has been provided to the trainee as specified above .
num cargo preference act use of united statesflag vessels .
pursuant to title num cfr num the contractor agrees num .
to utilize privately owned united statesflag commercial vessels to ship at least num percent of the gross tonnage computed separately for dry bulk carriers dry cargo liners and tankers involved whenever shipping any equipment material or commodities pursuant to this contract to the extent such vessels are available at fair and reasonable rates for united statesflag commercial vessels .
num .
to furnish within num days following the date of loading for shipments originating within the united states or within num working days following the date of loading for shipments originating outside the united states a legible copy of a rated onboard commercial ocean billoflading in english for each shipment of cargo described in paragraph num of this article to both the contracting officer through the prime contractor in the case of subcontractor billsoflading and to the division of national cargo office of market development maritime administration washington dc num .
num .
to insert the substance of the provisions of this clause in all subcontracts issued pursuant to this contract .
num return to table of contents section num prosecution and progress num subletting or assigning of contracts .
do not sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion thereof or of the right title or interest therein without written consent of the department .
if the contractor chooses to sublet any portion of the contract the contractor must submit a written request to sublet work on the certification of sublet work form developed by the department for this purpose .
with the engineers acceptance of the request the contractor may sublet a portion of the work but shall perform with its own organization work amounting to not less than num of the total contract amount .
the certification of sublet work request will be deemed acceptable by the department for purposes of the departments consent unless the engineer notifies the contractor within num business days of receipt of the certification of sublet work that the department is not consenting to the requested subletting .
include in the total contract amount the cost of materials and manufactured component products and their transportation to the project site .
for the purpose of meeting this requirement the department will not consider offsite commercial production of materials and manufactured component products that the contractor purchases or their transportation to the project as subcontracted work .
if the contractor sublets a part of a contract item the department will use only the sublet proportional cost in determining the percentage of subcontracted normal work .
execute all agreements to sublet work in writing and include all pertinent provisions and requirements of the contract .
all other agreements must be in writing and reference all applicable contract provisions .
upon request submit to the department a copy of the subcontract and agreement .
the subletting of work does not relieve the contractor or the surety of their respective liabilities under the contract .
the department recognizes a subcontractor only in the capacity of an employee or agent of the contractor and the engineer may require the contractor to remove the subcontractor as in the case of an employee .
num work performed by equipmentrental agreement .
the limitations set forth in num concerning the amount of work that may be sublet do not apply to work performed by equipmentrental agreement .
however for any work proposed to be performed by equipmentrental agreement notify the engineer in writing of such intention before using the rented equipment and indicate whether the equipment will be rented on an operated or nonoperated basis .
include with the written notice a listing and description of the equipment and a description of the particular work to be performed with such equipment .
as an exception to the above requirements the department will not require written notice for equipment to be rented without operators from an equipment dealer or from a firm whose principal business is the renting or leasing of equipment .
the operators of all rented equipment whether rented on an operated or a nonoperated basis are subject to all wage rate requirements applicable to the project .
when renting equipment without operators the contractor shall carry the operators on his own payroll .
for equipment that is rented on an operated basis and when required by the contract or requested by the engineer submit payrolls from the lessor with the names of the operators shown thereon .
num return to table of contents when a lessor provides rentals of equipment on an operated basis that exceed num such lessor is subject to any equal employment opportunity requirements that are applicable to the project .
num prosecution of work .
num compliance with time requirements commence work in accordance with the accepted working schedule and provide sufficient labor materials and equipment to complete the work within the time limits set forth in the proposal .
should the contractor fail to furnish sufficient and suitable equipment forces and materials as necessary to prosecute the work in accordance with the required schedule the engineer may withhold all estimates that are or may become due or suspend the work until the contractor corrects such deficiencies .
num submission of working schedule within num calendar days after contract award or at the preconstruction conference whichever is earlier submit to the engineer a work progress schedule for the project .
the engineer will review and respond to the contractor within num calendar days of receipt .
provide a schedule that shows the various activities of work in sufficient detail to demonstrate a reasonable and workable plan to complete the project within the contract time .
show the order and interdependence of activities and the sequence for accomplishing the work .
describe all activities in sufficient detail so that the engineer can readily identify the work and measure the progress on of each activity .
show each activity with a beginning work date a duration and a monetary value .
include activities for procurement fabrication and delivery of materials plant and equipment and review time for shop drawings and submittals .
include milestone activities when milestones are required by the contract documents .
in a project with more than one phase adequately identify each phase and its completion date and do not allow activities to span more than one phase .
conduct sufficient liaison and provide sufficient information to indicate coordination activities with utility owners that have facilities within the limits of construction have been resolved .
incorporate in the schedule any utility adjustment schedules included in the contract documents unless the utility company and the department mutually agree to changes to the utility schedules shown in the contract .
submit a working plan with the schedule consisting of a concise written description of the construction plan .
the engineer will return inadequate schedules to the contractor for corrections .
resubmit a corrected schedule within num calendar days from the date of the engineers return transmittal .
submit an updated work progress schedule for engineers acceptance if there is a significant change in the planned order or duration of an activity .
the engineer will review the corrected schedule and respond within num calendar days of receipt .
by acceptance of the schedule the engineer does not endorse or otherwise certify the validity or accuracy of the activity durations or sequencing of activities .
the engineer will use the accepted schedule as the baseline against which to measure the progress .
if the contractor fails to finalize either the initial or a revised schedule in the time specified the engineer will withhold all contract payments until the engineer accepts the schedule .
num beginning work notify the engineer not less than five days in advance of the planned start day of work .
upon the receipt of such notice the engineer may give the contractor notice to proceed and may designate the point or points to start the work .
in the notice to num return to table of contents proceed the engineer may waive the five day advance notice and authorize the contractor to begin immediately .
notify the engineer in writing at least two days in advance of the starting date of important features of the work .
do not commence work under the contract until after the department has issued the notice to proceed .
the department will issue the notice to proceed within num calendar days excluding saturdays sundays and holidays after execution of the contract .
num provisions for convenience of public schedule construction operations so as to minimize any inconvenience to adjacent businesses or residences .
where necessary the engineer may require the contractor to first construct the work in any areas along the project where inconveniences caused by construction operations would present a more serious handicap .
in such critical locations where there is no assurance of continuous effective prosecution of the work once the construction operations are begun the engineer may require the contractor to delay removal of the existing usable facilities .
num preconstruction conference immediately after awarding the contract but before the contractor begins work the engineer will call a preconstruction conference at a place the engineer designates to go over the construction aspects of the project .
attend this meeting along with the department and the various utility companies that will be involved with the road construction .
num limitations of operations .
num night work during active nighttime operations furnish place and maintain lighting sufficient to permit proper workmanship and inspection .
use lighting with num ftcd minimum intensity .
arrange the lighting to prevent interference with traffic or produce undue glare to property owners .
operate such lighting only during active nighttime construction activities .
provide a light meter to demonstrate that the minimum light intensity is being maintained .
lighting may be accomplished by the use of portable floodlights standard equipment lights existing street lights temporary street lights or other lighting methods approved by the engineer .
submit a lighting plan at the preconstruction conference for review and acceptance by the engineer .
submit the plan as a pdf file in the same scale as the contract plans and formatted on num inch by num inch sheets .
do not start night work prior to the engineers acceptance of the lighting plan .
during active nighttime operations furnish place and maintain variable message signs to alert approaching motorists of lighted construction zones ahead .
operate the variable message signs only during active construction activities .
include compensation for lighting for night work in the contract prices for the various items of the contract .
take ownership of all lighting equipment for night work .
num sequence of operations do not open up work to the prejudice of work already started .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section on which work is in progress before starting work on any additional section .
num interference with traffic at all times conduct the work in such manner and in such sequence as to ensure the least practicable interference with traffic .
operate all vehicles and other equipment safely and without hindrance to the traveling public .
park all private vehicles outside the clear zone .
place materials stored along the roadway so as to cause no obstruction to the traveling public as possible .
num return to table of contents where existing pavement is to be widened and stabilizing is not required prevent any open trench from remaining after working hours by scheduling operations to place the full thickness of widened base by the end of each day .
do not construct widening strips simultaneously on both sides of the road except where separated by a distance of at least num mile along the road and where either the work of excavation has not been started or the base has been completed .
num coordination with other contractors sequence the work and dispose of materials so as not to interfere with the operations of other contractors engaged upon adjacent work join the work to that of others in a proper manner in accordance with the spirit of the contract documents and perform the work in the proper sequence in relation to that of other contractors all as may be directed by the engineer .
each contractor is responsible for any damage done by him or his agents to the work performed by another contractor .
num drainage conduct the operations and maintain the work in such condition to provide adequate drainage at all times .
do not obstruct existing functioning storm sewers gutters ditches and other runoff facilities .
num fire hydrants keep fire hydrants on or adjacent to the highway accessible to fire apparatus at all times and do not place any material or obstruction within num feet of any fire hydrant .
num protection of structures do not operate heavy equipment close enough to pipe headwalls or other structures to cause their displacement .
num fencing erect permanent fence as a first order of business on all projects that include fencing where the engineer determines that the fencing is necessary to maintain the security of livestock on adjacent property or for protection of pedestrians who are likely to gain access to the project from adjacent property .
num contaminated materials when the construction operations encounter or expose any abnormal condition that may indicate the presence of a contaminated material discontinue such operations in the vicinity of the abnormal condition and notify the engineer immediately .
be alert for the presence of tanks or barrels discolored or stained earth metal wood ground water visible fumes abnormal odors excessively hot earth smoke or other conditions that appear abnormal as possible indicators of the presence of contaminated materials .
treat these conditions with extraordinary caution .
make every effort to minimize the spread of any contaminated materials into uncontaminated areas .
do not resume the construction operations in the vicinity of the abnormal conditions until so directed by the engineer .
dispose of the contaminated material in accordance with the requirements and regulations of any local state or federal agency having jurisdiction .
where the contractor performs work necessary to dispose of contaminated material and the contract does not include pay items for disposal the department will pay for this work as provided in num .
the department agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the contractor for damages when the contractor discovers or encounters contaminated materials or pollutants during the performance of services for the department when the presence of such materials or pollutants were unknown or not reasonably discoverable .
such indemnification agreement is only effective if the contractor immediately stops work and notifies the department of the contaminated material or pollutant problem .
num return to table of contents such indemnification agreement is not valid for damages resulting from the contractors willful wanton or intentional conduct or the operations of contaminated and hazardous material contractors .
num qualifications of contractors personnel .
provide competent careful and reliable superintendents foremen and workmen .
provide workmen with sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the work assigned to them .
provide workmen engaged on special work or skilled work such as bituminous courses or mixtures concrete bases pavements or structures or in any trade with sufficient experience in such work to perform it properly and satisfactorily and to operate the equipment involved .
provide workmen that shall make due and proper effort to execute the work in the manner prescribed in the contract documents or the engineer may take action as prescribed below .
it is prohibited as a conflict of interest for a contractor to subcontract with a consultant to perform contractor quality control when the consultant is under contract with the department to perform work on any project described in the contractors contract with the department .
prior to approving a consultant for contractor quality control the contractor shall submit to the department a certificate from the proposed consultant certifying that no conflict of interest exists .
whenever the engineer determines that any person employed by the contractor is incompetent unfaithful intemperate disorderly or insubordinate the engineer will provide written notice and the contractor shall discharge the person from the work .
do not employ any discharged person on the project without the written consent of the engineer .
if the contractor fails to remove such person or persons the engineer may withhold all estimates that are or may become due or suspend the work until the contractor complies with such orders .
protect defend indemnify and hold the department its agents officials and employees harmless from all claims actions or suite arising from such removal discharge or suspension of employees .
num temporary suspension of contractors operations .
num authority to suspend contractors operations the engineer has the authority to suspend the contractors operations wholly or in part .
the engineer will order such suspension in writing giving in detail the reasons for the suspension .
contract time will be charged during all suspensions of contractors operations .
the department may grant an extension of contract time in accordance with num when determined appropriate in the departments sole judgment .
no additional compensation or time extension will be paid or granted to the contractor when the operations are suspended for the following reasons num .
the contractor fails to comply with the contract documents .
num .
the contractor fails to carry out orders given by the engineer .
num .
the contractor causes conditions considered unfavorable for continuing the work .
immediately comply with any suspension order .
do not resume operations until authorized to do so by the engineer in writing .
any operations performed by the contractor and otherwise constructed in conformance with the provisions of the contract after the issuance of the suspension order and prior to the engineers authorization to resume operations will be at no cost to the department .
further failure to immediately comply with any suspension order will also constitute an act of default by the contractor and is deemed sufficient basis in and of itself for the department to declare the contractor in default in accordance with num with the num return to table of contents exception that the contractor will not have ten calendar days to correct the conditions for which the suspension was ordered .
num state of emergency the engineer has the authority to suspend the contractors operations wholly or in part pursuant to a governors declaration of a state of emergency .
the engineer will order such suspension in writing giving in detail the reasons for the suspension .
contract time will be charged during all suspensions of contractors operations .
the department at its sole discretion may grant an extension of contract time and reimburse the contractor for specific costs associated with such suspension .
further in such instances the departments determination as to entitlement to either time or compensability will be final unless the contractor can prove by clear and convincing evidence to a disputes review board that the departments determination was without any reasonable factual basis num prolonged suspensions if the engineer suspends the contractors operations for an indefinite period store all materials in such manner that they will not obstruct or impede the traveling public unnecessarily or become damaged in any way .
take every reasonable precaution to prevent damage to or deterioration of the work performed .
provide suitable drainage of the roadway by opening ditches shoulder drains etc .
and provide any temporary structures necessary for public travel through the project .
num permission to suspend contractors operations do not suspend operations or remove equipment or materials necessary for completing the work without obtaining the engineers written permission .
submit all requests for suspension of operations in writing to the engineer and identify specific dates to begin and end the suspension .
the contractor is not entitled to any additional compensation for suspension of operations during such periods .
num suspension of contractors operations holidays and special events unless the contractor submits a written request to work during one or more days of a holiday or special event at least ten calendar days in advance of the beginning date of the holiday or special event and receives written approval from the engineer the contractor shall not work on the following days martin luther king jr. day memorial day the saturday and sunday immediately preceding memorial day independence day independence day observed labor day the friday saturday and sunday immediately preceding labor day veterans day veterans day observed the wednesday immediately preceding thanksgiving day thanksgiving day the friday saturday and sunday immediately following thanksgiving day december num through january num inclusive and special events noted in the plans .
contract time will be charged during these holiday and special event periods .
contract time will be adjusted in accordance with num .
the contractor is not entitled to any additional compensation beyond any allowed contract time adjustment for suspension of operations during such holiday and special event periods .
during such suspensions remove all equipment and materials from the clear zone except those required for the safety of the traveling public and retain sufficient personnel at the job site to properly meet the requirements of sections num and num .
the contractor is not entitled to any additional compensation for removal of equipment from clear zones or for compliance with section num and section num during such holiday and special event periods .
num computation of contract time .
num general perform the contracted work fully entirely and in accordance with the contract documents within the contract time specified in the proposal or as may be extended in accordance with the provisions herein below .
num return to table of contents the department considers in the computation of the contract time the effect that utility relocation and adjustments have on job progress and the scheduling of construction operations required in order to adequately maintain traffic as detailed in the plans or as scheduled in the special provisions .
num date of beginning of contract time the date on which contract time begins is either the date on which the contractor actually begins work or the date for beginning the charging of contract time as set forth in the proposal whichever is earlier .
num adjusting contract time num increased work the department may grant an extension of contract time when it increases the contract amount due to overruns in original contract items adds new work items or provides for unforeseen work .
the department will base the consideration for granting an extension of contract time on the extent that the time normally required to complete the additional designated work delays the contract completion schedule .
num contract time extensions the department may grant an extension of contract time when a controlling item of work is delayed by factors not reasonably anticipated or foreseeable at the time of bid .
the department may allow such extension of time only for delays occurring during the contract time period or authorized extensions of the contract time period .
when failure by the department to fulfill an obligation under the contract results in delays to the controlling items of work the department will consider such delays as a basis for granting a time extension to the contract .
whenever the engineer suspends the contractors operations as provided in num for reasons other than the fault of the contractor the engineer will grant a time extension for any delay to a controlling item of work due to such suspension .
the department will not grant time extensions to the contract for delays due to the fault or negligence of the contractor .
the department does not include an allowance for delays caused by the effects of inclement weather or suspension of contractors operations as defined in num in establishing contract time .
the engineer will continually monitor the effects of weather and when found justified grant time extensions on either a bimonthly or monthly basis .
the engineer will not require the contractor to submit a request for additional time due to the effects of weather .
the department will grant time extensions on a day for day basis for delays caused by the effects of rains or other inclement weather conditions related adverse soil conditions or suspension of operations as defined in num that prevent the contractor from productively performing controlling items of work resulting in num .
the contractor being unable to work at least num of the normal work day on predetermined controlling work items or num .
the contractor must make major repairs to work damaged by weather provided that the damage is not attributable to the contractors failure to perform or neglect and provided that the contractor was unable to work at least num of the normal workday on predetermined controlling work items .
no additional compensation will be made for delays caused by the effects of inclement weather .
the department will consider the delays in delivery of materials or component equipment that affect progress on a controlling item of work as a basis for granting a time extension if such delays are beyond the control of the contractor or supplier .
such delays may include an areawide shortage an industrywide strike or a natural disaster that affects all num return to table of contents feasible sources of supply .
in such cases the contractor shall submit substantiating letters from a representative number of manufacturers of such materials or equipment clearly confirming that the delays in delivery were the result of an areawide shortage an industrywide strike etc .
no additional compensation will be made for delays caused by delivery of materials or component equipment .
the department will not consider requests for time extension due to delay in the delivery of custom manufactured equipment such as traffic signal equipment highway lighting equipment etc .
unless the contractor submits documentation that he placed the order for such equipment in a timely manner the delay was caused by factors beyond the manufacturers control and the lack of such equipment caused a delay in progress on a controlling item of work .
no additional compensation will be paid for delays caused by delivery of custom manufactured equipment .
the department will consider the effect of utility relocation and adjustment work on job progress as the basis for granting a time extension only if all the following criteria are met num .
delays are the result of either utility work that was not detailed in the plans or utility work that was detailed in the plans but was not accomplished in reasonably close accordance with the schedule included in the contract documents .
num .
utility work actually affected progress toward completion of controlling work items .
num .
the contractor took all reasonable measures to minimize the effect of utility work on job progress including cooperative scheduling of the contractors operations with the scheduled utility work at the preconstruction conference and providing adequate advance notification to utility companies as to the dates to coordinate their operations with the contractors operations to avoid delays .
as a condition precedent to an extension of contract time the contractor must submit to the engineer a preliminary request for an extension of contract time must be submitted in writing to the engineer within ten calendar days after the commencement of a delay to a controlling item of work .
if the contractor fails to submit this required preliminary request for an extension of contract time the contractor fully completely absolutely and irrevocably waives any entitlement to an extension of contract time for that delay .
in the case of a continuing delay only a single preliminary request for an extension of contract time will be required .
each such preliminary request for an extension of contract time shall include as a minimum the commencement date of the delay the cause of the delay and the controlling item of work affected by the delay .
furthermore the contractor must submit to the engineer a request for a contract time extension in writing within num days after the elimination of the delay to the controlling item of work identified in the preliminary request for an extension of contract time .
each request for a contract time extension shall include as a minimum all documentation that the contractor wishes the department to consider related to the delay and the exact number of days requested to be added to contract time .
if the contractor contends that the delay is compensable then the contractor shall also be required to submit with the request for a contract time extension a detailed cost analysis of the requested additional compensation .
if the contractor fails to submit this required request for a contract time extension with or without a detailed cost analysis depriving the engineer of the timely opportunity to verify the delay and num return to table of contents the costs of the delay the contractor waives any entitlement to an extension of contract time or additional compensation for the delay .
upon timely receipt of the preliminary request of contract time from the contractor the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that a controlling item of work is being delayed for reasons beyond the control of the contractor the engineer will take appropriate action to mitigate the delay and the costs of the delay .
upon timely receipt of the request for a contract time extension the engineer will further investigate the conditions and if it is determined that there was an increase in the time or the cost of performance of the controlling item of work beyond the control of the contractor then an adjustment of contract time will be made and a monetary adjustment will be made excluding loss of anticipated profits and the contract will be modified in writing accordingly .
the existence of an accepted schedule including any required updates as stated in num is a condition precedent to the contractor having any right to the granting of an extension of contract time or any monetary compensation arising out of any delay .
contractor failure to have an accepted schedule including any required updates for the period of potential impact or in the event the currently accepted schedule and applicable updates do not accurately reflect the actual status of the project or fail to accurately show the true controlling or non controlling work activities for the period of potential impact will result in any entitlement determination as to time or money for such period of potential impact being limited solely to the departments analysis and identification of the actual controlling or noncontrolling work activities .
further in such instances the departments determination as to entitlement as to either time or compensability will be final unless the contractor can prove by clear and convincing evidence to a disputes review board that the departments determination was without any reasonable factual basis .
num failure of contractor to maintain satisfactory progress .
num general pursue the work to completion section num of the florida statutes establishes certain requirements pertaining to the suspension or revocation of a contractors certificate of qualification because of delinquency on a previously awarded contract .
num regulations governing suspension for delinquency num .
a contractor is delinquent when the contract time for performing the work has expired and the contractor has not completed the contract work .
num .
once the department determines that the contractor is delinquent the department will give the contractor written notice of intent to suspend the contractors certificate of qualification .
if the contractor disagrees with the delinquency the contractor shall file a request for an administrative hearing with the clerk of agency proceedings within ten days of receipt of the notice of intent to suspend .
if the contractor does not file a request the department will make the suspension conclusive and final .
the request for hearing is filed when the contractor delivers it to and it is received by the clerk of agency proceedings mail station num room num haydon burns building num suwannee street tallahassee florida num .
num .
if the contractor files a request for a hearing the department will schedule the hearing within num days of the hearing officers receipt of the request .
num .
the department will continue the period of suspension of the contractors certificate of qualification until the contractor is no longer delinquent .
if the contractor requests an administrative hearing the departments final order depending on the outcome of the hearing will set forth the time period of suspension for the number of days the department num return to table of contents determines that the contractor was delinquent even if the contractor cures the delinquency during the pendency of the administrative proceedings .
num .
during the period of suspension of the contractors certificate of qualification the department will not allow the contractor and its affiliates to bid on any department contract regardless of dollar amount and will not approve the contractor as a subcontractor on any department contract .
num .
the department may grant extensions of time during the prosecution of the work as allowed under these specifications regardless of the contractors delinquency status .
num default and termination of contract .
num determination of default the following acts or omissions constitute acts of default and except as to subparagraphs num and num the department will give notice in writing to the contractor and his surety for any delay neglect or default if the contractor num. fails to begin the work under the contract within the time specified in the notice to proceed num. fails to perform the work with sufficient workmen and equipment or with sufficient materials to ensure prompt completion of the contract num. performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to perform anew such work that the engineer rejects as unacceptable and unsuitable num. discontinues the prosecution of the work or fails to resume discontinued work within a reasonable time after the engineer notifies the contractor to do so num. becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or files for reorganization under the bankruptcy code or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency either voluntarily or involuntarily num. allows any final judgment to stand against him unsatisfied for a period of ten calendar days num. makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors num. fails to comply with contract requirements regarding minimum wage payments or eeo requirements num. fails to comply with the engineers written suspension of work order within the time allowed for compliance and which time is stated in that suspension of work order or num. for any other cause whatsoever fails to carry on the work in an acceptable manner or if the surety executing the bond for any reasonable cause becomes unsatisfactory in the opinion of the department .
num. fails to comply with num .
for a notice based upon reasons stated in subparagraphs num through num and num if the contractor within a period of ten calendar days after receiving the notice described above fails to correct the conditions of which complaint is made the department will upon written certificate from the engineer of the fact of such delay neglect or default and the contractors failure to correct such conditions have full power and authority without violating the contract to take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor and to declare the contractor in default .
if the contractor after having received a prior notice described above for any reason stated in subparagraph num num num num num or num commits a second or subsequent act of default for any reason covered by the same subparagraph num num num num num or num as stated in the prior notice and regardless whether the specific reason is the same then regardless of whether the contractor has cured the deficiency stated in that prior notice the department will num return to table of contents upon written certificate from the engineer of the fact of such delay neglect or default and the contractors failure to correct such conditions have full power and authority without any prior written notice to the contractor and without violating the contract to take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor and to declare the contractor in default .
regarding subparagraph num if the contractor fails to comply with the engineers written suspension of work order within the time allowed for compliance and which time is stated in that suspension of work order the department will upon written certificate from the engineer of the fact of such delay and the contractors failure to correct that condition have full power and authority without violating the contract to immediately take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor and to declare the contractor in default .
regarding subparagraph num if the contractor fails to comply with num the department will have full power and authority without violating the contract to immediately take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor and to declare the contractor in default .
the department has no liability for anticipated profits for unfinished work on a contract that the department has determined to be in default .
notwithstanding the above the department shall have the right to declare the contractor or its affiliate in default and immediately terminate this contract without any prior notice to the contractor in the event the contractor or its affiliate is at any time convicted of a contract crime as these terms are defined in section num florida statutes .
the departments right to default the contractor or its affiliate for conviction of a contract crime shall extend to and is expressly applicable to any and all department contracts that were either advertised for bid for which requests for proposals or letters of interest were requested for which an intent to award was posted or otherwise issued or for which a contract was entered into after the date that the underlying or related criminal indictment criminal information or other criminal charge was filed against the contractor or its affiliate that resulted in the conviction .
in the event the department terminates this contract for this reason the contractor shall hereby forfeit any claims for additional compensation extra time or anticipated profits .
the contractor shall only be paid for any completed work up to the date of termination .
further the contractor shall be liable for any and all additional costs and expenses the department incurs in completing the contract work after such termination .
num termination of contract for convenience the department may terminate the entire contract or any portion thereof if the secretary determines that a termination is in the departments interest .
the secretary will deliver to the contractor a written notice of termination specifying the extent of termination and the effective date .
when the department terminates the entire contract or any portion thereof before the contractor completes all items of work in the contract the department will make payment for the actual number of units or items of work that the contractor has completed at the contract unit price and according to the formulas and provisions set forth in num for items of work partially completed and such payments will constitute full and complete compensation for such work or items .
no payment of any kind or amount will be made for items of work not started .
the department will not consider any claim for loss of anticipated profits or overhead of any kind including home office and jobsite overhead or other indirect impacts except as provided in num for partially completed work .
the department will consider reimbursing the contractor for actual cost of mobilization when not otherwise included in the contract including moving equipment to the num return to table of contents job where the volume of the work that the contractor has completed is too small to compensate the contractor for these expenses under the contract unit prices .
the department may purchase at actual cost acceptable materials and supplies procured for the work that the department has inspected tested and approved and that the contractor has not incorporated in the work .
submit the proof of actual cost as shown by receipted bills and actual cost records at such points of delivery as the engineer may designate .
termination of a contract or a portion thereof under the provisions of this subarticle does not relieve the contractor or the surety of its responsibilities for the completed portion of the contract or its obligations for and concerning any just claims arising out of the work performed .
all contractor claims for additional payment due to the departments termination of the entire contract or any portion thereof must meet the requirements of num .
num completion of work by department upon declaration of default the department will have full authority to appropriate or use any or all suitable and acceptable materials and equipment on the site and may enter into an agreement with others to complete the work under the contract or may use other methods to complete the work in an acceptable manner .
the department will charge all costs that the department incurs because of the contractors default including the costs of completing the work under the contract against the contractor .
if the department incurs such costs in an amount that exceeds the sum that would have been payable under the contract then the contractor and the surety shall be liable and shall pay the department the amount of the excess .
if after the ten day notice period and prior to any action by the department to otherwise complete the work under the contract the contractor establishes his intent to prosecute the work in accordance with the departments requirements then the department may allow the contractor to resume the work in which case the department will deduct from any monies due or that may become due under the contract any costs to the department incurred by the delay or from any reason attributable to the delay .
num liquidated damages for failure to complete the work .
num highway code requirements pertaining to liquidated damages section num paragraph num of the florida statutes requires that the department adopt regulations for the determination of default and provides that the contractor pay liquidated damages to the department for any failure of the contractor to complete the contract work within the contract time .
these code requirements govern and are herewith made a part of the contract .
num amount of liquidated damages applicable liquidated damages are the amounts established in the following schedule original contract amount daily charge per calendar day num and under num over num but less than num num but less than num num but less than num num but less than num num but less than num num but less than num num but less than num num return to table of contents num and over num plus num of any amount over num million round to nearest whole dollar num determination of number of days of default for all contracts regardless of whether the contract time is stipulated in calendar days or working days the engineer will count default days in calendar days .
num conditions under which liquidated damages are imposed if the contractor or in case of his default the surety fails to complete the work within the time stipulated in the contract or within such extra time that the department may have granted then the contractor or in case of his default the surety shall pay to the department not as a penalty but as liquidated damages the amount so due as determined by the code requirements as provided in num .
num right of collection the department has the right to apply as payment on such liquidated damages any money the department owes the contractor .
num allowing contractor to finish work the department does not waive its right to liquidated damages due under the contract by allowing the contractor to continue and to finish the work or any part of it after the expiration of the contract time .
num completion of work by department in the case of a default of the contract and the completion of the work by the department the contractor and his surety are liable for the liquidated damages under the contract but the department will not charge liquidated damages for any delay in the final completion of the departments performance of the work due to any unreasonable action or delay on the part of the department .
num release of contractors responsibility .
the department considers the contract complete when the contractor has completed all work and the department has accepted the work .
the department will then release the contractor from further obligation except as set forth in his bond and except as provided in num .
num recovery of damages suffered by third parties .
in addition to the damages provided for in num and pursuant to section num of the florida statutes when the contractor fails to complete the work within the contract time the department may recover from the contractor amounts that the department pays for damages suffered by third parties unless the failure to timely complete the work was caused by the departments act or omission .
num return to table of contents section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities .
num measurement standards the engineer will measure all work completed under the contract in accordance with the united states standard measures .
num method of measurements the engineer will take all measurements horizontally or vertically .
num determination of pay areas num final calculation when measuring items paid for on the basis of area of finished work where the pay quantity is designated to be determined by calculation the engineer will use lengths and widths in the calculations based on the station to station dimensions shown in the plans the station to station dimensions actually constructed within the limits designated by the engineer or the final dimensions measured along the surface of the completed work within the neat lines shown in the plans or designated by the engineer .
the engineer will use the method or combination of methods of measurement that reflect with reasonable accuracy the actual surface area of the finished work as the engineer determines .
num plan quantity when measuring items paid for on the basis of area of finished work where the pay quantity is designated to be the plan quantity the engineer will determine the final pay quantity based on the plan quantity subject to the provisions of num .
generally the engineer will calculate the plan quantity using lengths based on station to station dimensions and widths based on neat lines shown in the plans .
num construction outside authorized limits the engineer will not pay for surfaces constructed over a greater area than authorized or for material that the contractor has moved from outside of slope stakes and lines shown in the plans except where the engineer provides written instruction for the contractor to perform such work .
num truck requirements provide all trucks with numbers and certify that all trucks used have a manufacturers certification or permanent decal showing the truck capacity rounded to the nearest tenth of a cubic yard placed on both sides of the truck .
this capacity will include the truck body only and any side boards added will not be included in the certified truck body capacity .
ensure the lettering and numbers are legible for identification purposes at all times .
num ladders and instrument stands for bridge projects on bridge projects in order to facilitate necessary measurements provide substantial ladders to the tops of piers and bents and place and move such ladders as the engineer directs .
for bridge projects crossing water or marshy areas supply fixed stands for instrument mounting and measurements in accordance with the details stipulated in the specifications for the project .
num scope of payments .
num items included in payment accept the compensation as provided in the contract as full payment for furnishing all materials and for performing all work contemplated and embraced under the contract also for all loss or damage arising out of the nature of the work or from the action of the elements or from any unforeseen difficulties or obstructions which may arise or be encountered in the prosecution of the work until its final acceptance also for all other costs incurred under the provisions of division i .
num return to table of contents for any item of work contained in the proposal except as might be specifically provided otherwise in the basis of payment clause for the item include in the contract unit price or lump sum price for the pay item or items the cost of all labor equipment materials tools and incidentals required for the complete item of work including all requirements of the section specifying such item of work except as specifically excluded from such payments .
num fuels the department will in the contract documents provide an estimated quantity for fuel requirements for gasoline and diesel to cover the work specified in the contract .
price adjustments will be made only for the amount of gasoline and diesel fuel estimated by the department as required to complete the contract .
the requirement of each type of fuel for each pay item is estimated by multiplying the departments standard fuel factor for that pay item by the quantity of that pay item .
on contracts with an original contract time in excess of num calendar days the department will make price adjustments on each applicable progress estimate to reflect increases or decreases in the price of gasoline and diesel from those in effect during the month in which bids were received .
the contractor will not be given the option of accepting or rejecting these adjustments .
price adjustments for these fuels will be made only when the current fuel price cfp varies by more than num from the price prevailing in the month when bids were received bfp and then only on the portion that exceeds num .
price adjustments will be based on the monthly bulk average price for gas and diesel as derived by the department .
these average indexes shall be determined by averaging bulk fuel prices on the first day of each month as quoted by major oil companies that are reasonably expected to furnish fuel for projects in the state of florida .
average price indices for gasoline and diesel will be available on the construction office website before the numth of each month at the following url httpwww.fdot.govconstructionfuelbitfuelbit.shtm .
payment will be based on the quantities shown on the progress estimate on all items for which established standard fuel factors are on a file maintained by the department .
payment on progress estimates will be adjusted to reflect adjustments in the prices for gasoline and diesel in accordance with the following when fuel prices have decreased between month of bid and month of this progress estimate ai fi pi num pb during a period of decreasing prices .
ai total dollar amount positive or negative of the cost adjustment for each kind of fuel used by the contractor during the month i. fi total gallons calculated as being used during the month .
pi average price for fuel prevailing during month i. pb average price for fuel prevailing during the month b when bids were received on this contract .
when fuel prices have increased between month of bid and month of this progress estimate ai fi pi num pb during a period of increasing prices .
ai total dollar amount positive or negative of the cost adjustment for each kind of fuel used by the contractor during the month i. fi total gallons calculated as being used during the month .
pi average price for fuel prevailing during month i. pb average price for fuel prevailing during the month b when bids were received on this contract .
num return to table of contents payment will be made on the current progress estimate to reflect the index difference at the time work was performed .
adjustments will be paid or charged to the prime contractor only .
any contractor receiving an adjustment under this provision shall distribute the proper proportional part of such adjustment to subcontractors who perform applicable work .
num bituminous material prepare a contractors certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for superpave asphalt base turnout construction asphalt asphalt treated permeable base superpave asphaltic concrete miscellaneous asphalt pavement asphalt concrete friction course and asphalt membrane interlayer pay items .
submit this certification to the engineer no later than twelve oclock noon monday after the estimate cutoff or as directed by the engineer based on the quantity of asphalt produced and accepted on the roadway per contract .
ensure the certification includes the contract number financial project identification fpid number certification date and number the period the certification represents and the tons produced for each asphalt pay item .
on contracts having an original contract time of more than num calendar days or more than num tons of asphalt concrete the department will adjust the bid unit price for bituminous material excluding cutback and emulsified asphalt to reflect increases or decreases in the asphalt price index api of bituminous material from that in effect during the month in which bids were received .
the contractor will not be given the option of accepting or rejecting this adjustment .
bituminous adjustments will be made only when the current api capi varies by more than num of the api prevailing in the month when bids were received bapi and then only on the portion that exceeds num .
the department will determine the api for each month by averaging quotations in effect on the first day of the month at all terminals that could reasonably be expected to furnish bituminous material to projects in the state of florida .
the api will be available on the construction office website before the numth day of each month at the following url httpwww.fdot.govconstructionfuelbitfuelbit.shtm .
payment on progress estimates will be adjusted to reflect adjustments in the prices for bituminous materials in accordance with the following adjustment idgallons where id index difference capi numbapi when the api has decreased between the month of bid and month of this progress estimate .
where id index difference capi numbapi when the api has increased between the month of bid and month of this progress estimate .
payment will be made on the current progress estimate to reflect the index difference at the time work was performed .
for asphalt concrete items payable by the ton or square yard the number of gallons will be determined assuming a mix design with num liquid asphalt weighing num pounds per gallon .
for asphalt concrete items payable by the cubic yard the number of gallons will be determined assuming a mix design with num liquid asphalt weighing num pounds per gallon .
num nonduplication of payment in cases where the basis of payment clause in these specifications relating to any unit price in the bid schedule requires that the unit price cover and be considered compensation for certain work or material essential to the item the department num return to table of contents will not measure or pay for this same work or material under any other pay item that may appear elsewhere in these specifications .
num compensation for altered quantities .
num general when alteration in plans or quantities of work not requiring a supplemental agreement as hereinbefore provided for are offered and performed the contractor shall accept payment in full at contract unit bid prices for the actual quantities of work done and no allowance will be made for increased expense loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the contractor resulting either directly from such alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense on the part of the bidder and subsequent loss of expected reimbursement therefore or from any other cause .
compensation for alterations in plans or quantities of work requiring supplemental agreements shall be stipulated in such agreement except when the contractor proceeds with the work without change of price being agreed upon the contractor shall be paid for such increased or decreased quantities at the contract unit prices bid in the proposal for the items of work .
if no contract unit price is provided in the contract and the parties can not agree as to a price for the work the contractor agrees to do the work in accordance with num .
num payment based on plan quantity num error in plan quantity as used in this article the term substantial error is defined as the smaller of num or num below num. a difference between the original plan quantity and final quantity of more than num num. a change in quantity which causes a change in the amount payable of more than num .
on multiple job contracts changes made to an individual pay item due to substantial errors will be based on the entire contract quantity for that pay item .
where the pay quantity for any item is designated to be the original plan quantity the department will revise such quantity only in the event that the department determines it is in substantial error .
in general the department will determine such revisions by final measurement plan calculations or both as additions to or deductions from plan quantities .
in the event that either the department or the contractor contends that the plan quantity for any item is in error and additional or less compensation is thereby due the claimant shall submit at their own expense evidence of such in the form of acceptable and verifiable measurements or calculations .
the department will not revise the plan quantity solely on the basis of a particular method of construction that the contractor selects .
for earthwork items the claimant must note any differences in the original ground surfaces from that shown in the original plan crosssections that would result in a substantial error to the plan quantity and must be properly documented by appropriate verifiable level notes acceptable to both the contractor and the department prior to disturbance of the original ground surface by construction operations .
the claimant shall support any claim based upon a substantial error for differences in the original ground surface by documentation as provided above .
num authorized changes in limits of work where the department designates the pay quantity for any item to be the original plan quantity and authorizes a plan change which results in an increase or decrease in the quantity of that item the department will revise the plan quantity accordingly .
in general the department will determine such revisions by final measurement plan calculations or both .
num return to table of contents num specified adjustments to pay quantities do not apply the limitations specified in num and num to the following num .
where these specifications or special provisions provide that the department determines the pay quantity for an item on the basis of area of finished work adjusted in accordance with the ratio of measured thickness to nominal thickness .
num .
where these specifications provide for a deduction due to test results falling outside of the allowable specified tolerances .
num .
to payment for extra length fence posts as specified in num .
num lump sum quantities num error in lump sum quantity where the department designates the pay quantity for an item to be a lump sum and the plans show an estimated quantity the department will adjust the lump sum compensation only in the event that either the contractor submits satisfactory evidence or the department determines and furnishes satisfactory evidence that the lump sum quantity shown is in substantial error as defined in num .
num authorized changes in work where the department designates the pay quantity for an item to be a lump sum and the plans show an estimated quantity the department will adjust compensation for that item proportionately when an authorized plan change is made which results in an increase or decrease in the quantity of that item .
when the plans do not show an estimated plan quantity or the applicable specifications do not provide adjustments for contingencies the department will compensate for any authorized plan change resulting in an increase or decrease in the cost of acceptably completing the item by establishing a new unit price through a supplemental agreement as provided in num .
num deviation from plan dimensions if the contractor fails to construct any item to plan or to authorized dimensions within the specified tolerances the engineer at his discretion will require the contractor to reconstruct the work to acceptable tolerances at no additional cost to the department accept the work and provide the contractor no pay or accept the work and provide the contractor a reduced final pay quantity or reduced unit price .
the department will not make reductions to final pay quantities for those items designated to be paid on the basis of original plan quantity or a lump sum quantity under the provisions of this article unless such reduction results in an aggregate monetary change per item of more than num except that for earthwork items the aggregate change must exceed num or num of the original plan quantity whichever is smaller .
if in the opinion of the engineer the contractor has made a deliberate attempt to take advantage of the construction tolerances as defined in num to increase borrow excavation in fill sections or to decrease the required volume of roadway or lateral ditch excavation or embankment the department will take appropriate measurements and will apply reductions in pay quantities .
the department will not use the construction tolerance as defined in num as a pay tolerance .
the construction tolerance is not to be construed as defining a revised authorized template .
num deleted work .
the department will have the right to cancel the portions of the contract relating to the construction of any acceptable item therein by making an adjustment in payment to the contractor of a fair and equitable amount covering the value of all cancelled work less all items of cost incurred prior to the date that the engineer cancels the work .
num return to table of contents num partial payments .
num general the engineer will make partial payments on monthly estimates based on the amount of work that the contractor completes during the month including delivery of certain materials as specified herein below .
the engineer will make approximate monthly payments and the department will correct all partial estimates and payments in the subsequent estimates and in the final estimate and payment .
the department will base the amount of such payments on the total value of the work that the contractor has performed to the date of the estimate based on the quantities completed and the contract prices less payments previously made and less any retainage withheld .
retainage will not be withheld until the percent of contract time used exceeds num .
from that time forward the department will withhold retainage of num of the amount due on the current estimate as retainage when the percent of contract time used exceeds the percent of contract amount earned by more than num .
contract amount is defined as the original contract amount adjusted by approved supplemental agreements .
retainage will be determined for each job on multiple job contracts .
the department will not accept securities certificates of deposit or letters of credit as a replacement for retainage .
amounts withheld will not be released until payment of the final estimate .
num unsatisfactory payment record in accordance with sections num and num of the florida statutes and the rules of the department the department may disqualify the contractor from bidding on future department contracts if the contractors payment record in connection with contract work becomes unsatisfactory .
num withholding payment num withholding payment for defective work if the department discovers any defective work or material prior to the final acceptance or if the department has a reasonable doubt as to the integrity of any part of the completed work prior to final acceptance then the department will not allow payment for such defective or questioned work until the contractor has remedied the defect and removed any causes of doubt .
num withholding payment for failure to comply the department will withhold progress payments from the contractor if he fails to comply with any or all of the following within num days after beginning work num .
comply with and submit required documentation relating to prevailing wage rate provisions equal employment opportunity onthejob training and affirmative action num .
comply with the requirement to report all necessary information including actual payments to dbes all other subcontractors and major suppliers through the internet based equal opportunity reporting system num .
comply with or make a good faith effort to ensure employment opportunity for minorities and females in accordance with the required contract provisions for federal aid construction contracts and num .
comply with or make a good faith effort to meet onthejob training goals .
the department will withhold progress payments until the contractor has satisfied the above conditions .
num return to table of contents num release of retainage after acceptance when the contractor has furnished the department with all submittals required by the contract such as invoices eeo reports materials certifications certification of materials procured etc .
excluding contractors letter of acceptance of final amount due and form numa release and the engineer has determined that the measurement and computation of pay quantities is correct the department may reduce the retainage to num plus any amount that the department elects to deduct for defective work as provided in num .
the department will not allow a semifinal estimate under the provisions of the above paragraphs unless the time elapsing between num acceptance of the project and receipt of all test reports invoices etc .
and num submission of the final estimate to the contractor for acceptance exceeds or is expected to exceed ten days .
the department may deduct from payment estimates any sums that the contractor owes to the department on any account .
where more than one project or job separate job number is included in the contract the department will distribute the reduced retainage as provided in the first paragraph of this subarticle to each separate project or job in the ratio that the contract value of the work for the particular job bears to the total contract amount .
num partial payments for delivery of certain materials num general the department will allow partial payments for new materials that will be permanently incorporated into the project and are stockpiled in approved locations in the project vicinity .
stockpile materials so that they will not be damaged by the elements and in a manner that identifies the project on which they are to be used .
the following conditions apply to all payments for stockpiled materials num .
there must be reasonable assurance that the stockpiled material will be incorporated into the specific project on which partial payment is made .
num .
the stockpiled material must be approved as meeting applicable specifications .
num .
the total quantity for which partial payment is made shall not exceed the estimated total quantity required to complete the project .
num .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer certified invoices to document the value of the materials received .
the amount of the partial payment will be determined from invoices for the material up to the unit price in the contract .
num .
delivery charges for materials delivered to the jobsite will be included in partial payments if properly documented .
num .
partial payments will not be made for materials which were stockpiled prior to award of the contract for a project .
num partial payment amounts the following partial payment restrictions apply num .
partial payments less than num for any one month will not be processed .
num .
partial payments for structural steel and precast prestressed items will not exceed num of the bid price for the item .
partial payments for all other items will not exceed num of the bid price of the item in which the material is to be used .
num .
partial payment will not be made for aggregate and base course material received after paving or base construction operations begin except when a construction sequence designated by the department requires suspension of paving and base construction after the num return to table of contents initial paving operations partial payments will be reinstated until the paving and base construction resumes .
num off site storage if the conditions of num are satisfied partial payments will be allowed for materials stockpiled in approved instate locations .
additionally partial payments for materials stockpiled in approved outofstate locations will be allowed if the conditions of num and the following conditions are met num .
furnish the department a materials bond stating the supplier guarantees to furnish the material described in the contract to the contractor and department .
under this bond the obligor shall be the material supplier and the obligees shall be the contractor and the florida department of transportation .
the bond shall be in the full dollar amount of the bid price for the materials described in the contract .
num .
the following clauses must be added to the construction contract between the contractor and the supplier of the stockpiled materials notwithstanding anything to the contrary supplier will be liable to the contractor and the florida department of transportation should supplier default in the performance of this agreement .
notwithstanding anything to the contrary this agreement and the performance bond issued pursuant to this agreement does not alter modify or otherwise change the contractors obligation to furnish the materials described in this agreement to the florida department of transportation .
num .
the agreement between the contractor and the supplier of the stockpiled materials must include provisions that the supplier will store the materials and that such materials are the property of the contractor .
num certification of payment to subcontractors the term subcontractor as used herein includes persons or firms furnishing materials or equipment incorporated into the work or stockpiled for which the department has made partial payment and firms working under equipmentrental agreements .
the contractor is required to pay all subcontractors for satisfactory performance of their contracts before the department will make a further progress partial payment .
the contractor shall also return all retainage withheld to the subcontractors within num days after the subcontractors work is satisfactorily complete as determined by the department .
prior to receipt of any progress partial payment the prime contractor shall certify that all subcontractors having an interest in the contract were paid for satisfactory performance of their contracts and that the retainage is returned to subcontractors within num days after satisfactory completion of the subcontractors work .
submit this certification in the form designated by the department .
within num days of the contractors receipt of the final progress payment or any other payments thereafter except the final payment the contractor shall pay all subcontractors and suppliers having an interest in the contract for all work completed and materials furnished .
the department will honor an exception to the above when the contractor demonstrates good cause for not making any required payment and submits written notification of any such good cause to both the department and the affected subcontractors or suppliers within said num day period .
the contractor shall indemnify and provide defense for the department when called upon to do so for all claims or suits against the department by third parties pertaining to contractor payment or performance issues arising out of the contract .
it is expressly understood that the monetary limitation on the extent of the indemnification shall be the approved contract num return to table of contents amount which shall be the original contract amount as may be increased by subsequent supplemental agreements .
num record of construction materials .
num general for all construction materials used in the construction of the project except materials exempted by num preserve for the departments inspection the invoices and records of the materials for a period of three years from the date of completion of the project .
apply this requirement when subcontractors purchase materials and obtain the invoices and other materials records from the subcontractors .
by providing the materials the contractor certifies that all invoices will be maintained for the required period .
num noncommercial materials the provisions of num do not apply to materials generally classed as noncommercial such as fill materials local sand sandclay or local materials used as stabilizer .
num disputed amounts due the contractor .
the department reserves the right to withhold from the final estimate any disputed amounts between the contractor and the department .
the department will release all other amounts due as provided in num .
num acceptance and final payment .
num acceptance and final payment documents whenever the contractor has completely performed the work provided for under the contract and the engineer has performed a final inspection and made final acceptance as provided in num and num and subject to the terms of num the engineer will prepare a final estimate showing the value of the work as soon as the engineer makes the necessary measurements and computations .
the engineer will correct all prior estimates and payments in the final estimate and payment .
the department will pay the estimate less any sums that the department may have deducted or retained under the provisions of the contract as soon as practicable after final acceptance of the work along with all executed supplemental agreements received after final acceptance .
if the contractor fails to furnish all required contract documents as listed in num through num below within num days of the departments offer of final payment or request for refund of overpayment the department may suspend the contractors certificate of qualification under the provisions of florida administrative code num .
num .
the contractor has agreed in writing to accept the balance due or refund the overpayment as determined by the department as full settlement of his account under the contract and of all claims in connection therewith or the contractor has through the use of the qualified acceptance letter accepted the balance due or refunded the overpayment as determined by the department with the stipulation that his acceptance of such payment or the making of such refund does not constitute any bar admission or estoppel or have any effect as to those payments in dispute or the subject of a pending claim between the contractor and the department .
to receive payment based on a qualified acceptance letter define in writing the dispute or pending claim with full particular of all items of all issues in dispute including itemized amounts claimed for all particulars of all items and submit it as part of the qualified acceptance letter .
the contractor further agrees by submitting a qualified acceptance letter that any pending or future arbitration claim or suit is limited to those particulars including the itemized amounts defined in the original qualified acceptance letter and that he will commence with any such arbitration claim or suit within num calendar days from and after the num return to table of contents time of final acceptance of the work and that his failure to file a formal claim within this period constitutes his full acceptance of the engineers final estimate and payment .
the overpayment refund check from the contractor if required will be considered a part of any acceptance letter executed .
num .
the contractor has properly maintained the project as specified hereinbefore .
num .
the contractor has furnished a sworn affidavit to the effect that the contractor has paid all bills and no suits are pending other than those exceptions listed if any in connection with work performed under the contract and that the contractor has not offered or made any gift or gratuity to or made any financial transaction of any nature with any employee of the department in the performance of the contract .
include with the listed tort liability exceptions if any evidence of adequate insurance coverage as required in num .
num .
the surety on the contract bond consents by completion of their portion of the affidavit and surety release subsequent to the contractors completion of his portion to final payment to the contractor and agrees that the making of such payment does not relieve the surety of any of its obligations under the bond .
num .
the contractor has complied with and settled all requirements pertaining to any wagerate provisions .
num .
the contractor has submitted all required mill tests and analysis reports to the engineer .
num .
the contractor has furnished the construction compliance with specifications and plans certification .
provide the engineer with a notarized final certification of compliance with the requirements of section num to accompany the final estimate .
certification must be on a form provided by the engineer .
num .
the contractor has submitted and the department has accepted all as built drawings and certified surveys .
num .
the contractor has furnished all required manufacturers warranties to the engineer .
num review of engineers final estimate the department may review the engineers final estimate and make changes as necessary .
if changes are made the contractor will be so notified in writing in the notification of findings due to additional review .
this notification letter will detail the changes made as a result of the review and will stipulate the actions to be taken by the department and those required by the contractor .
the issuance of a notification of findings due to additional review will not impact the requirements of num above .
complete the required actions and submit the signed notification of findings due to additional review to the department within the timeframe specified in num .
if the notification of findings due to additional review is received after the time has expired in num num submit to the department within num days signifying agreement or disagreement with the findings .
for disagreement items submit a full explanation including the items and amount .
for any claim or part of a claim that pertains solely to the notification of findings due to additional review disputes submit full and complete claim documentation as described in num num as to such claim dispute issues within num days of receipt of the notification .
failure to submit the signed notification or to submit such claim documentation within the time frames specified may result in suspension of the contractors certificate of qualification under the provisions of florida administrative code num .
num return to table of contents num interest due on delayed payments .
the department will determine and pay any interest due the contractor for delays in final payment in accordance with section num of the florida statutes .
num offsetting payments .
section num of the florida statutes providing for offsetting payments to the contractor is hereby made a part of this contract num .
after settlement arbitration or final adjudication of any claim of the department for work done pursuant to a construction contract with any party the department may offset such amount from payments due for work done on any construction contract excluding amounts owed to subcontractors suppliers and laborers which it has with the party owing such amount if upon demand payment of the amount is not made within num days to the department .
num .
offsetting any amount pursuant to num above shall not be considered a breach of contract by the department .
num return to table of contents division ii construction details general construction operations section num construction equipmentgeneral requirements num general .
unless restricted to a specific type by the contract documents or the engineer the contractor may perform the work using equipment tools machinery etc .
of his own choosing .
provide a unique alphanumeric identification number on all equipment other than small tools used on the project .
this number shall be a minimum of num inches high and appear on both sides of the equipment .
place the number in such a manner so as to contrast sharply in color with the background on which it is placed .
ensure that the number which may be painted or otherwise permanently affixed to the equipment is clearly legible at all times .
upon submittal of notice of intent to claim or preliminary time extension request submit in accordance with num a list showing all equipment other than small tools for which the contractor may request compensation its identification number with serial number manufacturer year manufactured model and description .
update this list to account for equipment moving to or from the project and submit certification weekly by close of business on friday the equipment its unique number and the dates and hours that the equipment was assigned to this project for the proceeding week .
no compensation will be made for any equipment used during any time period when the said equipment is not listed in the weekly certification .
failure to submit this information in the time specified may result in the engineer withholding all contract payments until receipt of such information .
note that facilities to be constructed under the contract are adequate to support only their design loads in their completed construction stage .
if the contractors equipment or procedures during construction damage any part of the facility the contractor will replace or repair it as directed by the engineer at no expense to the department .
num equipment condition and approval .
num approval provide on site and in due time prior to its need in working condition all equipment to be used in construction of the project subject to approval or disapproval by the engineer .
use only factory recommended exhaust mufflers on internal combustion engines .
remove from the job alter or repair equipment which is disapproved by the engineer .
ensure that the number of units the sizes etc .
of the equipment on hand are adequate to complete the work within the contract time .
num maintenance consistent with public interest safety and good practice maintain all equipment tools and machinery used in a satisfactory working condition throughout the period they are on the job site .
also provide adequate equipment maintenance procedures to promote continuous satisfactory working condition and minimize noise pollution caused by construction equipment .
num stationary equipment screen all stationary equipment such as pumps compressors generators etc .
from noise sensitive receivers if that equipment is to operate num return to table of contents beyond normal working hours .
if it is feasible screen this equipment during normal working hours to reduce noise impacts .
num experimental equipment .
num general to encourage the development and use of new or improved equipment the engineer may grant the contractor permission to use equipment other than that normally used and currently accepted upon approval of the contractors written request for permission to use such equipment in place of the normally used equipment .
the engineer before considering or granting such request may require that the contractor establish at his own expense satisfactory evidence that the proposed equipment will produce work equal in quality to that produced by the specified equipment and meets any applicable local state or federal noise abatement laws by laws ordinances and regulation in effect .
num conditions of approval when the engineer grants permission for the use of new or improved equipment understand that the engineer gives such permission for the purpose of testing the quality of work this equipment actually produces .
the engineer will maintain the right to retract permission for use of the equipment at any time that in his opinion the contractor does not obtain results that are at least equal to the results obtainable with currently accepted equipment .
upon the engineers withdrawal of such permission for the use of the equipment use the equipment currently accepted and normal for the work and remove and dispose of or otherwise remedy at no expense to the department any work which the engineer considers defective or unsatisfactory as a result of the use of such experimental equipment .
if the engineer approved the use of particular equipment on a particular project the engineers approval does not extend to the use of the particular equipment on any other project .
furthermore the contractor is fully responsible for producing finished work of the quality required by the contract documents .
num return to table of contents section num mobilization num description .
perform preparatory work and operations in mobilizing for beginning work on the project including but not limited to those operations necessary for the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site and for the establishment of temporary offices buildings safety equipment and first aid supplies and sanitary and other facilities .
include the costs of bonds and any required insurance and any other preconstruction expense necessary for the start of the work excluding the cost of construction materials .
num basis of payment .
num when a separate item is included in the proposal when the proposal includes a separate item of payment for this work the work and incidental costs specified as being covered under this section will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the item of mobilization .
payment will be made under item no .
num num mobilization lump sum .
num partial payments when the proposal includes a separate pay item for mobilization and the notice to proceed has been issued partial payments will be made in accordance with the following for contracts of num contract days duration or less partial payment will be made at num of the bid price per month for the first two months .
for contracts in excess of num contract days duration partial payment will be made at num of the bid price per month for the first four months .
in no event shall more than num of the bid price be paid prior to commencing construction on the project site .
total partial payments for mobilization on any project including when more than one project or job is included in the contract will be limited to num of the original contract amount for that project .
any remaining amount will be paid upon completion of all work on the contract .
retainage as specified in num will be applied to all partial payments .
partial payments made on this item will in no way act to preclude or limit any of the provisions for partial payments otherwise provided for by the contract .
num when no separate item is included in the proposal when the proposal does not include a separate item for mobilization all work and incidental costs specified as being covered under this section will be included for payment under the several scheduled items of the overall contract and no separate payment will be made therefore .
num return to table of contents section num maintenance of traffic num description .
maintain traffic within the limits of the project for the duration of the construction period including any temporary suspensions of the work .
construct and maintain detours .
provide facilities for access to residences businesses etc .
along the project .
furnish install and maintain traffic control and safety devices during construction .
furnish and install work zone pavement markings for maintenance of traffic mot in construction areas .
provide any other special requirements for safe and expeditious movement of traffic specified in the plans .
mot includes all facilities devices and operations as required for safety and convenience of the public within the work zone .
do not maintain traffic over those portions of the project where no work is to be accomplished or where construction operations will not affect existing roads .
do not obstruct or create a hazard to any traffic during the performance of the work and repair any damage to existing pavement open to traffic .
num materials .
meet the following requirements bituminous adhesive section num temporary raised pavement markers section num paint section num removable tape section num glass spheres section num temporary traffic control device materials section num retroreflective and nonreflective sheeting for temporary traffic control devices section num num temporary traffic control devices use only the materials meeting the requirements of section num section num standard plans and the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd .
num detour provide all materials for the construction and maintenance of all detours .
num commercial materials for driveway maintenance provide materials of the type typically used for base including reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material and having stability and drainage properties that will provide a firm surface under wet conditions .
num specific requirements .
num beginning date of contractors responsibility maintain traffic starting the day work begins on the project or on the first day contract time is charged whichever is earlier .
num worksite traffic supervisor provide a worksite traffic supervisor who is responsible for initiating installing and maintaining all temporary traffic control devices as described in this section and the contract documents .
provide all equipment and materials needed to set up take down maintain traffic control and handle trafficrelated situations .
use approved alternate worksite traffic supervisors when necessary .
num return to table of contents the worksite traffic supervisor must meet the personnel qualifications specified in section num .
the worksite traffic supervisor is to perform the following duties num .
on site direction of all temporary traffic control on the project .
num .
is on site during all set up and take down and performs a drive through inspection immediately after set up .
num .
is on site during all nighttime operations ensuring proper temporary traffic control .
num .
immediately corrects all safety deficiencies and corrects minor deficiencies that are not immediate safety hazards within num hours .
num .
is available on a num hour per day basis and present at the site within num minutes after notification of an emergency situation and is prepared to respond to maintain temporary traffic control or to provide alternate traffic arrangements .
num .
conducts daily daytime and weekly nighttime inspections of projects with predominately daytime work activities and daily nighttime and weekly daytime inspections of projects with predominantly nighttime work activities of all traffic control devices traffic flow pedestrian bicyclist and business accommodations .
advise the project personnel of the schedule of these inspections and give them the opportunity to join in the inspection as deemed necessary .
pedestrians are to be accommodated with a safe accessible travel path around work sites separated from mainline traffic in compliance with the americans with disabilities act ada standards for transportation facilities .
maintain existing or detour bicycle facilities satisfactorily throughout the project limits .
existing businesses in work areas are to be provided with adequate entrances for vehicular and pedestrian traffic during business hours .
the department may disqualify and remove from the project a worksite traffic supervisor who fails to comply with the provisions of this section .
the department may temporarily suspend all activities except traffic erosion control and such other activities that are necessary for project maintenance and safety for failure to comply with these provisions .
num lane closure information system approval for all lane closures mobile operations and traffic pacing operations is required .
submit routine requests fourteen calendar days in advance of planned lane closures mobile operations and traffic pacing operations at the following url address httpslcis.dot.state.fl.us .
confirm at least once every two weeks that information entered within lcis reflects current planned operations and update as necessary .
for unforeseen events that require cancelling or rescheduling lane closures mobile operations and traffic pacing operations revise the lane closure request as soon as possible .
num alternative traffic control plan .
the contractor may propose an alternative traffic control plan tcp to the plan presented in the contract documents .
the contractors engineer of record must sign and seal the alternative plan and submit to the engineer .
prepare the tcp in conformance with and in the form outlined in the current version of the fdot design manual .
indicate in the plan a tcp for each phase of activities .
take responsibility for identifying and assessing any potential impacts to a utility that may be caused by the alternate tcp proposed by the contractor and notify the department in writing of any such potential impacts to utilities .
engineers approval of the alternate tcp does not relieve the contractor of sole responsibility for all utility impacts costs delays or damages whether direct or indirect resulting from contractor initiated changes in the design or construction activities from those in num return to table of contents the original contract specifications design plans including tcps or other contract documents and which effect a change in utility work different from that shown in the utility plans joint project agreements or utility relocation schedules .
the department reserves the right to reject any alternative tcp .
obtain the engineers written approval before beginning work using an alternate tcp .
the engineers written approval is required for all modifications to the tcp .
the engineer will only allow changes to the tcp in an emergency without the proper documentation .
num traffic control .
num standards fdot standard plans are the minimum standards for the use in the development of all tcps .
the mutcd part vi is the minimum national standard for traffic control for highway construction maintenance and utility operations .
follow the basic principles and minimum standards contained in these documents for the design application installation maintenance and removal of all traffic control devices warning devices and barriers which are necessary to protect the public and workers from hazards within the project limits .
num maintenance of roadway surfaces maintain all lanes that are being used for the mot including those on detours and temporary facilities under all weather conditions .
keep the lanes reasonably free of dust potholes and rutting .
provide the lanes with the drainage facilities necessary to maintain a smooth riding surface under all weather conditions .
num number of traffic lanes maintain one lane of traffic in each direction .
maintain two lanes of traffic in each direction at existing four or more lane cross roads where necessary to avoid undue traffic congestion .
construct each lane used for mot at least as wide as the traffic lanes existing in the area before commencement of construction .
do not allow traffic control and warning devices to encroach on lanes used for mot .
the engineer may allow the contractor to restrict traffic to oneway operation for short periods of time provided that the contractor employs adequate means of traffic control and does not unreasonably delay traffic .
when a construction activity requires restricting traffic to oneway operations locate the flaggers within view of each other when possible .
when visual contact between flaggers is not possible equip them with numway radios official or pilot vehicles or use traffic signals .
num crossings and intersections provide and maintain adequate accommodations for intersecting and crossing traffic .
do not block or unduly restrict any median opening road or street crossing the project unless approved by the engineer .
before beginning any construction submit to the engineer the names and phone numbers of persons that can be contacted when signal operation malfunctions .
num access for residences and businesses provide continuous access to all residences and all places of business .
num protection of the work from injury by traffic where traffic would be injurious to a base surface course or structure constructed as a part of the work maintain all traffic outside the limits of such areas until the potential for injury no longer exists .
num flagger provide flaggers to control traffic when traffic in both directions must use a single lane and in other situations as required .
all flaggers must meet the personnel qualifications specified in section num .
num conflicting pavement markings where the lane use or where normal vehicle or pedestrian paths are altered during construction remove all pavement markings paint tape thermoplastic raised pavement markers etc .
that will conflict with the adjusted vehicle or pedestrian paths .
use of paint to cover conflicting pavement markings is prohibited .
remove num return to table of contents conflicting pavement markings using a method that will not damage the surface texture of the pavement and which will eliminate the previous marking pattern regardless of weather and light conditions .
remove all pavement markings that will be in conflict with next phase of operation vehicle pedestrian paths as described above before opening to vehicle traffic or use by pedestrians .
cost for removing conflicting pavement markings paint tape thermoplastic raised pavement markers etc .
to be included in maintenance of traffic lump sum .
num vehicle and equipment visibility equip all pickups and automobiles used on the project with a minimum of one class num warning light that meets the society of automotive engineers recommended practice sae jnum dated november num num or sae jnum dated december num num and incorporated herein by reference .
existing lights that meet sae jnum dated march num or sae jnum dated april num may be used to their end of service life .
the warning lights must be a high intensity amber or white rotating flashing oscillating or strobe light .
lights must be unobstructed by ancillary vehicle equipment such as ladders racks or booms and be visible num degrees around the vehicle .
if the light is obstructed additional lights will be required .
the lights must be operating when the vehicle is in a work area where a potential hazard exists when operating at less than the average speed for the facility while performing work activities making frequent stops or called for in the plans or standard plans .
equip all other vehicles and equipment with a minimum of num square feet of retroreflective sheeting or warning lights .
num no waiver of liability conduct operations in such a manner that no undue hazard results due to the requirements of this article .
the procedures and policies described herein in no way acts as a waiver of any terms of the liability of the contractor or his surety .
num detours .
num general construct and maintain detour facilities wherever it becomes necessary to divert traffic from any existing roadway or bridge or wherever construction operations block the flow of traffic .
num construction plan construct and maintain detours for the safe passage of traffic in all conditions of weather .
provide the detour with all facilities necessary to meet this requirement .
where pedestrian facilities are detoured blocked or closed during the work provide safe alternate accessible routes through or around the work zone meeting the requirements of the ada standards for transportation facilities .
when temporary walkway surfaces and ramps are required to be constructed ensure surfaces are stable firm slip resistant and kept free of any obstructions and hazards such as holes debris mud construction equipment and stored materials .
when the plans call for the department to furnish detour bridge components construct the pile bents in accordance with the plans unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
provide two contractor representatives who will be directly involved in the erection of departmentowned temporary bridging to attend a mandatory oneday training session to be conducted at the departments storage facility .
no bridging will be released to the contractor prior to the completion of this training .
submit the following company name phone number office address project contact person names of the representatives who will attend the training described above project num return to table of contents number detour bridge type bridge length span length location and usage time frames to the engineer at least num calendar days before the intended pickup date to obtain the storage facility location and list of components for the project .
upon receipt the engineer will within num calendar days submit an approved material list to the contractor and the appropriate department storage yard .
submit the name of the representative with authority to pick up components to the engineer at least num calendar days before the proposed pickup date .
the department is not obligated to load the bridge components without this notice .
take responsibility and sign for each item loaded at the time of issuance .
provide timber dunnage and transport the bridge components from the designated storage facility to the job site .
unload erect and maintain the bridge then dismantle the bridge and load and return the components to the designated storage facility .
notify the engineer in writing at least num calendar days before returning the components .
include in this notice the name of the contractors representative authorized to sign for return of the bridge components .
the yard supervisor is not obligated to unload the bridge components without this notice .
the department will provide equipment and an operator at the departments storage facility to assist in loading and unloading the bridge components .
furnish all other labor and equipment required for loading and unloading the components .
the departments representative will record all bridge components issued or returned on the detour bridge issue and credit ticket .
the tickets must be signed by a department and a contractor representative after loading or unloading each truck to document the quantity and type of bridging issued or returned .
bind together all bridge components to be returned in accordance with the instructions given by the storage facility .
the yard supervisor will repack components that are not packed in compliance with these instructions .
upon request written packing instructions will be made available to the contractor before dismantling of the bridge for return to the departments storage facility .
assume responsibility for any shortage or damage to the bridge components .
monies due the contractor will be reduced at the rate of num per hour plus materials for repacking repairs or replacement of bridge components .
the skid resistance of open steel grid decking on the detour bridge may decrease gradually after opening the bridge to traffic .
the department will furnish a pneumatic floor scabbler machine for roughening the roadway surface of the detour bridge decking .
provide an air compressor at the job site with num cubic feet per minute capacity num psi air pressure for the power supply of the machine and an operator .
transport the scabbler machine to and from the departments structures shop .
repair any damage to the scabbler machine caused by operations at no expense to the department .
perform scabbling when determined necessary by the engineer .
the department will pay for the cost of scabbling as unforeseeable work in accordance with num .
return the bridge components to the designated storage facility beginning no later than num calendar days after the date the detour bridge is no longer needed the date the new bridge is placed in service or the date contract time expires whichever is earliest .
return the detour bridging at an average of not less than num feet per week .
upon failure to return the bridge components to the department within the time specified compensate the department for the bridge components not returned at the rate of num per num feet per day per bridge for single num return to table of contents lane and num per num feet per day per bridge for dual lane until the bridge components are returned to the department .
num construction methods select and use construction methods and materials that provide a stable and safe detour facility .
construct the detour facility to have sufficient durability to remain in good condition supplemented by maintenance for the entire period that the detour is required .
num removal of detours remove detours when they are no longer needed and before the contract is completed .
take ownership of all materials from the detour and dispose of them except for the materials on loan from the department with the stipulation that they are returned .
num detours over existing roads and streets when the department specifies that traffic be detoured over roads or streets outside the project area do not maintain such roads or streets .
however maintain all signs and other devices placed for the purpose of the detour .
num operation of existing movable bridges the department will maintain and operate existing moveable bridges that are to be removed by the contractor until such time as they are closed to traffic .
during this period make immediate repairs of any damage to such structures caused by use or operations related to the work at no expense to the department but do not provide routine repairs or maintenance .
in the event that use or operations result in damage to a bridge requiring repairs give such repairs top priority to any equipment material or labor available .
num special detour a special detour is defined as a diversion or lane shift for vehicular traffic that requires temporary pavement .
num traffic control officer .
provide uniformed law enforcement officers including marked law enforcement vehicles to assist in controlling and directing traffic in the work zone when the following types of work is necessary on projects num .
directing trafficoverriding the signal in a signalized intersection .
num .
when standard plans index num is used on freeway facilities interstates toll roads and expressways at nighttime for work within the travel lane .
num .
when standard plans index num traffic pacing is called for in the plans or approved by the engineer .
num .
when pulling conductorcable above an open traffic lane on limited access facilities when called for in the plans or approved by the engineer .
num .
when standard plans index num temporary road closure num minutes or less is used .
num driveway maintenance .
num general ensure that each residence and business has safe stable and reasonable access .
num construction methods place level manipulate compact and maintain the material to the extent appropriate for the intended use .
as permanent driveway construction is accomplished at a particular location the contractor may salvage and reuse previously placed materials that are suitable for reuse on other driveways .
num return to table of contents num temporary traffic control devices .
num installation and maintenance install and maintain temporary traffic control devices as detailed in the plans index num of the standard plans and when applicable in accordance with the approved vendor drawings as provided on the departments approved product list apl .
erect the required temporary traffic control devices to prevent any hazardous conditions and in conjunction with any necessary traffic rerouting to protect the traveling public workers and to safeguard the work area .
use only those devices that are on the apl or meeting the requirements of the standard plans .
immediately remove or cover any devices that do not apply to existing conditions .
the apl number is to be permanently marked on the device at a readily visible location .
sheeting used on devices is exempt from this marking requirement .
notify the engineer in writing of any scheduled operation that will affect traffic patterns or safety sufficiently in advance of commencing such operation to permit review of the plan for the proposed installation of temporary traffic control devices .
assign an employee the responsibility of maintaining the position and condition of all temporary traffic control devices throughout the duration of the contract .
keep the engineer advised at all times of the identification and means of contacting this employee on a num hour basis .
maintain temporary traffic control devices in the correct position properly oriented clearly visible and clean at all times .
all applicable temporary traffic control devices must meet the classification category of acceptable as defined in the american traffic safety services association atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
pedestrian longitudinal channeling devices lcds must meet the classification category of acceptable as defined in the pedestrian lcd evaluation guide which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecsfileslcdevaluationguide .pdf .
immediately repair replace or clean damaged defaced or dirty devices .
traffic control devices must not be cleaned while installedused .
use of warning lights on any temporary traffic control device is prohibited with the exception of the trailer mounted portable regulatory signs .
employ an approved independent channelizing device supplier cds to provide and maintain the condition of the following nonfixed channelizing devices drums cones vertical panels barricades tubular markers and longitudinal channeling devices .
cones may be provided and maintained by the contractor .
the cds shall not be affiliated with the contractor and shall be approved by the engineer in accordance with num .
the cds shall submit a monthly certification on letterhead that the channelizing devices mentioned above installedused within the work zone meet classification category of acceptable as defined in the pedestrian lcd evaluation guide and the atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
the cds shall submit the monthly certification on letterhead for channelizing devices installedused within the work zone .
the cds certification shall include the following statement i certify that i have provided and maintained the following devices list devices covered under the certification in accordance with pedestrian lcd evaluation guide and the atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
if the contractor chooses to provide and maintain cones the contractor must submit a monthly contractor certification on letterhead that all cones installedused within the work zone meet acceptable standards as outlined in the atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
num return to table of contents the contractor certification shall include the following statement i certify that i have provided and maintained cones in accordance with the atssa quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
num approved independent channelizing device supplier cds requirements submit the following documents to the engineer for independent cds approval at the preconstruction conference .
a cds may elect to provide a onetime submittal of this information to the state construction office for review and preapproval .
department approved cdss are listed on the state construction office website .
inform the engineer at the preconstruction conference of this approval .
num .
a letter on company letterhead signed and dated by the owner of the company or company officer with the following information and statements a .
the companys owners stockholders and officers .
b .
a statement declaring that the company will not perform as a cds on any project where there is common ownership directly or indirectly between the company and the contractor .
c. a statement declaring that the company will furnish and maintain the condition of all channelizing devices with the exception of cones as required in num num with its own forces .
d. a statement declaring at least five years of experience in providing channelizing device supplier services with its own inventory of channelizing devices .
e. on a separate sheet list a sample project history of the companys experience as a channeling device supplier for the five years declared in item numd above including the following information num .
project name and number and a brief description of cds work performed num .
beginning and ending date of cds project activities num .
location of project city state num .
monetary amount of cds work on project num .
owner of project contact person and phone number with area code num .
name of contractor client that the work was performed for and phone number with area code .
num .
a maintenance plan for approval by the department that outlines the frequency and methods for maintaining the condition of all channelizing devices except cones owned and maintained by the contractor installedused in the work zone .
num work zone signs furnish install maintain remove and relocate signs in accordance with the plans and standard plans index num .
use signs that meet the material and process requirements of section num .
use type iv sheeting for fluorescent orange work zone signs .
rollup signs must meet the requirements of type vi sheeting .
use type iv or type xi sheeting for all other work zone signs .
attach the sign to the sign support using hardware meeting the manufacturers recommendations on the apl vendor drawings or as specified in the standard plans .
num post mounted signs meet the requirements of num .
num portable signs use only approved systems which includes sign stands and attachment hardware nuts bolts clamps brackets braces etc .
meeting the vendor requirements specified on the apl drawings .
provide federal highway administrations num return to table of contents fhwa accepted sign substrate for use with accepted sign stands on the national highway system nhs under the provisions of the nchrp report num recommended procedures for the safety performance evaluation of highway features .
num barrier mounted signs if post mounting criteria can not be achieved in accordance with standard plans index num and a barrier or traffic railing exists use temporary sign criteria provided in standard plans index num .
num business signs provide and place signs in accordance with the plans and standard plans index num series .
furnish signs having retroreflective sheeting meeting the requirements of section num .
num project information signs provide and place signs in accordance with the plans and standard plans index num series .
furnish signs having retroreflective sheeting meeting the requirements of section num .
num channelizing devices furnish install maintain remove and relocate channelizing devices in accordance with the plans and standard plans .
num retroreflective collars for traffic cones use collars for traffic cones listed on the apl that meet the requirements of section num .
use cone collars at night designed to properly fit the taper of the cone when installed .
place the upper num inch collar a uniform num inches distance from the top of the cone and the lower num inch collar a uniform num inches distance below the bottom of the upper num inch collar .
collars must be capable of being removed for temporary use or attached permanently to the cone in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
provide a white sheeting having a smooth outer surface and that has the property of a retroreflector over its entire surface .
num longitudinal channelizing devices lcds use lcds listed on the apl and meeting the requirements of section num and the standard plans .
lcds must be interlocked except for the standalone unit placed perpendicular to a sidewalk .
for lcds requiring internal ballasting an indicator that clearly identifies the proper ballast level will be required .
for lcds requiring external ballasting the ballasting methods must be detailed in the apl drawings including ballasting type and minimum weight .
ensure that joints on the pedestrian lcds are free of sharp edges and have a maximum offset of num inch in any plane .
use alternating orange and white solid color vehicular lcds .
vehicular lcds may be substituted for drums vertical panels or barricades .
num temporary barrier furnish install maintain remove and relocate temporary barrier in accordance with the plans and standard plans .
obtain and use precast temporary concrete barrier from a manufacturing plant that is on the departments production facility listing .
temporary concrete barrier must meet the material and construction requirements of section num unless noted otherwise in the standard plans .
proprietary temporary concrete steel or water filled barrier used must be listed on the apl .
the maximum allowable height increase between consecutive temporary barrier units in the direction of traffic is num inch .
temporary barrier must comply with standard plans index num or num .
install temporary barriers as either anchored or freestanding as shown in the plans or the standard plans .
an anchored unit is defined as having at least one stake or bolt into the underlying pavement or bridge deck .
all other units including those with keeper pins are considered freestanding .
num return to table of contents remove temporary asphalt pads and repair all attachment scars to permanent structures and pavements after barrier removal .
make necessary repairs due to defective material work or contractor operations at no cost to the department .
restore barrier damaged by the traveling public within num hours after notification as authorized by the engineer .
trailer mounted barriers listed on the apl may be used at the option of the contractor .
trailer mounted barriers listed on the apl must have an fhwa eligibility letter and be successfully crash tested in accordance with mash tlnum criteria .
all trailer mounted barriers must be equipped with an apl listed truck mounted attenuator an apl listed vehicle mounted arrow board and vehicle warning lights in accordance with this section .
num temporary barrier meeting the requirements of standard plans index num and num ensure the marking requirements of the respective index are met .
num proprietary precast temporary concrete barrier fabricated prior to num the contractor must submit a certification stating that all unmarked barrier units meet the requirements of the specifications and the standard plans .
certifications will be project specific and nontransferable .
num proprietary precast temporary concrete barrier fabricated in num or later ensure each barrier unit has permanent clear markings showing the manufacture date serial number manufacturers name or symbol and the apl number .
label the markings on a plate plaque or cast in the unit .
proprietary barrier fabricated prior to num and marked with the indx num in lieu of the apl number will be permitted .
num barrier delineators install barrier delineators on top of temporary barrier and vehicular lcds meeting the requirements of section num .
num temporary glare screen use temporary glare screens listed on the apl that meet the requirements of section num .
furnish install maintain remove and relocate glare screen systems in conjunction with temporary barrier at locations identified in the plans .
the anchorage of the glare screen to the barrier must be capable of safely resisting an equivalent tensile load of num pounds per foot of glare screen with a requirement to use a minimum of three fasteners per barrier section .
when glare screen is utilized on temporary barrier barrier delineators will not be required .
num temporary crash cushion redirective or gating furnish install maintain and subsequently remove temporary crash cushions in accordance with the details and notes shown in the plans standard plans and requirements of the preapproved alternatives listed on the apl .
temporary crash cushions can be either new or used functionally sound refurbished devices .
performance of intended function is the only condition for acceptance .
all metallic components must be galvanized in accordance with section num .
anchor abutting temporary barrier in accordance the standard plans or apl drawings as required .
bidirectional installations must have a transition panel installed between the crash cushion and the abutting barrier .
delineate the crash cushion in accordance with section num .
maintain the crash cushions until their authorized removal .
do not place any materials or equipment within the length of the crash cushion .
remove temporary asphalt or concrete pads and repair all attachment scars to permanent structures and pavements after crash cushion removal .
make necessary repairs due to defective material work or contractor operations at no cost to the department .
restore crash num return to table of contents cushions damaged by the traveling public within num hours after notification as authorized by the engineer .
num temporary guardrail furnish temporary guardrail in accordance with the plans and standard plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num arrow board furnish arrow boards that meet the requirements of section num as required by the plans and standard plans to advise approaching traffic of lane closures or shoulder work .
ensure that the arrow board display panel is raised to a minimum mounting height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the edge of the travel way elevation when in the upright position .
type b arrow boards may be used on low to intermediate speed num mph to num mph facilities or for maintenance or moving operations on any speed facility .
type c arrow boards must be used for all other operations on highspeed num mph and greater facilities and may be substituted for type b arrow boards on any speed facility .
num portable changeable message sign pcms furnish pcmss or truck mounted changeable message signs that meet the requirements of section num as required by the plans and standard plans to supplement other temporary traffic control devices used in work zones .
ensure that the pcms display panel is raised to a minimum mounting height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the edge of the travel way elevation when in the upright position .
num portable regulatory signs prs furnish prss that meet the requirements of section num as required by the plans and standard plans .
ensure that the prs sign panel is raised to a minimum mounting height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the edge of the travel way elevation when in the upright position .
activate portable regulatory signs only during active work activities and deactivate when no work is being performed .
num radar speed display unit rsdu furnish rsdus that meet the requirements of section num as required by the plans and standard plans to inform motorists of the posted speed and their actual speed .
ensure that the rsdu display panel is raised to a minimum mounting height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the edge of the travel way elevation when in the upright position .
activate the radar speed display unit only during active work activities and deactivate when no work is being performed .
num temporary signalization and maintenance provide temporary signalization and maintenance at existing temporary and new intersections including but not limited to the following num .
installation of temporary poles and span wire assemblies as shown in the plans num .
temporary portable traffic signals as shown in the plans num .
adding or shifting signal heads num .
trouble calls num .
maintaining intersection and coordination timing and preemption devices .
coordination timing will require maintaining functionality of system communications .
restore any loss of operation within num hours after notification .
provide alternate temporary traffic control until the signalization is restored .
provide traffic signal equipment that meets the requirements of the standard plans and num .
the engineer may approve used signal equipment if it is in acceptable condition .
replacement components for traffic signal cabinet assemblies will be provided by the num return to table of contents maintaining agency .
for temporary signals used for lane closure operations on twolane two way roadways meet the requirements in num .
num temporary traffic detection and maintenance provide temporary traffic detection and maintenance at existing temporary and new signalized intersections .
provide temporary traffic detection equipment listed on the apl .
restore any loss of detection within num hours .
ensure num accuracy per signal phase measured at the initial installation and after any lane shifts by comparing sample data collected from the detection system with ground truth data collected by human observation .
collect the sample and ground truth data for a minimum of five minutes during a peak and five minutes during an offpeak period with a minimum three detections for each signal phase .
perform the test in the presence of the engineer .
num truck mounted attenuators and trailer mounted attenuators furnish install and maintain only those attenuators listed on the apl .
for posted speeds of num mph or greater use either truck mounted attenuators or trailer mounted attenuators that meet tlnum criteria nchrp or mash .
for posted speeds of num mph or less use either truck mounted attenuators or trailer mounted attenuators that meet tl num or tlnum criteria nchrp or mash .
when attenuators are called for in the plans or standard plans use either a truck mounted attenuator or a trailer mounted attenuator and install in accordance with this section and the manufacturers recommendations .
equip the attenuator cartridge with lights and reflectors in compliance with applicable florida motor vehicle laws including turn signals dual tail lights and brake lights .
ensure that lights are visible in both the raised and lowered positions if the unit is capable of being raised .
install either alternating black with yellow or white with orange sheeting on the rear of trailer mounted attenuators and on truck mounted attenuators in both the operating and raised position .
use type iii work zone or type iv sheeting consisting of num or num inch wide stripes installed to form chevrons that point upward .
all sheeting except black must be retroreflective .
attenuators will not be paid for separately .
include the cost of the truck with either a truck mounted attenuator or a trailer mounted attenuator in maintenance of traffic lump sum .
payment includes all costs including furnishing maintaining and removal when no longer required and all materials labor tools equipment and incidentals required for attenuator maintenance .
num temporary raised rumble strip set furnish install maintain remove and reinstall temporary raised rumble strips per the manufacturers recommendations and in accordance with standard plans index num .
the temporary raised rumble strip may be either a removable polymer striping tape or a molded engineered polymer material .
num automated flagger assistance devices afad furnish install maintain remove and relocate afads in accordance with the plans standard plans index num and apl vendor drawings .
position afads where they are clearly visible to oncoming traffic .
afads may be placed on the centerline if they have been successfully crash tested in accordance with mash tlnum criteria .
a gate arm is required in accordance with section num if a single afad is used on the shoulder to control one direction of traffic .
num return to table of contents the devices may be operated either by a single flagger at one end of the traffic control zone from a central location or by a separate flagger near each device location .
use only flaggers trained in accordance with section num and in the operation of the afad .
when in use each afad must be in view of and attended at all times by the flagger operating the device .
provide two flaggers onsite and use one of the following methods in the deployment of afads num .
place an afad at each end of the temporary traffic control zone or num .
place an afad at one end of the temporary traffic control zone and a flagger at the opposite end .
a single flagger may simultaneously operate two afads as described in num or a single afad as described in num if all of the following conditions are met num .
the flagger has an unobstructed view of the afads num .
the flagger has an unobstructed view of approaching traffic in both directions num .
for two afads the afads are less than num feet apart .
for one afad the afad and the flagger are less than num feet apart .
num .
two flaggers are available onsite to provide normal flagging operations should an afad malfunction .
afads may be either a remotely controlled stopslow afad mounted on either a trailer or a movable cart system or a remotely controlled redyellow lens afad .
illuminate the flagging station when the afad is used at night .
when the afad is not in use remove or cover signs and move the afad device outside the clear zone or shield it with a barrier .
afads will not be paid for separately .
afads may be used as a supplement or an alternate to flaggers in accordance with the plans standard plans index num and the apl vendor drawings .
include the cost for afads in maintenance of traffic lump sum .
num temporary lane separator furnish install maintain remove and relocate temporary lane separator in accordance with the plans and standard plans index num .
anchor the portable temporary lane separator with a removable anchor bolt .
use epoxy on bridge decks where anchoring is not allowed .
remove the epoxy from the bridge deck by hydroblasting or other method approved by the engineer .
num temporary signals for lane closures on twolane twoway roadways furnish install maintain remove and relocate temporary signals for lane closure operations on twolane twoway roadways at the locations shown in the plans .
temporary signals may be used at the contractors option as an alternate to flaggers for lane closure operations on two lane twoway roadways in accordance with standard plans index num .
temporary signals can either be portable signals or span wire signals and must be listed on the apl .
num work zone pavement marking .
num description furnish and install work zone pavement markings for mot in construction areas and in close conformity with the lines and details shown in the plans and standard plans .
centerlines lane lines edge lines stop bars standard crosswalks and turn arrows will be required in work zones prior to opening the road to traffic .
num painted pavement markings num return to table of contents num general use painted pavement markings meeting the requirements of section num .
use standard paint unless otherwise identified in the plans or approved by the engineer .
num removable tape num general use removable tape listed on the apl as shown in the plans and meeting the requirements of num .
num application apply removable tape with a mechanical applicator to provide pavement lines that are neat accurate and uniform .
equip the mechanical applicator with a film cutoff device and with measuring devices that automatically and accumulatively measure the length of each line placed within an accuracy tolerance of plus or minus num .
ensure removable tape adheres to the road surface .
removable tape may be placed by hand on short sections num feet or less if it is done in a neat accurate manner .
num retroreflectivity apply white and yellow pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum for white and contrast markings and not less than num mcdlxmnum for yellow markings .
black portions of contrast tapes and black masking tapes must be nonreflective and have a reflectance of less than num mcdlx mnum .
at the end of the six month service life the retroreflectance of white and yellow removable tape shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num removability provide removable tape capable of being removed from bituminous concrete and portland cement concrete pavement intact or in substantially large strips either manually or by a mechanical rollup device at temperatures above numf without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting .
num temporary raised pavement markers rpms use class b rpms except for work that consists of groundin rumble strips at centerline locations .
for groundin rumble strips at centerline locations use temporary rpms in accordance with section num .
provide only temporary rpms listed on the apl .
install all markers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations the standard plans and section num .
after initial installation replace broken or missing temporary rpms in locations where more than three consecutive temporary rpms are broken or missing at no expense to the department .
num method of measurement .
num general devices installedused on the project on any calendar day or portion thereof within the contract time including time extensions which may be granted will be paid for at the contract unit price for the applicable pay item .
include the cost of any work that is necessary to meet the requirements of the contract documents for mot under maintenance of traffic lump sum when separate payment is not provided .
num traffic control officers the quantity to be paid for will be at the contract unit price per hour num hour minimum for the actual number of officers certified to be on the project site including any law enforcement vehicles and all other direct and indirect costs .
payment will be made only for those traffic control officers specified in the plans and authorized by the engineer .
cost for traffic control officers used for operations other than those specified in num will be paid for under maintenance of traffic lump sum .
num special detours when a special detour is shown in the plans the work of constructing maintaining and subsequently removing such detour facilities will be paid for under special detour lump sum .
however traffic control devices warning devices barriers signing pavement markings and restoration to final configuration will be paid for under their respective pay items .
num return to table of contents when the plans show more than one special detour each special detour will be paid for separately at the contract lump sum price for each .
num commercial material for driveway maintenance the quantity to be paid for will be the certified volume in cubic yards of all materials authorized by the engineer acceptably placed and maintained for driveway maintenance .
the volume which is authorized to be reused and which is acceptably salvaged placed and maintained in other designated driveways will be included again for payment .
num work zone signs the number of temporary postmounted signs temporary regulatory warning and guide certified as installedused on the project will be paid for at the contract unit price for work zone signs .
when multiple signs are located on single or multiple posts each sign panel will be paid individually .
signs greater than num square feet and detailed in the plans will be paid for under maintenance of traffic lump sum .
temporary portable signs excluding mesh signs and vehicular mounted signs will be included for payment under work zone signs only if used in accordance with the standard plans .
the number of temporary barrier mounted signs temporary regulatory warning and guide certified as installedused on the project will be paid for at the contract unit price for barrier mounted work zone signs .
work zone signs may be installed fourteen days prior to the start of contract time with the approval of the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
num. business signs the number of business signs certified as installedused on the project will be paid for at the contract unit price for business signs .
num project information signs no separate payment will be made for project information signs .
payment will be included under maintenance of traffic lump sum .
num channelizing devices the number of drums vertical panels and type i type ii type iii or direction indicator barricades certified as installedused on the project meeting the requirements of standard plans index num and have been properly maintained will be paid for at the contract unit prices for channelizing device .
payment for drums vertical panels and type i type ii type iii and direction indicator barricades will be paid per each per day .
payment for vehicular lcds will be paid as the length in feet installed divided by the device spacing for barricades vertical panels and drums and certified as installedused on the project meeting the requirements of standard plans index num and have been properly maintained will be paid for at the contract unit price for channelizing device .
payment for pedestrian lcds will be paid as the plan quantity length in feet in place and accepted .
for sidewalk closures the plan quantity length will be based on the width of the sidewalk .
the quantity of pedestrian lcds will be paid for regardless of whether materials are new used or relocated from a previous installation on the project .
placement of pedestrian lcds at locations not shown in the plans or not authorized by the engineer will be at the contractors expense .
payment for pedestrian lcd mounted signs will be made under work zone signs per each per day .
payment will not be made for channelizing devices unsatisfactorily maintained as determined by the engineer .
payment will be made for each channelizing device that is used to delineate trailer mounted devices .
payment will be made for channelizing devices delineating portable changeable message signs during the period beginning num working days before contract time begins as authorized by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num temporary barrier the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet of freestanding units or anchored units certified as installedused on the project .
the quantity to be paid for relocating barrier will be based on the relocated installation type .
no separate payment will be made for the asphalt pad .
num barrier delineators no separate payment will be made for barrier delineators installed on top of temporary barrier and vehicular lcds .
include the cost for barrier delineators in the cost of the barrier or vehicular lcd .
num temporary glare screen the certified quantity to be paid for will be determined by the number of sections times the nominal length of each section .
num temporary crash cushions no separate payment will be made for the concrete or asphalt pad .
num redirective the quantity to be paid for will be the number of temporary crash cushions redirective certified as installedused and maintained on the project including anchoring of temporary barrier necessary for transition to the crash cushion and delineation .
num gating the quantity to be paid for will be the number of temporary crash cushions gating certified as installedused and maintained on the project including anchoring of temporary barrier necessary for transition to the crash cushion and delineation .
num temporary guardrail the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet of temporary guardrail constructed and certified as installedused on the project .
the length of a run of guardrail will be determined as a multiple of the nominal panel lengths .
num arrow board the quantity to be paid at the contract unit price will be for the number of arrow boards certified as installedused on the project on any calendar day or portion thereof within the contract time .
num portable changeable message sign the quantity to be paid at the contract unit price will be for the number of pcmss or truck mounted changeable message signs certified as installedused on the project on any calendar day or portion thereof within the contract time .
payment will be made for each portable changeable message sign that is used during the period beginning fourteen working days before contract time begins as authorized by the engineer .
num portable regulatory signs the quantity to be paid for will be the number of portable regulatory signs certified as installedused on the project on any calendar day or portion thereof within the contract time will be paid for the contract unit price for portable regulatory sign .
num radar speed display unit the quantity to be paid for will be the number of radar speed display units certified as installedused on the project on any calendar day or portion thereof within the contract time will be paid for the contract unit price for radar speed display unit .
num temporary signalization and maintenance for existing intersections the certified quantity to be paid for will be the number of signalized intersections per day for the full duration of the contract .
for temporary intersections the certified quantity to be paid for will be the number of signalized intersections per day for the duration of the temporary intersection .
no separate payment will be made for temporary signalization and maintenance at new intersections .
num temporary traffic detection and maintenance for existing intersections the certified quantity to be paid for will be the number of signalized intersections per day beginning the day contract time begins and ending the day the permanent detection is operational and the final lane configuration is in place .
for temporary and new intersections the num return to table of contents certified quantity to be paid for will be the number of signalized intersections per day beginning the day the temporary detection is functional and ending the day the permanent detection is operational and the final lane configuration is in place for a new intersection or when the detection is removed for a temporary intersection .
num work zone pavement markings the quantities of work zone pavement markings authorized and acceptably applied under this section and certified as installedused on the project will be paid for as follows num .
the length in gross miles of solid num skip num dotted num dotted and num dotted lines .
the gross mile measurement will be taken as the distance from the beginning of the painted line to the end of the painted line and will include the unmarked gaps for skip and dotted lines .
the gross mile measurement will not include designated unmarked lengths at intersections turn lanes etc .
final measurement will be determined by plan dimensions or stations subject to num .
num .
the length in linear feet of transverse lines diagonal lines chevrons and parking spaces .
num .
the number of pavement messages symbols and arrows .
each arrow is paid as a complete marking regardless of the number of points or directions .
num .
the number of temporary rpms authorized and acceptably applied .
num temporary raised rumble strips the quantity to be paid for will be the number of calendar days or portions thereof that temporary raised rumble strips are certified as installedused on the project within the contract time .
the number of strips used must meet the requirements of standard plans index num .
no adjustment will be made to the per day measurement for the number of strips or sets used or for the number of times the sets are relocated .
num temporary lane separator the quantity to be paid for will be the field measure in feet of temporary lane separator certified as installedused on the project including drainage gaps completed and accepted .
num temporary signals for lane closures on twolane twoway roadways the quantity to be paid for will be the number of temporary signals per day installedused at the locations shown in the plans .
temporary signals installedused at the contractors option as an alternative to flaggers will be included in maintenance of traffic lump sum .
num submittals .
num submittal instructions prepare a certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for certified mot payment items for each project in the contract .
submit the certification of quantities to the engineer .
the department will not pay for any disputed items until the engineer approves the certification of quantities .
num contractors certification of quantities request payment by submitting a certification of quantities no later than twelve oclock noon monday after the estimate cutoff date or as directed by the engineer based on the amount of work done or completed .
ensure the certification consists of the following num .
contract number fpid number certification number certification date and the period that the certification represents .
num .
the basis for arriving at the amount of the progress certification less payments previously made and less an amount previously retained or withheld .
the basis will include a num return to table of contents detail breakdown provided on the certification of items of payment in accordance with num .
after the initial setup of the mot items and counts the interval for recording the counts will be made weekly on the certification sheet unless there is a change .
this change will be documented on the day of occurrence .
some items may necessitate a daily interval of recording the counts .
num basis of payment .
num maintenance of traffic general work when an item of work is included in the proposal price and payment will be full compensation for all work and costs specified under this section except as may be specifically covered for payment under other items .
num traffic control officers price and payment will be full compensation for the services of the traffic control officers .
num special detours price and payment will be full compensation for providing all detour facilities shown in the plans and all costs incurred in carrying out all requirements of this section for general mot within the limits of the detour as shown in the plans .
num commercial materials for driveway maintenance price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified for this item including specifically all required shaping and maintaining of driveways .
num work zone signs price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials for furnishing signs supports and necessary hardware installation relocating maintaining and removing signs .
num. business signs price and payment will be full compensation for all materials and labor required for furnishing installing relocating maintaining and removing the signs as well as the cost of installing any logos provided by business owners .
num project information signs price and payment will be full compensation for all materials and labor for furnishing installing relocating maintaining and removing signs .
num channelizing devices prices and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing relocating maintaining and removing the channelizing devices .
num temporary barrier price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining and removing the barrier and asphalt pad .
when called for temporary barrier relocate will be full compensation for relocating the barrier .
num temporary glare screen price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining and removing the glare screen certified as installedused on the project .
when called for glare screen relocate will be full compensation for relocating the glare screen .
num temporary crash cushion redirective or gating price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing maintaining and removing crash cushions and concrete or asphalt pads .
num temporary guardrail price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials required for a complete installation including end anchorage assemblies and any end connections to other structures and for installing maintaining and removing guardrail .
num arrow board price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing operating relocating maintaining and removing arrow boards .
num portable changeable message sign price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing operating relocating maintaining and removing portable changeable message signs .
num return to table of contents num portable regulatory signs price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing relocating operating maintaining and removing a completely functioning system as described in these specifications .
payment will include all labor materials incidentals repairs and any actions necessary to operate and maintain the unit at all times that work is being performed or traffic is being affected by construction andor mot operations .
num radar speed display unit price and payment will be made only for a completely functioning system as described in these specifications .
payment will include all labor hardware accessories signs and incidental items necessary for a complete system .
payment will include any measurements needed to insure that the unit conforms to all specification requirements .
payment will include all labor materials incidentals repairs and any actions necessary to operate and maintain the unit at all times that work is being performed or traffic is being affected by construction andor mot operations .
price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing operating relocating maintaining and removing radar speed display unit .
num temporary signalization and maintenance price and payment will constitute full compensation for furnishing installing operating maintaining and removing temporary traffic control signals including all equipment and components necessary to provide an operable traffic signal .
payment will be withheld for each day at each intersection where the temporary signalization is not operational within num hours after notification .
num temporary traffic detection and maintenance price and payment will constitute full compensation for furnishing installing operating maintaining and removing temporary traffic detection including all equipment and components necessary to provide an acceptable signalized intersection .
take ownership of all equipment and components .
payment will be withheld for each day at each intersection where the temporary detection is not operational within num hours after notification .
num work zone pavement markings price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
removable tape may be substituted for standard paint at no additional cost to the department .
payment for temporary rpms used to supplement line markings will be paid for under temporary raised pavement markers .
install these rpms as detailed in the standard plans .
num temporary raised rumble strips price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials described in this section including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces disposal of all debris furnishing of all materials application curing removal reinstalling and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num temporary lane separator price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
num temporary signals for lane closures on twolane twoway roadways price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing operating num return to table of contents maintaining and removing temporary traffic signal including all equipment and components necessary to provide an operable portable traffic signal .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num maintenance of traffic lump sum .
item no .
num num special detour lump sum .
item no .
num num commercial material for driveway maintenance per cubic yard .
item no .
num num traffic control officer per hour .
item no .
num num work zone sign per each per day .
item no .
num num business sign each .
item no .
num num barrier mounted work zone sign per each per day item no .
num num temporary barrier per foot .
item no .
num num temporary lane separator per foot item no .
num num temporary guardrail per foot .
item no .
num num channelizing devices item no .
num num arrow board per each per day .
item no .
num num temporary raised pavement markers each .
item no .
num num temporary crash cushion gating per location .
item no .
num num temporary crash cushion redirective per location .
item no .
num num glare screen per foot .
item no .
num num portable changeable message sign per each per day .
item no .
num temporary signalization and maintenance per intersection per day .
item no .
num temporary traffic detection and maintenance per intersection per day .
item no .
num temporary signal for lane closures on twolane two way roadways per each per day .
item no .
num portable regulatory sign per each per day .
item no .
num radar speed display unit per each per day .
item no .
num temporary raised rumble strips per day .
item no .
num removable tape whiteblack per gross mile .
item no .
num removable tape yellow per gross mile .
item no .
num painted pavement markings .
item no .
num thermoplastic pavement markings .
num return to table of contents section num temporary work structures num description .
num scope of work construct temporary work structures used solely to support construction equipment .
temporary structures include but are not limited to work bridges elevated platforms and rail systems .
items such as barges mats or items such as falsework or scaffolding are not included in this section .
if a temporary structure type other than the structure type shown in the plans is chosen assume responsibility for obtaining all necessary permit revisions and the engineers approval .
conform to any limitations contained in the plans and permits .
do not place embankment outside the limits shown in the plans .
the cost of the embankment placing compaction and removal will be included in the lump sum price for temporary work structure .
num materials construct the temporary work structure using materials sufficient to handle the anticipated loads .
assume responsibility for the design of the temporary structure .
num navigation requirements submit drawings showing the location of the temporary work structures relative to the navigable waterway to the coast guard at least num days prior to beginning construction of the structure or as required by conditions of the permit .
provide adequate lighting of the structure during the duration of construction as required by the coast guard or local authorities .
num basis of payment .
num general the unit price for the temporary work structure will include all costs associated with the design materials labor installation removal and disposal of the structure .
num partial payments when the plans include a separate pay item for temporary work structure num of the lump sum price will be paid upon completion of the temporary work structure and num will be paid upon complete removal of the temporary work structure from the project site .
when the project requires numerous structures or multiple setups leap frog type of the same system the num will be split evenly between the various structures or setups .
partial payments for any project will be limited to num of the original contract amount for that project .
any remaining amount will be paid upon completion of all work on the project .
when more than one project is included in the contract the above percentages will apply separately to each project which has a separate pay item for temporary work structures .
payment will be made under item no .
num num temporary work structures lump sum .
num return to table of contents section num prevention control and abatement of erosion and water pollution num description .
provide erosion control measures on the project and in areas outside the rightofway where work is accomplished in conjunction with the project so as to prevent pollution of water detrimental effects to public or private property adjacent to the project rightofway and damage to work on the project .
construct and maintain temporary erosion control features or where practical construct and maintain permanent erosion control features as shown in the plans or as may be directed by the engineer .
num general .
coordinate the installation of temporary erosion control features with the construction of the permanent erosion control features to the extent necessary to ensure economical effective and continuous control of erosion and water pollution throughout the life of the contract .
due to unanticipated conditions the engineer may direct the use of control features or methods other than those included in the original contract .
in such event the department will pay for this additional work as unforeseeable work .
num control of contractors operations which may result in water pollution .
prevent pollution of streams canals lakes reservoirs and other water impoundments with fuels oils bitumens calcium chloride or other harmful materials .
also conduct and schedule operations to avoid or otherwise minimize pollution or siltation of such water impoundments and to avoid interference with movement of migratory fish .
do not dump any residue from dust collectors or washers into any live stream .
restrict construction operations in rivers streams lakes tidal waters reservoirs canals and other water impoundments to those areas where it is necessary to perform filling or excavation to accomplish the work shown in the plans and to those areas which must be entered to construct temporary or permanent structures .
as soon as conditions permit promptly clear rivers streams and impoundments of all obstructions placed therein or caused by construction operations .
do not frequently ford live streams with construction equipment .
wherever an appreciable number of stream crossings are necessary at any one location use a temporary bridge or other structure .
except as necessary for construction do not deposit excavated material in rivers streams canals or impoundments or in a position close enough thereto to be washed away by high water or runoff .
where pumps are used to remove highly turbid waters from enclosed construction areas such as cofferdams or forms treat the water by one or more of the following methods prior to discharge into state waters pumping into grassed swales or appropriate vegetated areas or sediment basins or confined by an appropriate enclosure such as turbidity barriers when other methods are not considered appropriate .
do not disturb lands or waters outside the limits of construction as staked except as authorized by the engineer .
num return to table of contents obtain the engineers approval for the location of and method of operation in borrow pits material pits and disposal areas furnished for waste material from the project other than commercially operated sources such that erosion during and after completion of the work will not result in probability of detrimental siltation or water pollution .
num materials for temporary erosion control .
the engineer will not require testing of materials used in construction of temporary erosion control features other than as provided for geotextile fabric in num unless such material is to be incorporated into the completed project .
when no testing is required the engineer will base acceptance on visual inspection .
the contractor may use new or used materials for the construction of temporary silt fence staked turbidity barriers and floating turbidity barrier not to be incorporated into the completed project subject to the approval of the engineer .
num preconstruction requirements .
prior to the preconstruction conference submit to the department an erosion control plan meeting the requirements or special conditions of all permits authorizing project construction .
if no permits are required or the approved permits do not contain special conditions or specifically address erosion and water pollution the project erosion control plan will be governed by num num num num and section num .
when a dep generic permit is issued the contractors erosion control plan shall be prepared to accompany the departments stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp .
ensure the erosion control plan includes procedures to control offsite tracking of soil by vehicles and construction equipment and a procedure for cleanup and reporting of nonstorm water discharges such as contaminated groundwater or accidental spills .
do not begin any soil disturbing activities until department approval of the contractors erosion control plan including required signed certification statements have been submitted to the department .
failure to sign and submit any required documents or certification statements will be considered a default of the contract .
any soil disturbing activities performed without the required signed documents or certification statements may be considered a violation of the dep generic permit .
when the swppp is required prepare the erosion control plan in accordance with the planned sequence of operations and present in a format acceptable to the department .
the erosion control plan shall describe but not be limited to the following items or activities num .
for each phase of construction operations or activities supply the following information a .
locations of all erosion control devices b .
types of all erosion control devices c. estimated time erosion control devices will be in operation d. monitoring schedules for maintenance of erosion control devices e. methods of maintaining erosion control devices f. containment or removal methods for pollutants or hazardous wastes num .
the name and telephone number of the person responsible for monitoring and maintaining the erosion control devices .
num .
submit for approval the erosion control plans meeting paragraphs numa numb or numc below num return to table of contents a .
projects permitted by the southwest florida water management district swfwmd require the following submit the erosion control plan to the engineer for review and to the appropriate swfwmd office for review and approval .
include the swfwmd permit number on all submitted data or correspondence .
the contractor may schedule a meeting with the appropriate swfwmd office to discuss his erosion control plan in detail to expedite the review and approval process .
advise the engineer of the time and place of any meetings scheduled with swfwmd .
do not begin construction activities until the erosion control plan receives written approval from both swfwmd and the engineer .
b .
projects permitted by the south florida water management district or the st. johns river water management district require the following obtain the engineers approval of the erosion control plan .
do not begin construction activities until the erosion control plan receives written approval from the engineer .
c. projects authorized by permitting agencies other than the water management districts or projects for which no permits are required require the following the engineer will review and approve the contractors erosion control plan .
do not begin construction activities until the erosion control plan receives written approval from the engineer .
comply with the approved erosion control plan .
num construction requirements .
num limitation of exposure of erodible earth the engineer may limit the surface areas of unprotected erodible earth exposed by the construction operation and may direct the contractor to provide erosion or pollution control measures to prevent contamination of any river stream lake tidal waters reservoir canal or other water impoundments or to prevent detrimental effects on property outside the project rightofway or damage to the project .
limit the area in which excavation and filling operations are being performed so that it does not exceed the capacity to keep the finish grading turf sod and other such permanent erosion control measures current in accordance with the accepted schedule .
do not allow the surface area of erodible earth that clearing and grubbing operations or excavation and filling operations expose to exceed num square feet without specific prior approval by the engineer .
this limitation applies separately to clearing and grubbing operations and excavation and filling operations .
the engineer may increase or decrease the amount of surface area the contractor may expose at any one time .
num incorporation of erosion and sediment control features incorporate permanent erosion control features into the project at the earliest practical time .
use temporary erosion and sediment control features found in the state of florida erosion and sediment control designer and reviewer manual esc manual to correct conditions that develop during construction which were not foreseen at the time of design to control erosion and sediment prior to the time it is practical to construct permanent control features or to provide immediate num return to table of contents temporary control of erosion and sediment that develops during normal construction operations which are not associated with permanent erosion control features on the project .
an electronic version of the esc manual can be found at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecsfilesflerosionse dimentmanual.pdf install all sediment control devices in a timely manner to ensure the control of sediment and the protection of lakes streams gulf or ocean waters or any wetlands associated therewith and to any adjacent property outside the rightofway as required .
complete the installation of sediment control devices prior to the commencement of any earthwork .
after installation of sediment control devices repair portions of any devices damaged at no expense to the department .
the engineer may authorize temporary erosion and sediment control features when finished soil layer is specified in the contract and the limited availability of that material from the grading operations will prevent scheduled progress of the work or damage the permanent erosion control features .
num scheduling of successive operations schedule operations such that the area of unprotected erodible earth exposed at any one time is not larger than the minimum area necessary for efficient construction operations and the duration of exposure of uncompleted construction to the elements is as short as practicable .
schedule and perform clearing and grubbing so that grading operations can follow immediately thereafter .
schedule and perform grading operations so that permanent erosion control features can follow immediately thereafter if conditions on the project permit .
num details for temporary erosion and sediment control features num general use temporary erosion sediment and water pollution control features found in the esc manual .
these features consist of but are not limited to temporary turf rolled erosion control products sediment containment systems runoff control structures sediment barriers inlet protection systems silt fences turbidity barriers and chemical treatment .
for design details for some of these items refer to the standard plans and esc manual .
num temporary turf the engineer may designate certain areas of turf or sod constructed in accordance with section num as temporary erosion control features .
for areas not defined as sod constructing temporary turf by seeding only is not an option for temporary erosion control under this section .
the engineer may waive the turf establishment requirements of section num for areas with temporary turf that will not be a part of the permanent construction .
num runoff control structures construct runoff control structures in accordance with the details shown in the plans the esc manual or as may be approved as suitable to adequately perform the intended function .
num sediment containment systems construct sediment containment systems in accordance with the details shown in the plans the esc manual or as may be approved as suitable to adequately perform the intended function .
clean out sediment containment systems as necessary in accordance with the plans or as directed .
num sediment barriers provide and install sediment barriers according to details shown in the plans as directed by the engineer or as shown in the esc manual to protect against downstream accumulation of sediment .
sediment barriers include but are not limited to synthetic bales silt fence fiber logs and geosynthetic barriers .
reusable barriers that num return to table of contents have had sediment deposits removed may be reinstalled on the project as approved by the engineer .
num silt fence num general furnish install maintain and remove silt fences in accordance with the manufacturers directions these specifications the details as shown in the plans the standard plans and the esc manual .
num materials and installation use a geotextile fabric made from woven or nonwoven fabric meeting the physical requirements of section num according to those applications for erosion control .
choose the type and size of posts wire mesh reinforcement if required and method of installation .
do not use products which have a separate layer of plastic mesh or netting .
provide a durable and effective silt fence that controls sediment comparable to the standard plans and the esc manual .
erect silt fence at upland locations across ditchlines and at temporary locations shown in the plans or approved by the engineer where continuous construction activities change the natural contour and drainage runoff .
do not attach silt fence to existing trees unless approved by the engineer .
num inspection and maintenance inspect all silt fences immediately after each rainfall and at least daily during prolonged rainfall .
immediately correct any deficiencies .
in addition make a daily review of the location of silt fences in areas where construction activities have changed the natural contour and drainage runoff to ensure that the silt fences are properly located for effectiveness .
where deficiencies exist install additional silt fences as directed by the engineer .
remove sediment deposits when the deposit reaches approximately num of the volume capacity of the silt fence or as directed by the engineer .
dress any sediment deposits remaining in place after the silt fence is no longer required to conform with the finished grade and prepare and seed them in accordance with section num .
num floating turbidity barriers and staked turbidity barriers install maintain and remove turbidity barriers to contain turbidity that may occur as the result of dredging filling or other construction activities which may cause turbidity to occur in the waters of the state .
the contractor may need to deploy turbidity barriers around isolated areas of concern such as seagrass beds coral communities etc .
both within as well as outside the rightof way limits .
the engineer will identify such areas .
place the barriers prior to the commencement of any work that could impact the area of concern .
install the barriers in accordance with the details shown in the plans or as approved by the engineer .
ensure that the type barrier used and the deployment and maintenance of the barrier will minimize dispersion of turbid waters from the construction site .
the engineer may approve alternate methods or materials .
operate turbidity barriers in such a manner to avoid or minimize the degradation of the water quality of the surrounding waters and minimize damage to areas where floating barriers installed .
num inlet protection system furnish and install inlet protection systems as shown in the plans the standard plans and the esc manual .
num rolled erosion control products recps num return to table of contents num general install recps in locations where temporary protection from erosion is needed .
two situations occur that require artificial coverings .
the two situations have differing material requirements which are described below .
num .
use recps composed of natural or synthetic fiber mats plastic sheeting or netting as protection against erosion when directed by the engineer during temporary pauses in construction caused by inclement weather or other circumstances .
remove the material when construction resumes .
num .
use recps as erosion control blankets at locations shown in the plans to facilitate plant growth while permanent grassing is being established .
for the purpose described use nontoxic biodegradable natural or synthetic woven fiber mats .
install erosion control blankets capable of sustaining a maximum design velocity of num ftsec as determined from tests performed by utah state university texas transportation institute or an independent testing laboratory approved by the department .
submit to the engineer certified test reports from the manufacturer showing that the erosion control blankets meet the requirements of this specification .
certification must be attested by a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturing company .
also furnish two num by num inch samples for product identification .
the manufacturers test records shall be made available to the department upon request .
leave the material in place as installed to biodegrade .
num chemical treatment provide chemical treatment in accordance with the esc manual .
chemical treatment may be used to clarify turbid or sediment laden water that does not yet meet state water quality standards or as an amendment to other erosion prevention and sediment control products to aid in their performance .
the contractor must provide all of the required toxicity testing information in accordance with the esc manual to the engineer for review and acceptance prior to using any chemical treatment on the project site .
num removal of temporary erosion control features in general remove or incorporate into the soil any temporary erosion control features existing at the time of construction of the permanent erosion control features in an area of the project in such a manner that no detrimental effect will result .
the engineer may direct that temporary features be left in place .
num maintenance of erosion and sediment control features .
num general provide routine maintenance of permanent and temporary erosion and sediment control features at no expense to the department until the project is complete and accepted .
if reconstruction of such erosion and sediment control features is necessary due to the contractors negligence or carelessness or in the case of temporary erosion and sediment control features failure by the contractor to install permanent erosion control features as scheduled the contractor shall replace such erosion control features at no expense to the department .
if reconstruction of permanent or temporary erosion and sediment control features is necessary due to factors beyond the control of the contractor the department will pay for replacement under the appropriate contract pay item or items .
inspect all erosion and sediment control features at least once every seven calendar days and within num hours of the end of a storm of num inches or greater .
maintain all erosion control features as required in the stormwater pollution prevention plan contractors erosion control plan and as specified in the state of florida department of environmental num return to table of contents protection generic permit for stormwater discharge from large and small construction activities .
num protection during suspension of contract time .
if it is necessary to suspend the construction operations for any appreciable length of time shape the top of the earthwork in such a manner to permit runoff of rainwater and construct earth berms along the top edges of embankments to intercept runoff water .
provide temporary slope drains to carry runoff from cuts and embankments that are in the vicinity of rivers streams canals lakes and impoundments .
locate slope drains at intervals of approximately num feet and stabilize them by paving or by covering with waterproof materials .
should such preventive measures fail immediately take such other action as necessary to effectively prevent erosion and siltation .
the engineer may direct the contractor to perform during such suspensions of operations any other erosion and sediment control work deemed necessary .
num method of measurement .
when separate items for temporary erosion control features are included in the contract the quantities to be paid for will be num. the area in square yards of rolled erosion control products num. the length in feet of runoff control structures measured along the surface of the work constructed num. the number of sediment containment systems constructed and accepted num. the number of sediment containment system cleanouts accomplished and accepted num. the length in feet of sediment barriers num. the length in feet of floating turbidity barrier num. the length in feet of staked turbidity barrier num. the number of inlet protection systems num. the area in square yards of chemical treatment .
num. the number of floc logs or drums of product for chemical treatment .
upon acceptance by the engineer the quantity of floating turbidity barriers sediment barriers staked turbidity barriers and inlet protection devices will be paid for regardless of whether materials are new used or relocated from a previous installation on the project .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including construction and routine maintenance of temporary erosion control features .
any additional costs resulting from compliance with the requirements of this section other than construction routine maintenance and removal of temporary erosion control features will be included in the contract unit prices for the item or items to which such costs are related .
the work of performance turf designated as a temporary erosion control feature in accordance with num will be paid for under the appropriate pay items specified in the contract documents .
separate payment will not be made for the cost of constructing temporary earth berms along the edges of the roadways to prevent erosion during grading and subsequent operations .
the contractor shall include these costs in the contract prices for grading items .
num return to table of contents additional temporary erosion control features constructed as directed by the engineer will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
in case of repeated failure on the part of the contractor to control erosion pollution or siltation the engineer reserves the right to employ outside assistance or to use the departments own forces to provide the necessary corrective measures .
any such costs incurred including engineering costs will be charged to the contractor and appropriate deductions made from the monthly progress estimate .
payment will be made under item no .
num num artificial coverings rolled erosion control products per square yard .
item no .
num num slope drains temporary runoff control structures per foot .
item no .
num num sediment basins containment systems each .
item no .
num num sediment basin containment system cleanouts each .
item no .
num num sediment barriers per foot item no .
num num floating turbidity barrier per foot .
item no .
num num staked turbidity barrier per foot .
item no .
num num inlet protection system each .
item no .
num num chemical treatment per square yard .
item no .
num num chemical treatment floc logs drums of product each .
num return to table of contents section num contractor quality control general requirements num general .
num quality control documentation .
num submission of materials certification and reporting test results submit certifications prior to placement of materials .
report test results at completion of the test and meet the requirements of the applicable specifications .
num databases obtain access to the departments databases prior to testing and material placement .
database access information is available through the departments website .
enter all required and specified documentation and test results in the department databases .
num worksheets make available to the department when requested worksheets used for collecting test information .
ensure the worksheets at a minimum contain the following num .
project identification number num .
time and date num .
laboratory identification and name num .
training identification numbers tin and initials num .
record details as specified within the test method .
num inspections to assure compliance with acceptance criteria .
num general the department is not obligated to make an inspection of materials at the source of supply manufacture or fabrication .
provide the engineer with unrestricted entry at all times to such parts of the facilities that concern the manufacture fabrication or production of the ordered materials .
bear all costs incurred in determining whether the material meets the requirements of these specifications .
num quality control qc inspection provide all necessary inspection to assure effective qc of the operations related to materials acceptance .
this includes but is not limited to sampling and testing production storage delivery construction and placement .
ensure that the equipment used in the production and testing of the materials provides accurate and precise measurements in accordance with the applicable specifications .
maintain a record of all inspections including but not limited to date of inspection results of inspection and any subsequent corrective actions taken .
make available to the department the inspection records when requested .
num notification of placing order order materials sufficiently in advance of their incorporation in the work to allow time for sampling testing and inspection .
notify the engineer prior to placing orders for materials .
submit to the engineer a fabrication schedule for all items requiring commercial inspection at least num days before beginning fabrication .
these items include steel bridge components moveable bridge components pedestrian bridges castings forgings structures erected either partially or completely over the travelled roadway or mounted on bridges as overhead traffic signs some of these may be further classified as cantilevered overhead trusses or monotubes or any other item identified as an item requiring commercial inspection in the contract documents .
num return to table of contents num additional requirements for lump sum projects .
prepare and submit to the engineer a projectspecific list of material items and quantities to be used on the project as a job guide schedule in the same format as the current sampling testing and reporting guide num calendar days prior to commencement of construction .
submit uptodate quantities for the items on the job guide schedule to the engineer with each monthly progress estimate .
the department may not authorize payment of any progress estimate not accompanied by updated job guide schedule quantities .
maintain the job guide schedule throughout the project including the quantity placed since the previous submittal and total to date quantity and any additional materials placed .
do not commence work activities that require testing until the job guide schedule has been reviewed and accepted by the engineer .
at final acceptance submit a final job guide schedule that includes all materials used on the project in the same format as the monthly reports .
num quality control program .
certain operations require personnel with specific qualifications .
certain materials require production under an approved quality control qc plan to ensure that these materials meet the requirements of the contract documents .
applicable materials include hot mix asphalt portland cement concrete structural earthwork cementitious materials timber steel and miscellaneous metals galvanized metal products prestressed andor precast concrete products drainage products and fiber reinforced polymer products .
for all applicable materials included in the contract submit a qc plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section to the engineer .
do not incorporate any of these materials into the project prior to the engineers approval of the qc plan .
steel and miscellaneous metal products including aluminum are defined as the metal components of bridges including pedestrian and moveable bridges overhead and cantilevered sign supports ladders and platforms bearings end wall grates roadway gratings drainage items expansion joints roadway decking shear connectors handrails galvanized products fencing guardrail light poles high mast light poles standard mast arm assemblies and monotube assemblies stay inplace forms casing pipe strain poles fasteners connectors and other hardware .
num producer quality control program .
num general when accreditation or certification is required make supporting documents from the two previous inspections performed by the accrediting or certifying agency available to the department upon request .
obtain department approval prior to beginning production .
meet and maintain the approved producer quality control program requirements at all times .
production of these products without the departments prior acceptance of the producer quality control program may result in rejection of the products .
continued approval will be subject to satisfactory results from department evaluations including the independent assurance program .
in cases of non compliance with the accepted producer quality control program identify all affected material and do not incorporate or supply to the department projects .
the following conditions may result in suspension of a producer quality control program num .
failure to timely supply information required .
num .
repeated failure of material to meet standard specification requirements .
num return to table of contents num .
failure to take immediate corrective action relative to deficiencies in the performance of the producer quality control program .
num .
certifying materials that are not produced under an accepted producer quality control program for use on department projects .
num .
failure to correct any deficiencies related to any requirement of the producer quality control program having received notice from the department within the amount of time defined in the notice .
num producer quality control program requirements num hot mix asphalt portland cement concrete structural earthwork cementitious materials timber steel and miscellaneous metals galvanized metal products prestressed andor precast concrete products drainage products and fiber reinforced polymer products quality control program have an accepted producer quality control program developed in accordance with this section during the production of materials to be used on department projects .
num prestressed concrete quality control program have a current certification from a department approved precast prestressed concrete plant certification agency and a department accepted producer quality control plan meeting the requirements of this section .
the list of department approved certification agencies is available on the website of the state materials office smo .
num steel and miscellaneous metals quality control program have an accepted producer quality control plan developed in accordance with this section and a current american institute for steel construction aisc certification provided that aisc certification program is available for the category of the fabrication products .
num submittal depending on the type of products producers shall submit their proposed producer quality control programs to the smo or to the district materials office as described below num state materials office smo producers of cementitious materials steel and miscellaneous metals galvanized metal products aggregates and fiber reinforced polymer products must submit their proposed producer quality control program to the smo for review and acceptance .
num district materials office producers of hot mix asphalt portland cement concrete structural earthwork timber prestressed andor precast concrete products and drainage products must submit their proposed producer quality control program to the local district materials office for acceptance .
producers located outside the state must contact the smo for address information of the district materials office responsible for the review of the proposed quality control program .
num compliance with the materials manual .
producers of flexible pipe shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of precast concrete pipe shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of precast concrete drainage structures shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url num return to table of contents httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of precastprestressed concrete products shall meet the requirements of sections num and num of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following urls httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of precast prestressed concrete products using self consolidating concrete shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of incidental precastprestressed concrete products shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of portland cement concrete shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of structural steel and miscellaneous metal components shall meet the requirements of sections num num num num num and num of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following urls httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
producers of fiber reinforced polymer composites shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments materials manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
num producer quality control qc plan review and acceptance the department will respond to the producer within num calendar days of receipt of the proposed producer quality control program .
the department may perform evaluation activities to verify compliance with submitted documents prior to acceptance .
if the producer quality control program must be revised for any reason including noncompliance submit the revision to the department .
the department will respond to the producer within seven calendar days of receipt of the revised producer quality control program .
num producers quality control qc plan submit detailed policies methods and procedures to ensure the specified quality of all applicable materials and related production operations .
include other items in addition to these guidelines as necessary .
num personnel num qualifications submit the training identification numbers tins or any other information which will be traceable to the certification agencys training location and dates for all technicians performing sampling testing and inspection for both field num return to table of contents and laboratory tests .
submit the names of the construction training and qualification program ctqp certifications and other pertinent certifications held and the expiration dates for each certification for each technician .
include employed and subcontracted technicians .
num level of responsibility identify the primary contact for the department .
identify roles and responsibilities of various personnel involved in the qc process .
num raw materials num source identify the sources of raw materials .
submit locations and plant or mine numbers when applicable .
num certification submit methods of verifying compliance of certification with the specifications .
num disposition of failing materials describe the system for controlling nonconforming materials including procedures for identification isolation and disposition .
num storage facilities for raw materials describe measures and methods including bedding details for preventing segregation contamination and degradation .
describe methods of identifying individual materials .
where applicable submit a site plan showing the locations of various materials .
num production equipment describe calibration frequencies maintenance schedule and procedures for production equipment .
num plant requirements num plant identification for those facilities producing materials listed in num submit the mailing address physical address including county and xy latitude and longitude coordinates of the plant telephone and fax numbers email address primary contact at the plant responsible person in charge facility number provided by the department owner information including parent company vendor number designed production capacity and other information as required .
num process control system describe the methods and measures established to ensure contract compliance for the produced materials that are supplemental to the qc sampling and testing program described in the contract documents .
these methods and measures will include but are not limited to inspection schedule additional sampling and testing maintenance schedule etc .
num loading and shipping control describe the methods and measures for preventing segregation contamination and degradation during loading and shipping operations .
describe the methods established for materials to be in compliance with the specifications at the point of use .
num types of products generated describe the products the plant is approved to produce under department guidelines .
num other requirements num submittal of certification submit certifications issued by the plantcontractor for the applicable products approved by the department .
num statement of compliance include a statement of compliance with all quality requirements set forth by the department in the contract documents and department manuals .
num documentation storage identify location of document storage to enable department review .
include qc charts qualification and accreditation records inspection reports and other pertinent supporting documents .
num return to table of contents num final manufactured product plant operations describe inspection schedule and methods for identifying defects and noncompliance with the specifications .
describe corrective actions and methods to resolve them .
num storage when storage of the produced materials is required and it is not defined in the contract documents describe the methods and duration for storage .
include measures and methods for preventing segregation contamination and degradation during storage .
num disposition of failing materials when not described in the specifications describe the methods and measures for identifying and controlling the failing materials .
include preventive and corrective measures .
describe disposition of failing materials .
num testing laboratories identify the laboratories performing testing .
ensure that the testing laboratories comply with the laboratory qualification program requirements of this section or other applicable requirements .
num department inspection access include a statement allowing the department access including the right to photograph video record and digitally record both the production process and the products produced for the department while department representatives are on or at the production facility .
the department representatives shall not be required to obtain further written or oral consent to take said photographs video recordings or digital recordings of a production process and products while conducting inspections .
num contractor quality control qc plan .
num general submit the contractor qc plan in the departments database seven days prior to beginning work on any qc material as defined in this section .
the qc plan may be submitted as a whole or in portions for the work related to the contract .
update the qc plan at least five working days prior to the implementation of any changes .
if at any time the work is not in compliance with the contract documents the engineer may suspend operations in accordance with num .
num personnel qualification submit the training identification numbers for all technicians performing sampling testing and inspection for field tests .
include employed and subcontracted technicians .
num production facilities identify the producers of materials listed in num for the project .
include the departments facility id number as part of the identification .
all producers must have accepted producers quality control program and be listed on the departments production facility listing .
num structural concrete mix designs identify the approved structural concrete mix designs for each structural concrete production facility for review and approval by the engineer .
do not begin work on the material without the engineers approval .
the engineer will review and respond within five calendar days of submittal .
num testing laboratories identify the laboratories performing testing .
ensure that the testing laboratories comply with the laboratory qualification program requirements of this section .
num contractor certification of compliance .
provide the engineer with a notarized monthly certification of compliance with the contract documents to accompany each progress estimate on a form provided by the engineer .
the department may not authorize payment of any progress estimate not accompanied by an executed certification document .
num return to table of contents final payment in accordance with num will not be made until a final notarized certification summarizing all qc exceptions has been submitted .
num lab qualification program .
testing laboratories participating in the departments acceptance program must have current department qualification when testing materials that are used on department projects .
in addition they must have one of the following num .
current aashto aap accreditation .
num .
inspected on a regular basis per astm d num for earthwork astm d num for asphalt and astm c num for concrete for test methods used in the acceptance program with all deficiencies corrected and under the supervision of a specialty engineer .
num .
current construction materials engineering council cmec program accreditation or other independent inspection program accreditation acceptable to the engineer and equivalent to num or num above .
after meeting the criteria described above submit a laboratory qualification application to the department .
the application is available from the departments website .
obtain the departments qualification prior to beginning testing .
the department may inspect the laboratory for compliance with the accreditation requirements prior to issuing qualification .
meet and maintain the qualification requirements at all times .
testing without departments qualification may result in a rejection of the test results .
continued qualifications are subject to satisfactory results from department evaluations including independent assurance evaluations .
in case of suspension or disqualification prior to resumption of testing resolve the issues to the departments satisfaction and obtain reinstatement of qualification .
the following conditions may result in suspension of a laboratorys qualified status num .
failure to timely supply required information .
num .
loss of accredited status .
num .
failure to correct deficiencies in a timely manner .
num .
unsatisfactory performance .
num .
changing the laboratorys physical location without notification to the accrediting agency and the engineer .
num .
delays in reporting the test data in the departments database .
num .
incomplete or inaccurate reporting .
num .
using unqualified technicians performing testing .
should any qualified laboratory falsify records the laboratory qualification will be subject to revocation by the engineer .
falsification of projectrelated documentation will be subject to further investigation and penalty under state and federal laws .
it is prohibited for any contract laboratory or staff to perform contractor qc testing and any other acceptance program testing on the same contract .
num personnel qualifications .
num general provide qualified personnel for sampling testing and inspection of materials and construction activities .
ensure that qualifications are maintained during the course of sampling testing and inspection .
construction operations that require a qualified technician must not begin until the department verifies that the technician is on the ctqp list of qualified technicians .
the ctqp lists are subject to satisfactory results from periodic independent assurance evaluations .
num return to table of contents num quality control qc manager designate a qc manager who has full authority to act as the contractors agent to institute any and all actions necessary to administer implement monitor and as necessary adjust quality control processes to ensure compliance with the contract documents .
the qc manager must speak and understand english .
the qc manager must be onsite at the project on a daily basis or always available upon four hours notice .
ensure that the qc manager is qualified as such through the construction training and qualification program .
the qc manager and the superintendent must not be the same individual .
under the direction of the qc manager and using departments standard forms provided by the engineer summarize the daily qc activities including testing and material sampling .
since erasures are strictly prohibited on all reports and forms use blue or colored ink .
do not use black ink .
if manual corrections to original data are necessary strike through correct and date the entry including the initials of the person making the correction .
make copies of the completed forms available for the department to review daily unless otherwise required in the specifications .
ensure that the qc test data is entered into the departments database on a daily basis .
maintain all qc related reports and documentation for a period of three years from final acceptance of the project .
make copies available for review by the department upon request .
num temporary traffic control maintenance of traffic personnel worksite traffic supervisors flaggers and other personnel responsible for work zone related transportation management and traffic control must obtain training and certification in accordance with the departments temporary traffic control maintenance of traffic training handbook located at the following url address httpwww.fdot.govroadwayttcdefault.shtm .
num earthwork quality control qc personnel num earthwork level i ensure the technician who samples soil and earthwork materials from the roadway project takes earthwork moisture and density readings and records those data in the density log book holds a ctqp earthwork construction inspection level i qualification .
num earthwork level ii ensure the technician responsible for determining the disposition of soil and earthwork materials on the roadway and for interpreting and meeting contract document requirements holds a ctqp earthwork construction inspection level ii qualification .
num asphalt quality control qc personnel num plant technicians for asphalt plant operations provide a qc technician qualified as a ctqp asphalt plant level ii technician available at the asphalt plant at all times when producing mix for the department .
perform all asphalt plant related testing with a ctqp asphalt plant level i technician .
as an exception measurements of temperature may be performed by someone under the supervision of a ctqp plant level ii technician .
num paving technicians for paving operations with the exception of miscellaneous or temporary asphalt keep a qualified ctqp asphalt paving level ii technician on the roadway at all times when placing asphalt mix for the department and perform all testing with a ctqp asphalt paving level i technician .
as an exception measurements of crossslope temperature and yield spread rate can be performed by someone under the supervision of a ctqp paving level ii technician at the roadway .
num mix designer ensure all mix designs are developed by individuals who are ctqp qualified as an asphalt hot mix designer .
num return to table of contents num documentation document all qc procedures inspection and all test results and make them available for review by the engineer throughout the life of the contract .
identify in the asphalt producers qc plan the qc managers and asphalt plant level ii technicians responsible for the decision to resume production after a quality control failure .
num concrete qc personnel num concrete field technician level i ensure technicians performing plastic property testing on concrete for materials acceptance are qualified ctqp concrete field technicians level i .
plastic property testing will include but not be limited to slump temperature air content watertocementitious materials ratio calculation and making and curing concrete cylinders .
duties will include initial sampling and testing to confirm specification compliance prior to beginning concrete placements ensuring timely placement of initial cure and providing for the transport of compressive strength samples to the designated laboratories .
num concrete field inspector level ii ensure field inspectors responsible for the quality of concrete being placed on the following structure types are qualified ctqp concrete field inspectors level ii num .
moveable bridges num .
bridges over a water opening of num feet or more num .
bridges with a span of num feet or more num .
cable supported or cable stayed bridges num .
posttensioned bridges num .
steel girder or steel truss bridges num .
multilevel roadways with the exception of concrete traffic railing placements a level ii inspector must be present on the jobsite during all concrete placements .
prior to the placement of concrete the inspector will inspect the element to be cast to ensure compliance with contract documents .
a level ii inspectors duties may include ensuring that concrete testing inspection and curing in the field are performed in accordance with the contract documents .
the qc inspector will inform the verification inspector of anticipated concrete placements and lot sizes .
num concrete laboratory technician level i ensure technicians testing cylinders and recording concrete strength for material acceptance are qualified ctqp concrete laboratory technicians level i .
duties include final curing compressive strength testing and the recordingreporting of all test data .
num supervisory personnel posttensioned and movable bridge structures num general provide supervisory personnel meeting the qualification requirements only for the posttensioned and movable bridge types detailed in this article .
submit qualifications to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
do not begin construction until the qualifications of supervisory personnel have been approved by the engineer .
num proof of license or certification submit a copy of the professional engineer license current and in force issued by the state in which registration is held .
the license must be for the field of engineering that the construction work involves such as civil electrical or mechanical .
under certain circumstances florida registration may be required .
submit a copy of the license issued by the state of florida for tradesmen that require a license indicating that the license is in force and is current .
submit a copy of the num return to table of contents certification issued by the international society of automation for each certified control systems technician .
num experience record submit the following information for supervisory personnel to substantiate their experience record .
the supervisor project engineer superintendentmanager or foreman seeking approval must provide a notarized certification statement attesting to the completeness and accuracy of the information submitted .
submit the following experience information for each individual seeking approval as a supervisor project owners name and telephone number of an owners representative project identification number state city county highway number and feature intersected .
detailed descriptions of each bridge construction experience and the level of supervisory authority during that experience .
report the duration in weeks as well as begin and end dates for each experience period .
the name address and telephone number of an individual that can verify that the experience being reported is accurate .
this individual should have been an immediate supervisor unless the supervisor can not be contacted in which case another individual with direct knowledge of the experience is acceptable .
num concrete posttensioned segmental box girder construction ensure the individuals filling the following positions meet the minimum requirements as follows num project engineernew construction ensure the project engineer is a registered professional engineer with five years of bridge construction experience .
ensure a minimum of three years of experience is in segmental box girder construction engineering and includes a minimum of one year in segmental casting yard operations and related surveying one year in segment erection and related surveying including posttensioning and grouting of longitudinal tendons and a minimum of one year as the project engineer in responsible charge of segmental box girder construction engineering .
ensure this individual is present at the site of construction at all times while segmental box girder construction or segment erection is in progress .
num project engineerrepair and rehabilitation ensure the project engineer is a registered professional engineer with five years of bridge construction experience .
ensure a minimum of three years of experience is in segmental box girder construction engineering and includes one year of posttensioning and grouting of longitudinal tendons and a minimum of one year as the project engineer in responsible charge of segmental box girder rehabilitation engineering or segmental box girder new construction engineering .
num project superintendentmanagernew construction ensure the project superintendentmanager has a minimum of ten years of bridge construction experience or is a registered professional engineer with five years of bridge construction experience .
ensure that a minimum of three years of experience is in segmental box girder construction operations and includes a minimum of one year in the casting yard operations and related surveying one year in segment erection and related surveying including posttensioning and grouting of longitudinal tendons and a minimum of one year as the project superintendentmanager in responsible charge of segmental box girder construction operations .
ensure this individual is present at the site of construction at all times while segmental box girder construction or segment erection is in progress .
num project superintendentmanagerrepair and rehabilitation ensure the project superintendentmanager has a minimum of five years of bridge construction experience or is a registered professional engineer with three years of bridge num return to table of contents construction experience .
ensure that a minimum of two years of experience is in segmental box girder construction operations and includes a minimum of one year experience performing post tensioning and grouting of longitudinal tendons and a minimum of one year as the project superintendentmanager in responsible charge of segmental box girder rehabilitation operations or segmental box girder new construction operations .
num foremannew construction ensure that the foreman has a minimum of five years of bridge construction experience with two years of experience in segmental box girder operations and a minimum of one year as the foreman in responsible charge of segmental box girder new construction operations .
ensure this individual is present at the site of construction at all times while segmental box girder construction or segment erection is in progress .
num foremanrepair and rehabilitation ensure the foremen has a minimum of five years of bridge construction experience with two years of experience in segmental box girder operations and a minimum of one year as the foreman in responsible charge of segmental box girder rehabilitation operations or segmental box girder new construction operations .
num geometry control engineermanager ensure that the geometry control engineermanager for construction of castinplace box segments is a registered professional engineer with one year of experience a nonregistered engineer with three years of experience or a registered professional land surveyor with three years of experience in geometry control for casting and erection of castinplace box segments .
credit for experience in castinplace box girder geometry control will be given for experience in precast box girder geometry control but not vice versa .
ensure that the geometry control engineermanager for precast box segments is a registered professional engineer with one year of experience or nonregistered with three years of experience in casting yard geometry control of concrete box segments .
the geometry control engineermanager must be responsible for and experienced at implementing the method for establishing and maintaining geometry control for segment casting yard operations and segment erection operations and must be experienced with the use of computer programs for monitoring and adjusting theoretical segment casting curves and geometry .
this individual must be experienced at establishing procedures for assuring accurate segment form setup posttensioning duct and rebar alignment and effective concrete placement and curing operations as well as for verifying that casting and erection field survey data has been properly gathered and recorded .
ensure this individual is present at the site of construction at all times while castinplace segmental box girder construction is in progress or until casting yard operations and segment erection is complete .
num surveyor ensure that the surveyor in charge of geometry control surveying for box segment casting andor box segment erection has a minimum of one year of bridge construction surveying experience .
ensure this individual is present at the site of construction at all times while segmental box girder construction or segment erection is in progress .
num movable bridge construction ensure the individual filling the following positions meet the minimum requirements as follows num electrical journeyman ensure the electrical journeyman holds an active journeyman electricians license and has at least five years experience in industrial electrical work or is a certified control systems technician .
a certified control num return to table of contents systems technician will not be permitted to perform electrical power work including but not limited to conduit and wireway installation or power conductor connection .
ensure the electrical journeyman has successfully completed the installation of one similar movable bridge electrical system during the last three years .
num control systems engineer and mechanical systems engineer ensure the control systems engineer and mechanical systems engineer are both registered professional engineers with a minimum of num years supervisory experience each in movable bridge construction .
ensure the engineers have working knowledge of the movable bridge leaf motion control techniques mechanical equipment and arrangements specified for this project .
ensure that each engineer has been in responsible control of the design and implementation of at least three movable bridge electrical control and machinery systems within the past num years of which at least one of the three bridges was within the last three years .
ensure that a minimum of one of the three bridge designs incorporated the same type of leaf motion control and machinery systems specified for this project .
num concrete posttensioned other than segmental box girder construction ensure the individual filling the following positions meet the minimum requirements as follows num project engineer ensure the project engineer is a registered professional engineer with five years of bridge construction experience .
ensure that a minimum of three years of experience is in concrete posttensioned construction .
ensure that the three years of experience includes experience in girder erection safe use of cranes stabilization of girders design of false work for temporary girder support posttensioning and grouting operations and a minimum of one year as the project engineer in responsible charge of post tensioning related engineering responsibilities .
num project superintendentmanager ensure the project superintendentmanager has a minimum of ten years of bridge construction experience or is a registered professional engineer with five years of bridge construction experience and has a minimum of three years of supervisory experience in girder erection safe use of cranes stabilization of girders design of falsework for temporary girder support posttensioning grouting operations and a minimum of one year as the project superintendentmanager in responsible charge of posttensioning related operations .
num foreman ensure the foremen has a minimum of five years of bridge construction experience with two years of experience in posttensioning related operations and a minimum of one year as the foreman in responsible charge of posttensioning related operations .
num posttensioning pt and filler injection personnel qualifications perform all stressing and filler injection operations in the presence of the engineer and with personnel meeting the qualifications of this article .
coordinate and schedule all pt and filler injection activities to facilitate inspection by the engineer .
num posttensioning perform all pt field operations under the direct supervision of a level ii ctqp qualified pt technician who must be present at the site of the posttensioning work during the entire duration of the operation .
for the superstructures of bridges having concrete posttensioned box or i girder construction provide at least two ctqp qualified pt technicians level i or ii on the work crew .
the supervisor of the work crew who must be a level ii ctqp qualified pt technician may also be a work crew member in which case the supervisor shall count as one of the two ctqp qualified work crew members .
for pt num return to table of contents operations other than the superstructures of posttensioned box or i girder construction perform all pt operations under the direct supervision of a level ii ctqp qualified pt technician who must be present at the site of the pt work during the entire duration of the operation .
work crew members are not required to be ctqp qualified .
num grouting perform all grouting field operations under the direct supervision of a level ii ctqp qualified grouting technician who must be present at the site of the grouting work during the entire duration of the operation .
for the superstructures of bridges having concrete posttensioned box or i girder construction provide at least two ctqp qualified grouting technicians level i or ii on the work crew .
the supervisor of the work crew who must be a level ii ctqp qualified grouting technician may also be a work crew member in which case the supervisor shall count as one of two ctqp qualified work crew members .
for grouting operations other than the superstructures of posttensioned box or i girder construction perform all grouting operations under the direct supervision of a level ii ctqp qualified grouting technician who must be present at the site of the grouting work during the entire duration of the operation .
work crew members are not required to be ctqp qualified .
perform all vacuum grouting operations under the direct supervision of a crew foreman who has been trained and has experience in the use of vacuum grouting equipment and procedures .
submit the crew foremans training and experience records to the engineer for approval prior to performing any vacuum grouting operation .
num flexible filler injection perform all filler injection operations under the direct supervision of a filler injection foreman who has american segmental bridge institute asbi certification in the flexible filler process .
provide at least two ctqp qualified grouting technicians with asbi certification in the flexible filler process one of whom must be a level ii ctqp qualified grouting technician .
both technicians must be present at the site of the flexible filler injection work during the entire duration of the operation .
provide a filler injection quality control qc inspector who has asbi certification in the flexible filler process .
the filler injection qc inspector must be present at the site of the flexible filler injection work during the entire duration of the operation .
verifiable experience performing injection of similar flexible filler on at least two projects is acceptable in lieu of asbi certification in the flexible filler process .
perform all flexible filler repair operations under the direct supervision of a crew foreman who has been trained and has verifiable experience in the use of vacuum flexible filler repair equipment and procedures .
submit the crew foremans training and experience records to the engineer prior to performing any flexible filler operation .
num failure to comply with bridge qualification requirements make an immediate effort to reestablish compliance .
if an immediate effort is not put forth as determined by the engineer payment for the bridge construction operations requiring supervisors to be qualified under this specification will be withheld up to num days .
cease all bridge construction and related activities casting yard etc .
if compliance is not met within num days regardless of how much effort is put forth .
resume bridge construction operations only after written approval from the engineer stating that compliance is reestablished .
num prestressed concrete plant quality control personnel obtain personnel certifications from department accredited training providers .
the list of department approved courses and their accredited providers is available on the smo website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govmaterialsadministrationresourcestrainingstructuralconcrete prestressed.shtm .
num return to table of contents ensure each prestressed concrete plant has an onsite production manager an onsite plant quality control manager a plant engineer and adequate onsite qc inspectorstechnicians to provide complete qc inspections and testing .
ensure the plant manager for qc has at least five years of related experience and a current precastprestressed concrete institute pci qc personnel certification level iii and a current certificate of completion of section num specification examination .
ensure that the qc inspectortechnician has a current certificate of completion of section num specification examination .
ensure that the batch plant operators of the ready mixed concrete batch plants meet the requirements of section num of the materials manual .
ensure that the batch plant operators of the onsite centrally mixed concrete plants meet the requirements of section num .
num additional requirements for quality control personnel of prestressed manufacturing facilities num testing personnel ensure personnel performing tests have the following certifications personnel performing plastic property tests must have aci concrete field testing techniciangrade i certification .
personnel performing laboratory compressive strength testing must have aci concrete laboratory testing technician level i certification or aci concrete strength testing technician certification .
num batch plant operator ensure the concrete batch plant operator is qualified as a ctqp concrete batch plant operator .
as an alternative to ctqp qualification the department will accept the precast concrete structures association pcsa batch plant operator certification .
num signal installation inspector provide an inspector trained and certified by the international municipal signal association imsa as a traffic signal inspector to perform all signal installation inspections .
use only department approved signal inspection report forms during the signal inspection activities .
ensure all equipment materials and hardware is in compliance with department specifications and verify that all equipment requiring certification is listed on the departments approved product list apl .
submit the completed signal inspection report forms certified by the imsa traffic signal inspector to the engineer .
the departments approved inspection report forms are available at the following url httpwww.fdot.govtraffic .
num pipe and precast concrete products manufacturing facilities quality control personnel num general obtain personnel certifications from department accredited training providers .
the list of department approved courses and their accredited providers is available on the smo website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govmaterialsadministrationresourcestrainingstructuralindex.shtm .
num precast concrete drainage structures precast concrete box culvert precast concrete pipe and incidental precast concrete manufacturing facilities quality control personnel num level i quality control inspectors ensure that the level i inspectors have the following certifications num precast concrete drainage technician level i num return to table of contents pci quality control technician level i certification .
as an alternative a current precast concrete quality control technician level i certification in the respective work area will be accepted .
ctqp concrete field technician level i .
num incidental precast concrete technician level i pci quality control technician level i certification .
as an alternative a current precast concrete quality control technician level i certification in the respective work area will be accepted .
ctqp concrete field technician level i .
num precast concrete pipe technician level i precast concrete quality control technician level i certification .
ctqp concrete field technician level i .
num level ii quality control inspectors ensure that level ii inspectors have the following certifications num precast concrete drainage technician level ii precast concrete drainage technician level i in accordance with num .
pci quality control technician level ii certification .
as an alternative a current precast concrete quality control technician level ii certification in the respective work area will be accepted .
num incidental precast concrete technician level ii incidental precast concrete technician level i in accordance with num .
pci quality control technician level ii certification .
as an alternative a current precast concrete quality control technician level ii in the respective work area will be accepted .
level ii technicians who will perform quality control of incidental prestressed products must have a current certificate of completion of section num specification examination .
num precast concrete pipe technician level ii precast concrete pipe technician level i in accordance with num .
precast concrete pipe technician certification level ii .
num plant quality control manager ensure that the qc manager has a minimum of two years construction related experience in the specific work area and has the following certifications num precast concrete drainage facilities precast concrete drainage technician level ii in accordance with num .
num incidental precast concrete facilities incidental precast concrete technician level ii in accordance with num .
section num specification certification if the plant produces incidental prestressed products .
num precast concrete pipe facilities num return to table of contents precast concrete pipe technician level ii in accordance with num .
num additional requirements for quality control personnel of precast concrete drainage precast concrete box culvert and incidental precast concrete manufacturing facilities num testing personnel ensure personnel performing tests have the following certifications personnel performing plastic property tests must have aci concrete field testing techniciangrade i certification .
personnel performing laboratory compressive strength testing must have aci concrete laboratory testing technician level num certification or aci concrete strength testing technician certification .
num batch plant operator ensure the concrete batch plant operator is qualified as a ctqp concrete batch plant operator .
as an alternative to ctqp qualification the department will accept the precast concrete structures association pcsa batch plant operator certification .
for dry cast concrete pipe and dry cast drainage structures as an alternative to ctqp qualification the department will accept the acpa quality school level ii certification .
num structural steel and miscellaneous metals fabrication facility quality control personnel ensure each fabrication facility has an onsite production manager an onsite facility manager for qc a plant engineer and on site qc inspectorstechnicians to provide complete qc inspections and testing .
ensure that the facility manager for qc and qc inspectorstechnicians meet the certification requirements set forth in the latest version of aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration s num steel bridge fabrication qcqa guide specification including the years of experience required in table num below .
the facility manager for qc must meet the requirements of table num for every structural steel member type produced by a plant with qc being managed by the facility manager for qc .
the facility manager for qc will report directly to the plant manager or plant engineer and must not be the plant production manager nor report to or be the subordinate of the plant production manager .
qc inspectorstechnicians must be the employees of and must report directly to the facility manager for qc .
table num experience requirements for qc inspectorstechnicians and facility manager for quality control structural steel member type minimum years of experience required qc inspectortechnician facility manager for qc rolled beam bridges num year num years welded plate girders i sections box sections etc .
num years num years complex structures such as trusses arches cable stayed bridges and moveable bridges num years num years fracture critical fc members num years num years num return to table of contents section num litter removal and mowing num description .
provide pickup removal and disposal of litter within the project limits from the outside edge of travel way to the right of way line .
include the median on divided highways from the inside edge of travel way to the inside edge of travel way .
litter includes but is not limited to bottles cans paper tires tire pieces lumber vehicle parts metal junk and brush debris .
exclude any inaccessible areas and area identified in the plans as new landscaping in accordance with the contract documents .
mow turf or vegetation within the project limits .
turf consists of grasses planted in accordance with section num .
vegetation consists of planted and natural grasses weeds and other natural vegetation that have been previously mowed .
exclude any areas identified in the plans as new landscaping in accordance with the contract documents .
num operation .
num frequency begin litter removal in conjunction with the beginning of the project and continue per the frequency shown in the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
begin mowing when directed by the engineer and continue per the frequency in the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
continue litter removal and mowing until final acceptance in accordance with num .
mow all areas to obtain a uniform height of num inches .
after final acceptance perform litter removal and mowing until new turf is established in accordance with num at no cost to the department .
maintain turf and vegetation height between num inches and num inches .
do not include seed stalk or wildflowers when measuring height .
perform litter removal prior to and in conjunction with mowing however the engineer may direct litter pickups in addition to those performed in conjunction with mowing .
do not mow new turf until a healthy root system is established .
in designated wildflower areas avoid cutting wildflowers when in bloom and when reseeding .
num general mow shoulders and medians concurrently so that not more than one mile will be left partially mowed at the conclusion of the working day .
mow turf and vegetation on slopes or around appurtenances concurrent with the mowing operation .
in areas saturated with standing water mow or cut to the surface of the water using hand labor or other specialized equipment when standard equipment will cause damage .
do not remove turf or other vegetation cuttings from the rightofway or rake or pick up the cuttings unless the cuttings are in the traveled ways bike lanes or sidewalk are obstructing drainage structures or are the result of cleaning the equipment .
num limitations maintain traffic in accordance with section num .
when mowing within four feet of a travel lane operate the equipment in the same direction of traffic unless the adjacent lane is closed to traffic due to construction operations .
perform all work during daylight hours .
num disposal of litter and debris during each litter removal cycle bag and remove all litter or piles at the end of each working day .
dispose of litter in accordance with applicable local and state laws .
do not store or stockpile litter within the project limits .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
for each litter removal cycle the quantity to be paid will be the area in acres from which litter has been picked up removed and disposed completed and accepted .
the quantity will be determined by calculation using the lengths and widths based on the station to station dimensions shown in the plans .
for each mowing cycle the quantity to be paid will be the area in acres of mowing completed and accepted .
the quantity will be determined by calculation using the lengths and widths based on the station to station dimensions shown in the plans .
num basis of payment .
for litter removal price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
for mowing price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
no separate payment will be made for litter removal and mowing after final acceptance .
payment will be made under item no .
num num litter removal per acre .
item no .
num num mowing per acre num return to table of contents section num monitor existing structures num description .
provide settlement vibration and groundwater monitoring in accordance with the requirements of this section .
the work required under this section does not modify the requirements or responsibilities for preservation of existing property from damage in accordance with num .
evaluate the need for design of and provide any necessary precautionary features to protect existing structures from damage .
employ construction methods that will not produce damaging vibrations soil movement soil loss or instability of existing structures .
num construction .
num inspection and settlement monitoring num miscellaneous structures when constructing foundations for miscellaneous structures such as sign signal lighting or intelligent transportation system structures inspect and document the condition of the existing structures shown in the plans and survey and monitor for settlement the existing structures shown in the plans .
num structures other than miscellaneous when excavating or constructing retaining walls and foundations for bridges buildings and structures other than miscellaneous structures inspect and document the condition of the following existing structures and survey and monitor for settlement the following existing structures num. as shown in the plans .
num. within a distance of five shaft or auger cast pile diameters or the estimated depth of drilled shaft or auger cast pile excavation whichever is greater measured from the center of these foundation elements .
num. within a distance of three times the depth of any other excavations .
num. within num feet of sheet pile installation and extraction operations .
num. within num feet of steel soldier pile installation and extraction operations .
num. for projects with pile driving operations inspect and document the condition of all structures within a distance in feet of pile driving operations equal to num times the square root of the impact hammer energy in footpounds .
survey and monitor for settlement all structures within a distance in feet of pile driving operations equal to num times the square root of the impact hammer energy in footpounds .
num roadway compaction operations when performing embankment and asphalt compaction inspect and document the condition of the following existing structures and survey and monitor for settlement the following existing structures num. as shown in the plans .
num. within num feet of vibratory compaction in any mode operations .
num inspection and documentation requirements inspect and document the condition of the existing structures and all existing cracks with descriptions and pictures using a qualified specialty engineer .
prepare two reports documenting the condition of the structures one report before beginning the construction operations that may affect the existing structures such as but not limited to foundation construction excavations vibratory compaction dewatering and retaining wall construction and a second report after completing such construction operations .
include in the reports the specialty engineers assessment of any num return to table of contents damage present and in the event of damage the specialty engineers assessment of whether the observed damage is the result of the construction operations .
submit both reports to the engineer .
inspecting and documenting the condition of bridges sign signal lighting and its structures owned by the department is not required except when shown in the contract documents .
the department will make the necessary arrangements to provide right of way entry to the existing structures .
num settlement surveying and monitoring requirements obtain the engineers approval for the number and location of monitoring points .
survey and monitor the settlement of structures recording elevations to num foot num. before beginning construction num. daily during the driving of any casings piling or sheeting num. daily during compaction num. daily during foundation drilling num. weekly for two weeks after stopping pile driving num. during excavation num. during blasting num. or as directed by the engineer upon either detecting movement of num feet or damage to the structure immediately stop the construction operations affecting the structure backfill any open excavations notify the engineer and submit a corrective action plan for acceptance by the engineer .
num vibration monitoring when shown in the contract documents employ a qualified specialty engineer to continuously monitor and record vibration levels at the structures shown in the plans during the operation of any equipment causing vibrations or during blasting operations .
submit the vibration records to the engineer within num hours of performing the monitoring activity .
provide vibration monitoring equipment capable of detecting velocities of num inches per second or less .
obtain the engineers approval of the number and locations of the monitoring points .
upon either detecting vibration levels reaching num inches per second or damage to the structure immediately stop the source of vibrations backfill any open excavations notify the engineer and submit a corrective action plan for acceptance by the engineer .
num groundwater monitoring install a piezometer at the right of way line and near any existing structure that may be affected by dewatering operations or as directed by the engineer .
monitor the piezometer and record the groundwater elevation level each day that dewatering activities are performed and for one week after activities have ceased or on a schedule approved by the engineer .
notify the engineer of any groundwater lowering near the structure of num inches or more .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be lump sum completed and accepted .
no separate payment will be made for the design furnishing construction and removal of precautionary features such as but not limited to sheeting shoring or bracing installed for protection of existing structures .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num monitor existing structures inspection and settlement monitoring lump sum .
item no .
num num monitor existing structures vibration monitoring lump sum .
item no .
num num monitor existing structures groundwater monitoring lump sum .
num return to table of contents clearing construction site section num clearing and grubbing num description .
clear and grub within the areas shown in the plans .
remove and dispose of all trees stumps roots and other such protruding objects buildings structures appurtenances existing flexible asphalt pavement and other facilities necessary to prepare the area for the proposed construction .
remove and dispose of all product and debris not required to be salvaged or not required to complete the construction .
perform miscellaneous work necessary for the complete preparation of the overall project site as specified in num .
num standard clearing and grubbing .
num work included completely remove and dispose of all buildings timber brush trees stumps roots rubbish debris existing flexible pavement and base drainage structures culverts and pipes .
remove all other obstructions resting on or protruding through the surface of the existing ground and the surface of excavated areas .
perform standard clearing and grubbing within the following areas num .
all areas where excavation is to be done including borrow pits lateral ditches rightofway ditches etc .
num .
all areas where roadway embankments will be constructed .
num .
all areas where structures will be constructed including pipe culverts and other pipe lines .
num depths of removal of roots stumps and other debris in all areas where excavation is to be performed or roadway embankments are to be constructed remove roots and other debris to a depth of num inches below the ground surface .
remove roots and other debris from all excavated material to be used in the construction of roadway embankment or roadway base .
plow the surface to a depth of at least num inches and remove all roots thereby exposed to a depth of at least num inches .
completely remove and dispose of all stumps within the roadway rightofway .
remove all roots etc .
protruding through or appearing on the surface of the completed excavation within the roadway area and for structures to a depth of at least num inches below the finished excavation surface .
remove or cut off all stumps roots etc .
below the surface of the completed excavation in borrow pits material pits and lateral ditches .
in borrow and material pits do not perform any clearing or grubbing within num feet inside the rightofway line .
within all other areas where standard clearing and grubbing is to be performed remove roots and other debris projecting through or appearing on the surface of the original ground to a depth of num inches below the surface but do not plow or harrow these areas .
num boulders remove any boulders encountered in the roadway excavation other than as permitted under the provisions of num or found on the surface of the ground .
when approved by the engineer place boulders in neat piles inside the right of way .
the contractor num return to table of contents may stockpile boulders encountered in departmentfurnished borrow areas which are not suitable for use in the embankment construction within the borrow area .
num asbestos containing materials acm not identified prior to the work when encountering or exposing any condition indicating the presence of asbestos cease operations immediately in the vicinity and notify the engineer in accordance with num .
num selective clearing and grubbing .
num general remove and dispose of vegetation obstructions etc .
as shown in the plans .
provide acceptable fill material and grade and compact holes or voids created by the removal of the stumps .
perform all selective clearing and grubbing in accordance with ansi anum .
no staging storing or dumping will be allowed in selective clearing and grubbing areas .
use only rubber tire equipment in these areas .
protect trees to remain from trunk branch and root damage .
num trees to remain protect trees as shown in the plans or directed by the engineer .
at the driplines of areas designated as trees to remain construct a tree protection barrier in accordance with standard plans index num .
when pruning cuts or root pruning to existing trees is shown in the plans work is to be supervised on site by an international society of arboriculture isa certified arborist performed in accordance with ansi anum .
num protection of plant preservation areas areas to remain natural may be designated in the plans .
protect these areas with a tree protection barrier in accordance with standard plans index num .
no clearing and grubbing staging storage or dumping is allowed in these areas .
do not bring equipment into these areas .
num protection of property remaining in place .
protect property to remain in place in accordance with num .
num removal of buildings .
num parts to be removed completely remove all parts of the buildings including utilities plumbing foundations floors basements steps connecting concrete sidewalks or other pavement septic tanks and any other appurtenances by any practical manner which is not detrimental to other property and improvements .
remove utilities to the point of connection to the utility authoritys cutin .
after removing the sewer connections to the point of cutin construct a concrete plug at the cutin point as directed by the engineer except where the utility owners may elect to perform their own plugging .
contact the appropriate utility companies prior to removal of any part of the building to ensure disconnection of services .
submit demolition schedule num working days before beginning any demolition or renovation of a building .
num removal by others where buildings within the area to be cleared and grubbed are so specified to be removed by others remove and dispose of any foundations curtain walls concrete floors basements or other foundation parts which might be left in place after such removal of buildings by others .
num return to table of contents num removal of existing bridges .
num general the work under this article includes bridges as defined in num .
remove and dispose of the materials from existing bridges .
remove num. those bridges and approach slabs or portions of bridges shown in the plans to be removed num. those bridges and approach slabs or portions of bridges found within the limits of the area to be cleared and grubbed and directed by the engineer to be removed num. those bridges and approach slabs or portion of bridges which are necessary to be removed in order to complete the work and num. other appurtenances or obstructions which may be designated in the contract documents to be included as an item of payment for the work under this article .
submit schedule information and demolition plan for approval num working days before beginning any demolition or renovation of any structures .
num method of removal num general remove the structures in such a way so as to leave no obstructions to any proposed new bridge or to any waterways .
pull cut off or break off pilings to the requirements of the permit or other contract documents or if not specified not less than num feet below the finish ground line .
in the event that the plans indicate channel excavation to be done by others consider the finish ground line as the limits of such excavation .
for materials which are to remain the property of the department or are to be salvaged for use in temporary bridges avoid damage to such materials and entirely remove all bolts nails etc .
from timbers to be so salvaged .
mark structural steel members for identification as directed .
num removal of steel members with hazardous coatings submit to the engineer for approval the contractors lead in construction compliance program qpnum certification from the society for protective coatings sspc from the firm actually removing and disposing of these steel members before any members are disturbed .
vacuum power tool clean any coated steel member to bare metal as defined by sspcspnum a minimum of num inches either side of any area to be heated e.g .
torch cutting sawing grinding etc .
in accordance with num cfr num .
abrasive blasting is prohibited .
num partial removal of bridges on concrete bridges to be partially removed and widened remove concrete by manually or mechanically operated pavement breakers by concrete saws by chipping hammers or by hydrodemolition methods .
do not use explosives .
where concrete is to be removed to neat lines use concrete saws or hydrodemolition methods capable of providing a reasonably uniform cleavage face .
if the equipment used will not provide a uniform cut without surface spalling first score the outlines of the work with small trenches or grooves .
for all demolition methods submit for review and approval of the engineer a demolition plan that describes the method of removal equipment to be used types of rebar splices or couplers and method of straightening or cutting rebar .
in addition for hydro demolition describe the method for control of water or slurry runoff and measures for safe containment of concrete fragments that are thrown out by the hydrodemolition machine .
num authority of u.s. coast guard for bridges in navigable waters when constructing the project under authority of a u.s. coast guard permit the u.s. coast guard may inspect and approve the work to remove any existing bridges involved therein prior to acceptance by the department .
num return to table of contents num asbestos containing materials acm not identified prior to the work when encountering or exposing any condition indicating the presence of asbestos cease operations immediately in the vicinity and notify the engineer .
make every effort to minimize the disturbance of the acm .
immediately provide provisions for the health and safety of all jobsite personnel and the public that may be exposed to any acm .
provisions shall meet all applicable federal state and local rules and regulations regarding potentially hazardous conditions due to acm .
the engineer will notify the district contamination impact coordinator dcic who will engage the services of the departments contamination assessmentremediation contractor car .
provide access to the potential contamination area .
preliminary investigation by the car contractor will determine the course of action necessary for site security and the steps necessary to resolve the contamination issue .
the car contractor will perform an asbestos survey to delineate the asbestos areas and identify any staging or holding areas that will be needed for assessment or abatement of the asbestos material .
the car contractor will maintain jurisdiction over activities within areas contaminated with acm including staging and holding areas .
the car contractor will be responsible for the health and safety of workers within these delineated areas .
provide continuous access to these areas for the car contractor and representatives of regulatory or enforcement agencies having jurisdiction .
coordinate with the car contractor and engineer to develop a work plan with projected completion dates for the final resolution of the contamination in coordination with any regulatory agencies as appropriate .
use the work plan and schedule as a basis for planning the completion of all work efforts .
the engineer may grant contract time extensions according to the provisions of num .
cooperate with the car contractor to expedite integration of the car contractors operations into the construction project .
adjustments to quantities or to contract unit prices will be made according to work additions or reductions on the part of the prime contractor in accordance with num .
the engineer will inform the prime contractor when operations may resume in the affected area .
num removal of existing concrete .
remove and dispose of existing rigid portland cement concrete pavement sidewalk slope pavement ditch pavement curb and curb and gutter etc .
where shown in the plans .
remove all gravity walls noisesound walls retaining walls mse walls perimeter walls and roadway concrete barriers where shown in the plans .
all ancillary elements of these concrete features being removed including but not limited to leveling pads copings reinforcing steel or straps footings etc are incidental and included in the cost of the removal .
num ownership of materials .
except as may be otherwise specified in the contract documents take ownership of all buildings structures appurtenances and other materials removed and dispose of them in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents num disposal of materials .
num general either stack materials designated to remain the property of the department in neat piles within the rightofway load onto the departments vehicles or deliver to location designated in the plans .
dispose of timber stumps brush roots rubbish and other material resulting from clearing and grubbing in areas and by methods meeting the applicable requirements of all federal state and local rules and regulations .
do not block waterways by the disposal of debris .
with the approval of the engineer wood chips may be evenly distributed to a depth of no more than one inch in designated areas in the departments rightofway .
num burning debris where burning of such materials is permitted perform all such burning in accordance with the applicable federal state and local rules and regulations .
perform all burning at locations where trees and shrubs adjacent to the cleared area will not be harmed .
num timber and crops the contractor may sell any merchantable timber fruit trees and crops that are cleared under the operations of clearing and grubbing for his own benefit subject to the provisions of num which may require that the timber fruit trees or crops be burned at or near the site of their removal as directed by the engineer .
the contractor is liable for any claims which may arise pursuant to the provisions of this subarticle .
num disposal of treated wood treated wood must be handled and disposed of properly during removal .
treated wood should not be cut or otherwise mechanically altered in a manner that would generate dust or particles without proper respiratory and dermal protection .
the treated wood must be disposed of in at least a lined solid waste facility or through recyclingreuse .
treated wood shall not be disposed by burning or placement in a construction and demolition cd debris landfill .
num hazardous materialswaste handle transport and dispose of hazardous materialswaste in accordance with all federal state and local rules and regulations including but not limited to the following num .
sspc guide num num .
federal water pollution control act and num .
resource conservation and recover act rcra .
accept responsibility for the collection sampling classification packaging labeling accumulation time storage manifesting transportation treatment and disposal of hazardous materialswaste both solid and liquid .
separate all solid and liquid waste and collect all liquids used at hygiene stations and handle as hazardous materialswaste .
obtain written approval from the engineer for all hazardous materialswaste stabilization methods before implementation .
obtain an epafdep hazardous waste identification number epafdep id number before transporting andor disposal of any hazardous materialswaste .
list the department as the generator for hazardous materialswaste resulting from removal or demolition of department materials .
submit the following for the engineers approval before transporting treatment or disposal of any hazardous materialswaste num .
name address and qualifications of the transporter num .
name address and qualifications of the treatment facility num .
proposed treatment andor disposal of all hazardous materialswaste .
num return to table of contents num .
epafdep hazardous waste identification number application form .
num .
manifest forms .
transport all hazardous materialswaste in accordance with applicable federal state and local rules and regulations including but not limited to the num cfr num standards .
submit all final hazardous materialswaste manifestbills of lading and certificates of disposal to the engineer within num days of each shipment .
num steel members with hazardous coating dispose of steel members with hazardous coating in one of the following manners num .
deliver the steel members and other hazardous waste to a licensed recycling or treatment facility capable of processing steel members with hazardous coating .
num .
deliver the steel members with hazardous coating to a site designated by the engineer for use as an offshore artificial reef .
deliver any other hazardous materialswaste to a licensed hazardous materialswaste recycling treatment facility .
dismantle andor cut steel members to meet the required dimensions of the recycling facility treatment facility or offshore artificial reef agency .
all compensation for the cost of removal and disposal of hazardous materialswaste will be included in the cost of removal of existing structures .
num certification of compliance submit certification of compliance from the firm actually removing and disposing of the hazardous materialswaste stipulating the hazardous materialswaste has been handled transported and disposed of in accordance with this specification .
the certification of compliance shall be attested to by a person having legal authority to bind the company .
maintain all records required by this specification and ensure these records are available to the department upon request .
num miscellaneous operations .
num water wells required to be plugged fill or plug all water wells within the rightofway including areas of borrow pits and lateral ditches that are not to remain in service in accordance with applicable federal state and local rules and regulations .
cut off the casing of cased wells at least num inches below the ground line or num inches below the elevation of the finished excavation surface whichever is lower .
water wells as referred to herein are defined either as artesian or nonartesian as follows num .
an artesian well is an artificial hole in the ground from which water supplies may be obtained and which penetrates any waterbearing rock the water in which is raised to the surface by natural flow or which rises to an elevation above the top of the water bearing bed .
artesian wells are further defined to include all holes drilled as a source of water that penetrate any waterbearing beds that are a part of the artesian water system of florida as determined by representatives of the applicable water management district .
num .
a nonartesian watertable well is a well in which the source of water is an unconfined aquifer .
the water in a nonartesian well does not rise above the source bed .
num leveling terrain within the areas between the limits of construction and the outer limits of clearing and grubbing fill all holes and other depressions and cut down all mounds and ridges .
make the area of a sufficient uniform contour so that the departments subsequent mowing and cutting operations are not hindered by irregularity of terrain .
perform this work regardless of whether the irregularities were the result of construction operations or existed originally .
num return to table of contents num mailboxes when the contract documents require furnishing and installing mailboxes permit each owner to remove the existing mailbox .
work with the local postmaster to develop a method of temporary mail service for the period between removal and installation of the new mailboxes .
install the mailboxes in accordance with the standard plans .
num method of measurement .
num clearing and grubbing the quantity to be paid for will be the lump sum quantity .
num selective clearing and grubbing the quantity to be paid will be the plan quantity area in acres designated for selective clearing and grubbing .
num removal of existing bridges the quantity to be paid for will be the lump sum quantity or quantities for the specific structures or portions of structures to be removed .
num removal of existing concrete the quantity to be paid for will be the number of square yards of existing concrete elements acceptably removed and disposed of as specified .
the quantity will be determined by actual measurement along the surface of the element before its removal .
measurements for appurtenances which have irregular surface configurations such as curb and gutter steps and ditch pavement will be the area as projected to an approximate horizontal plane .
where the removal of pavement areas is necessary only for the construction of box culverts pipe culverts storm sewers inlets manholes etc .
these areas will not be included in the measurements .
area measurements for walls will be based on exposed vertical face measurements times the horizontal length of the wall .
num plugging water wells the quantity to be paid for will be the number of water wells plugged for each type of well artesian or nonartesian .
num mailboxes the quantity to be paid for will be the number of mailboxes acceptably furnished and installed .
num delivery of salvageable material to the department the quantity to be paid for will be the lump sum quantity for delivery of salvageable materials to the department as indicated in the plans .
num general in each case except as provided below where no item of separate payment for such work is included in the proposal all costs of such work will be included in the various scheduled items in the contract or under specific items as specified herein below or elsewhere in the contract .
num basis of payment .
num clearing and grubbing num lump sum payment price and payment will be full compensation for all clearing and grubbing required for the roadway rightofway and for lateral ditches channel changes or other outfall areas and any other clearing and grubbing indicated or required for the construction of the entire project including all necessary hauling furnishing equipment equipment operation furnishing any areas required for disposal of debris leveling of terrain and the landscaping work of trimming etc .
where construction easements are specified in the plans and the limits of clearing and grubbing for such easements are dependent upon the final construction requirements no adjustment will be made in the lump sum price and payment either over or under for variations from the limits of the easement defined in the plans .
num return to table of contents num when no direct payment is provided when no item for clearing and grubbing is included in the proposal the contractor shall include the cost of any work of clearing and grubbing which is necessary for the proper construction of the project in the contract price for the structure or other item of work for which such clearing and grubbing is required .
the contractor shall include the cost of all clearing and grubbing which might be necessary in pits or areas from which base material is obtained in the contract price for the base in which such material is used .
the clearing and grubbing of areas for obtaining stabilizing materials where required only for the purpose of obtaining materials for stabilizing will not be paid for separately .
num selective clearing and grubbing price and payment will be full compensation for all selective clearing and grubbing including all necessary hauling furnishing equipment certified arborist equipment operation furnishing any areas required for disposal of debris leveling of terrain root pruning and tree protection .
num removal of existing bridges price and payment will be full compensation for all work of removal and disposal of the designated bridges .
when direct payment for the removal of existing bridges is not provided in the proposal the contractor shall include the cost of removing all bridges in the contract price for clearing and grubbing or if no item of clearing and grubbing is included in the compensation for the other items covering the new bridge being constructed .
num removal of existing concrete price and payment will be full compensation for performing and completing all the work of removal and satisfactory disposal .
when no separate item for this work is provided and no applicable item of excavation or embankment covering such work as provided in num is included the contractor shall include the costs of this work in the contract price for the item of clearing and grubbing or for the pipe or other structure for which the concrete removal is required .
num plugging water wells price and payment will be full compensation for each type of well acceptably plugged .
if a water well requiring plugging is encountered and the contract contains no price for plugging wells of that specific type the plugging of such well will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
num mailboxes price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials required including supports and numbers .
num delivery of salvageable material to the department price and payment will be full compensation for all work required for delivery of the materials to the department .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num clearing and grubbing lump sum .
item no .
num num selective clearing and grubbing acre .
item no .
num num removal of existing bridges lump sum .
item no .
num num removal of existing concrete per square yard .
item no .
num num plugging water wells artesian each .
item no .
num num plugging water wells nonartesian each .
item no .
num num mailbox furnish and install each .
item no .
num num delivery of salvageable material to fdot lump sum .
num return to table of contents earthwork and related operations section num excavation and embankment num description .
num general excavate and construct embankments as required for the roadway ditches channel changes and borrow material .
use suitable excavated material or authorized borrow to prepare subgrades and foundations .
construct embankments in accordance with standard plans index num .
compact and dress excavated areas and embankments .
meet the requirements of section num for excavation of material for clearing and grubbing and section num for excavation and backfilling of structures and pipe .
material displaced by the storm sewer or drainage structure system is not included in the earthwork quantities shown in the plans .
num unidentified areas of contamination when encountering or exposing any abnormal condition indicating the presence of contaminated materials cease operations immediately in the vicinity and notify the engineer .
the presence of tanks or barrels discolored earth metal wood ground water etc .
visible fumes abnormal odors excessively hot earth smoke or other conditions that appear abnormal may indicate the presence of contaminated materials and must be treated with extreme caution .
make every effort to minimize the spread of contamination into uncontaminated areas .
immediately provide for the health and safety of all workers at the job site and make provisions necessary for the health and safety of the public that may be exposed to any potentially hazardous conditions .
ensure provisions adhere to all applicable laws rules or regulations covering potentially hazardous conditions and will be in a manner commensurate with the gravity of the conditions .
the engineer will notify the district contamination impact coordinator dcic who will coordinate selecting and tasking the departments contamination assessmentremediation contractor car .
provide access to the potentially contaminated area .
preliminary investigation by the car contractor will determine the course of action necessary for site security and the steps necessary under applicable laws rules and regulations for additional assessment andor remediation work to resolve the contamination issue .
the car contractor will delineate the contamination areas any staging or holding area required and in cooperation with the prime contractor and engineer develop a work plan that will provide the car contractors operations schedule with projected completion dates for the final resolution of the contamination issue .
the car contractor will maintain jurisdiction over activities inside any outlined contaminated areas and any associated staging holding areas .
the car contractor will be responsible for the health and safety of workers within the delineated areas .
provide continuous access to these areas for the car contractor and representatives of regulatory or enforcement agencies having jurisdiction .
both contractors will use the schedule as a basis for planning the completion of both work efforts .
the engineer may grant the contract time extensions according to the provisions of num .
cooperate with the car contractor to expedite integration of the car contractors operations into the construction project .
the prime contractor is not expected to num return to table of contents engage in routine construction activities such as excavating grading or any type of soil manipulation or any construction processes required if handling of contaminated soil surface water or ground water is involved .
all routine construction activities requiring the handling of contaminated soil surface water or groundwater will be by the car contractor .
adjustments to quantities or to contract unit prices will be made according to work additions or reductions on the part of the prime contractor in accordance with num .
the engineer will direct the prime contractor when operations may resume in the affected area .
num classifications of excavation .
num general the department may classify excavation specified under this section for payment as any of the following regular excavation subsoil excavation lateral ditch excavation and channel excavation .
if the proposal does not show subsoil excavation or lateral ditch excavation as separate items of payment include such excavation under the item of regular excavation .
if the proposal shows lateral ditch excavation as a separate item of payment but does not show channel excavation as a separate item of payment include such excavation under the item of lateral ditch excavation .
otherwise include channel excavation under the item of regular excavation .
num regular excavation regular excavation includes roadway excavation and borrow excavation as defined below for each .
num roadway excavation roadway excavation consists of the excavation and the utilization or disposal of all materials necessary for the construction of the roadway ditches channel changes etc .
except as may be specifically shown to be paid for separately and that portion of the lateral ditches within the limits of the roadway rightofway as shown in the plans .
num borrow excavation borrow excavation consists of the excavation and utilization of material from authorized borrow pits including only material that is suitable for the construction of roadway embankments or of other embankments covered by the contract .
a cost savings initiative proposal csip submittal based on using borrow material from within the project limits will not be considered .
num subsoil excavation subsoil excavation consists of the excavation and disposal of muck clay rock or any other material that is unsuitable in its original position and that is excavated below the finished grading template .
for stabilized bases and sand bituminous road mixes consider the finished grading template as the top of the finished base shoulders and slopes .
for all other bases and rigid pavement consider the finished grading template as the finished shoulder and slope lines and bottom of completed base or rigid pavement .
for pond and ditches that identify the placement of a blanket material consider the finished grading template as the bottom of the blanket material .
subsoil excavation also consists of the excavation of all suitable material within the above limits as necessary to excavate the unsuitable material .
consider the limits of subsoil excavation indicated in the plans as being particularly variable in accordance with the field conditions actually encountered .
the quantity of material required to replace the excavated material and to raise the elevation of the roadway to the bottom of the template will be paid for under embankment or borrow excavation truck measure .
num lateral ditch excavation lateral ditch excavation consists of all excavation of inlet and outlet ditches to structures and roadway changes in channels of streams and ditches num return to table of contents parallel to the roadway rightofway .
dress lateral ditches to the grade and crosssection shown in the plans .
num channel excavation channel excavation consists of the excavation and satisfactory disposal of all materials from the limits of the channel as shown in the plans .
num preliminary soils investigations .
when the plans contain the results of a soil survey do not assume such data is a guarantee of the depth extent or character of material present .
num removal of unsuitable materials and existing roads .
num subsoil excavation where muck rock clay or other material within the limits of the roadway is unsuitable in its original position excavate such material to the crosssections shown in the plans or indicated by the engineer and backfill with suitable material .
shape backfill material to the required crosssections .
where the removal of plastic soils below the finished earthwork grade is required meet a construction tolerance from the lines shown in the plans as the removal limits of plus or minus num feet in depth and plus or minus num inches each side in width .
num construction over existing old road where a new roadway is to be constructed over an old one plow or scarify the old road and break it up full width regardless of height of fill .
if the plans provide that paving materials may be incorporated into the fill distribute such material in a manner so as not to create voids .
recompact the old road meeting the requirements of num .
num obliterating old road where the plans call for obliteration of portions of an old road outside of the proposed new roadway obliterate such sections of the old road by grading to fill ditches and to restore approximately the original contour of the ground or a contour which produces a pleasing appearance .
num disposal of surplus and unsuitable material .
num ownership of excavated materials dispose of surplus and excavated materials as shown in the plans or if the plans do not indicate the method of disposal take ownership of the materials and dispose of them outside the rightofway .
num disposal of muck on side slopes as an exception to the provisions of num .
num when approved by the engineer in rural undeveloped areas the contractor may place muck anum material on the slopes or store it alongside the roadway provided there is a clear distance of at least num feet between the roadway grading limits and the muck and the contractor dresses the muck to present a neat appearance .
in addition the contractor may also dispose of this material by placing it on the slopes in developed areas where in the opinion of the engineer this will result in an aesthetically pleasing appearance and will have no detrimental effect on the adjacent developments .
where the engineer permits the disposal of muck or other unsuitable material inside the rightofway limits do not place such material in a manner which will impede the inflow or outfall of any channel or side ditches .
the engineer will determine the limits adjacent to channels within which such materials may be disposed .
num disposal of paving materials unless otherwise noted take ownership of paving materials such as paving brick asphalt block concrete slab sidewalk curb and gutter etc .
excavated in the removal of existing pavements and dispose of them outside the rightof way .
if the materials are to remain the property of the department place them in neat piles as directed .
existing limerock base that is removed may be incorporated in the stabilized portion of num return to table of contents the subgrade .
if the construction sequence will allow incorporate all existing limerock base into the project as allowed by the contract documents .
num disposal areas where the contract documents require disposal of excavated materials outside the rightofway and the disposal area is not indicated in the contract documents furnish the disposal area without additional compensation .
provide areas for disposal of removed paving materials out of sight of the project and at least num feet from the nearest roadway rightofway line of any state maintained road .
if the materials are buried disregard the num foot limitation .
num borrow .
num materials for borrow do not open borrow pits until the engineer has approved their location .
do not provide borrow materials that are polluted as defined in chapter num of the florida statutes oil of any kind and in any form gasoline pesticides ammonia chlorine and derivatives thereof excluding liquefied petroleum gas in concentrations above any local state or federal standards .
prior to placing any borrow material that is the product of soil incineration provide the engineer with a copy of the certificate of materials recycling and post burn analysis showing that the material is below all allowable pollutant concentrations .
num furnishing of borrow areas to obtain the engineers approval to use an off site construction activity area that involves excavation such as a borrow pit or local aggregate pit request in writing a review for cultural resources involvement .
send the request to the division of historical resources dhr department of state state historic preservation officer tallahassee fl .
as a minimum include in the request the project identification number the county a description of the property with township range section etc .
the dimensions of the area to be affected and a location map .
do not start any work at the offsite construction activity area prior to receiving clearance from the dhr that no additional research is warranted .
for certain locations the dhr will require a cultural resources assessment cra survey before approval can be granted .
when this is required secure professional archaeological services to complete an historical and archaeological survey report .
submit the report to the dhr and to the department .
the engineer will determine final approval or rejection of offsite construction activity areas based on input from the dhr .
before receiving approval or before use of borrow areas obtain written clearance from the engineer concerning compliance with the federal endangered species act and other wildlife regulations as specified in num and section numf of the usdot act as specified in num num .
the department will adjust contract time in accordance with num for any suspension of operations required to comply with this article .
the department will not accept any monetary claims due to delays or loss of offsite construction activity areas .
except where the plans specifically call for the use of a particular borrow or dredging area the contractor may substitute borrow or dredging areas of his own choosing provided the engineer determines the materials from such areas meet the departments standards and other requirements for stability for use in the particular sections of the work in which it is to be placed and the contractor absorbs any increase in hauling or other costs .
stake the corners of the proposed borrow area and provide the necessary equipment along with an operator in order for the engineer to investigate the borrow area .
the engineer will determine test locations collect samples and perform tests to investigate the proposed borrow area based on soil strata num return to table of contents and required soil properties .
the engineer will approve use of materials from the proposed area based on test results and project requirements .
final acceptance of materials will be based on point of use test as described in num .
before using any borrow material from any substitute areas obtain the engineers approval in writing for the use of the particular areas and where applicable ensure that the engineer has crosssectioned the surface .
upon such written approval by the engineer consider the substitute areas as designated borrow areas .
when furnishing the dredging or borrow areas supply the department with evidence that the necessary permits rights or waivers for the use of such areas have been secured .
do not excavate any part of a contractor furnished borrow area which is less than num feet from the rightofway of the project or any state road until the engineer has approved a plan for landscaping and restoring the disturbed area .
perform this landscaping and land restoration at no expense to the department prior to final acceptance of the project .
do not provide a borrow area closer than num feet to the rightofway of any state road .
in department furnished borrow pits do not excavate material within num feet of adjacent property lines .
upon completion of excavation neatly shape dress grass vegetate landscape and drain all exposed areas including haul roads as necessary so as not to present an objectionable appearance .
meet the requirements of section num when furnishing borrow areas regardless of location .
num borrow material for shoulder buildup when so indicated in the plans furnish borrow material with a specific minimum bearing value for building up of existing shoulders .
blend materials as necessary to achieve this specified minimum bearing value prior to placing the materials on the shoulders .
take samples of this borrow material at the pit or blended stockpile .
include all costs of providing a material with the required bearing value in the contract unit price for borrow material .
num haul routes for borrow pits provide and maintain at no expense to the department all necessary roads for hauling the borrow material .
where borrow area haul roads or trails are used by others do not cause such roads or trails to deteriorate in condition .
arrange for the use of all nonpublic haul routes crossing the property of any railroad .
incur any expense for the use of such haul routes .
establish haul routes which will direct construction vehicles away from developed areas when feasible and keep noise from hauling operations to a minimum .
advise the engineer in writing of all proposed haul routes .
num authorization for use of borrow when the item of borrow excavation is included in the contract use borrow only when sufficient quantities of suitable material are not available from roadway and drainage excavation to properly construct the embankment subgrade and shoulders and to complete the backfilling of structures .
do not use borrow material until so ordered by the engineer and then only use material from approved borrow pits .
num materials for embankment .
num use of materials excavated from the roadway and appurtenances assume responsibility for determining the suitability of excavated material for use on the project in accordance with the applicable contract documents .
consider the sequence of work and maintenance of traffic phasing in the determination of the availability of this material .
num general requirements for embankment materials construct embankments of acceptable material including reclaimed asphalt pavement rap recycled concrete aggregate num return to table of contents rca and portland cement concrete rubble but containing no muck stumps roots brush vegetable matter rubbish reinforcement bar or other material that does not compact into a suitable and enduring roadbed .
do not use rap or rca in the top num feet of slopes and shoulders that are to be grassed or have other type of vegetation established .
do not use rap or rca in stormwater management facility fill slopes .
remove all waste material designated as undesirable .
use material in embankment construction in accordance with plan details or as the engineer directs .
complete the embankment using maximum particle sizes in any dimension as follows num .
in top num inches num inches in any dimension .
num .
num to num inches num inches in any dimension .
num .
in the depth below num inches not to exceed num inches in any dimension or the compacted thickness of the layer being placed whichever is less .
spread all material so that the larger particles are separated from each other to minimize voids between them during compaction .
compact around these rocks in accordance with num .
when and where approved by the engineer the contractor may place larger rocks not to exceed num inches in any dimension outside the one to two slope and at least num feet or more below the bottom of the base .
compact around these rocks to a firmness equal to that of the supporting soil .
construct grassed embankment areas in accordance with num .
where constructing embankments adjacent to bridge end bents or abutments do not place rock larger than num inches in diameter within num feet of the location of any endbent piling .
num materials used at pipes culverts etc .
construct embankments over and around pipes culverts and bridge foundations with selected materials .
num embankment construction .
num general construct embankments in sections of not less than num feet in length or for the full length of the embankment .
do not construct another lot over an untested lot without the engineers approval in writing .
for construction of mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts and retaining wall systems a lot is defined as a single lift of finished embankment not to exceed num feet .
for construction of shoulderonly areas shared use paths and sidewalks areas a lot is defined as a single lift of finished embankment not to exceed num feet .
isolated compaction operations will be considered as separate lots .
for multiple phase construction a lot shall not extend beyond the limits of the phase .
num dry fill method num general construct embankments to meet the compaction requirements in num and in accordance with the acceptance program requirements in num .
as far as practicable distribute traffic over the work during the construction of embankments so as to cover the maximum area of the surface of each layer .
construct embankment using the dry fill method whenever normal dewatering equipment and methods can accomplish the needed dewatering .
num maximum compacted lift thickness requirements construct the embankment in successive layers with lifts up to a maximum listed in the table below based on the embankment material classification group .
num return to table of contents group aashto soil class maximum lift thickness thick lift control test section requirements num anum num inches not needed anum no .
num sieve num num anum num inches without control test section maximum of num inches per num anum no .
num sieve num anum anum anum anum anum anum anum liquid limit num num thick lift requirements for embankment materials classified as group num in the table above the option to perform thick lift construction in successive layers of not more than num inches compacted thickness may be used after meeting the following requirements num .
notify the engineer and obtain approval in writing prior to beginning construction of a test section .
a .
demonstrate the possession and control of compacting equipment sufficient to achieve density required by num for the full depth of a thicker lift .
num .
construct a test section of the length of one full lot of not less than num feet .
num .
perform five quality control qc tests at random locations within the test section .
a .
all five qc tests and a department verification test must meet the density required by num. b .
identify the test section with the compaction effort and soil classification in the departments earthwork records system ers .
num .
obtain engineers approval in writing for the compaction effort after completing a successful test section .
in case of a change in compaction effort or soil classification failing qc test or when the qc tests can not be verified construct a new test section .
the contractor may elect to place material in num inches compacted thickness at any time .
construct all layers approximately parallel to the centerline profile of the road .
the engineer reserves the right to terminate the contractors use of thick lift construction .
whenever the engineer determines that the contractor is not achieving satisfactory results revert to the num inch compacted lifts .
num equipment and methods provide normal dewatering equipment including but not limited to surface pumps sump pumps and trenchingdigging machinery .
provide normal dewatering methods including but not limited to constructing shallow surface drainage trenchesditches using sand blankets sumps and siphons .
when normal dewatering does not adequately remove the water the engineer may require the embankment material to be placed in the water or on low swampy ground in accordance with num .
num placing in unstable areas when depositing fill material in water or on low swampy ground that will not support the weight of hauling equipment construct the num return to table of contents embankment by dumping successive loads in a uniformly distributed layer of a thickness not greater than necessary to support the hauling equipment while placing subsequent layers .
once sufficient material has been placed so that the hauling equipment can be supported construct the remaining portion of the embankment in layers in accordance with the applicable provisions of num .
num placing on steep slopes when constructing an embankment on a hillside sloping more than num degrees from the horizontal before starting the fill deeply plow or cut steps into the surface of the original ground on which the embankment is to be placed .
num placing outside the standard minimum slope the standard minimum slope is defined as the plane described by a one vertical to two horizontal slope downward from the roadway shoulder point or the gutter line in accordance with standard plans index num and num .
where material that is unsuitable for normal embankment construction is to be used in the embankment outside the standard minimum slope place such material in layers of not more than num inches in thickness measured loose .
the contractor may also place material which is suitable for normal embankment outside such standard minimum slope in num inch layers .
maintain a constant thickness for suitable material placed within and outside the standard minimum slope unless placing in a separate operation .
num hydraulic method num method of placing when the hydraulic method is used as far as practicable place all dredged material in its final position in the embankment by such method .
place and compact any dredged material that is reworked or moved and placed in its final position by any other method as specified in num .
baffles or any other form of construction may be used if the slopes of the embankments are not steeper than indicated in the plans .
remove all timber used for temporary bulkheads or baffles from the embankment and fill and thoroughly compact all voids .
when placing fill on submerged land construct dikes prior to beginning of dredging and maintain the dikes throughout the dredging operation .
num excess material do not use any excess material placed outside the prescribed slopes or below the normal highwater table to raise the fill areas .
remove only the portion of this material required for dressing the slopes .
num protection of openings in embankment leave openings in the embankments at the bridge sites .
remove any material which invades these openings or existing channels without additional compensation to provide the same existing channel depth as before the construction of the embankment .
do not excavate or dredge any material within num feet of the toe of the proposed embankment .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap method num general use only rap material stored at facilities with an approved florida department of environmental protection stormwater permit or transferred directly from a milling project to the department project .
certify the source if rap material is from an identifiable department project .
do not use rap material in the following areas construction areas that are below the seasonal high groundwater table elevation mse wall backfill underneath mse walls or the top num inches of embankment .
prior to placement submit documentation to the engineer for his approval outlining the proposed location of the rap material .
num soil and rap mixture place the rap material at the location and spread uniformly using approved methods to obtain a maximum layer thickness of num inches .
mix this num inches maximum layer of rap with a loose soil layer num to num inches thick .
after mixing num return to table of contents meet all embankment utilization requirements of standard plans index num for the location used .
the total rap and other embankment material shall not exceed num inches per lift after mixing and compaction if the contractor can demonstrate that the density of the mixture can be achieved .
perform mixing using rotary tillers or other equipment meeting the approval of the engineer .
the engineer will determine the order in which to spread the two materials .
mix both materials to the full depth .
ensure that the finished layer will have the thickness and shape required by the typical section .
demonstrate the feasibility of this construction method by successfully completing a num foot long test section .
num alternate soil and rap layer construction construct soil in num to num inch compacted lifts and rap in alternate layers with num inch maximum compacted lifts .
use soil with a minimum lbr value of num to prevent failure during compaction of the overlying rap layer .
demonstrate the feasibility of this construction method by successfully completing a num foot long test section .
num compaction requirements .
num moisture content compact the materials at a moisture content such that the specified density can be attained .
if necessary to attain the specified density add water to the material or lower the moisture content by manipulating the material or allowing it to dry as is appropriate .
num compaction of embankments num general uniformly compact each layer using equipment that will achieve the required density and as compaction operations progress shape and manipulate each layer as necessary to ensure uniform density throughout the embankment .
num compaction over unstable foundations where the embankment material is deposited in water or on low swampy ground and in a layer thicker than num inches as provided in num compact the top num inches compacted thickness of such layer to the density as specified in num .
num compaction where plastic material has been removed where unsuitable material is removed and the remaining surface is of the anum anum anum or anum soil groups see aashto mnum as determined by the engineer compact the surface of the excavated area by rolling with a sheepsfoot roller exerting a compression of at least num psi on the tamper feet for the full width of the roadbed subgrade and shoulders .
perform rolling before beginning any backfill and continue until the roller feet do not penetrate the surface more than num inch .
do not perform such rolling where the remaining surface is below the normal water table and covered with water .
vary the procedure and equipment required for this operation at the discretion of the engineer .
num compaction of grassed shoulder areas for the upper num inch layer of all shoulders which are to be grassed since no specific density is required compact only to the extent directed .
num compaction of grassed embankment areas do not compact the outer layers of any embankments where plant growth will be established .
leave this layer in a loose condition to a minimum depth of num inches for the subsequent seeding or planting operations .
do not place rap or rap blended material within the top num inches of areas to be grassed .
num compaction for pipes culverts etc .
compact the backfill of trenches to the densities specified for embankment or subgrade as applicable and in accordance with the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents thoroughly compact embankments over and around pipes culverts and bridges in a manner which will not place undue stress on the structures and in accordance with the requirements of num .
num compaction of subgrade if the plans do not provide for stabilizing compact the subgrade as defined in num in both cuts and fills to the density specified in num .
for cut areas determine standard proctor maximum density in accordance with fm numtnum at a frequency of one per mile or when there is a change in soil type whichever occurs first .
for undisturbed soils do not apply density requirements where constructing paved shoulders num feet or less in width .
where trenches for widening strips are not of sufficient width to permit the use of standard compaction equipment perform compaction using vibratory rollers trench rollers or other type compaction equipment approved by the engineer .
maintain the required density until the base or pavement is placed on the subgrade .
num acceptance program .
num general requirements num initial equipment comparison before initial production perform an initial nuclear moisture density gauge comparison with the verification and independent assurance ia gauges .
when comparing the computed dry density of one nuclear gauge to a second gauge three sets of calculations must be performed ia to qc ia to verification and qc to verification .
ensure that the difference between any two computed dry densities does not exceed num lbftnum between gauges from the same manufacturer and num lbftnum between gauges from different manufacturers .
repair or replace any gauge that does not compare favorably with the ia gauge .
perform a comparison analysis between the qc nuclear gauge and the verification nuclear gauge any time a nuclear gauge or repaired nuclear gauge is first brought to the project .
repair and replace any qc gauge that does not compare favorably with the verification gauge at any time during the remainder of the project .
calibrate all qc gauges annually .
num initial production lot before construction of any production lot prepare a num foot initial control section consisting of one full lot .
notify the engineer in writing at least num hours prior to production of the initial control section .
perform all qc tests required in num .
when the initial qc test results pass specifications the engineer will perform a verification test to verify compliance with the specifications .
do not begin constructing another lot until successfully completing the initial production lot .
the engineer will notify the contractor in writing of the initial production lot approval within three working days after receiving the contractors qc data when test results meet the following conditions num .
qc and verification tests must meet the density requirements .
num .
difference between qc and verification computed dry density results shall meet the requirements of num .
if verification test result fails the density requirements of num correct the areas of noncompliance .
the qc and verification tests will then be repeated .
num density over num when a qc computed dry density results in a value greater than num of the applicable proctor maximum dry density the engineer will perform an independent verification iv density test within num feet .
if the iv density results in a num return to table of contents value greater than num the engineer will investigate the compaction methods examine the applicable standard proctor maximum density and material description .
the engineer may collect and test an iv standard proctor maximum density sample for acceptance in accordance with the criteria of num .
num quality control qc tests num standard proctor maximum density determination determine the qc standard proctor maximum density and optimum moisture content by sampling and testing the material in accordance with the specified test method listed in num .
num density testing requirements ensure compliance to the requirements of num by nuclear density testing in accordance with fm numtnum .
determine the inplace moisture content for each density test .
use fm numtnum fm num determination of moisture content by means of a calcium carbide gas pressure moisture tester or astm d num laboratory determination of moisture content of granular soils by use of a microwave oven for moisture determination .
num soil classification perform soil classification tests on the sample collected in num in accordance with aashto tnum tnum tnum and fm numtnum .
classify soils in accordance with aashto mnum in order to determine compliance with embankment utilization requirements as specified in standard plans index num .
num department verification the engineer will conduct verification tests in order to accept all materials and work associated with num .
the engineer will verify the qc results if they meet the verification comparison criteria otherwise the engineer will implement resolution procedures .
the engineer will select test locations including station offset and lift using a random number generator based on the lots under consideration .
each verification test evaluates all work represented by the qc testing completed in those lots .
in addition to the verification testing the engineer may perform additional independent verification iv testing .
the engineer will evaluate and act upon the iv test results in the same manner as verification test results .
when the project requires less than four qc tests per material type the engineer reserves the right to accept the materials and work through visual inspection .
num reduced testing frequency obtain the engineers written approval for the option to reduce density testing frequency to one test every two lots if resolution testing was not required for num consecutive verified lots or if resolution testing was required but the qc test data was upheld and all substantiating tests are recorded in the earthwork records system ers .
generate random numbers based on the two lots under consideration .
when qc test frequency is reduced to one every two lots obtain the engineers approval to place more than one lot over an untested lot .
assure similar compaction efforts for the untested lots .
if the verification test fails and qc test data is not upheld by resolution testing the qc testing will revert to the original frequency of one qc test per lot .
do not apply reduced testing frequency in construction of shoulderonly areas shared use paths sidewalks and first and last lift .
num payment for resolution tests if the resolution laboratory results compare favorably with the qc results the department will pay for resolution testing .
no additional compensation either monetary or time will be made for the impacts of any such testing .
num return to table of contents if the resolution laboratory results do not compare favorably with the qc results the costs of the resolution testing will be deducted from monthly estimates .
no additional time will be granted for the impacts of any such testing .
num acceptance criteria obtain a minimum qc density of num of the standard proctor maximum density as determined by fm numtnum method c with the following exceptions embankment constructed by the hydraulic method as specified in num material placed outside the standard minimum slope as specified in num except when a structure is supported on existing embankment and other areas specifically excluded herein .
num additional requirements num frequency conduct qc sampling and testing at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
the engineer will perform verification sampling and tests at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
test name quality control verification verification of shoulderonly areas shared use paths and sidewalks standard proctor maximum density one per soil type one per soil type one per soil type density one per lot one per four lots and for wet conditions the first lift not affected by water one per two lots soil classification and organic content one per standard proctor maximum density one per standard proctor maximum density one per standard proctor maximum density num test selection and reporting determine test locations including stations and offsets using the random number generator approved by the engineer .
do not use notepads or worksheets to record data for later transfer to the density log book .
notify the engineer upon successful completion of qc testing on each lot prior to placing another lift on top .
num verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures num standard proctor maximum density determination the engineer will verify the qc results if the results compare within num lbftnum of the verification test result .
otherwise the engineer will take one additional sample of material from the soil type in question .
the state materials office smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm numtnum method c. the engineer will compare the resolution test results with the qc test results .
if all resolution test results are within num lbftnum of the corresponding qc test results the engineer will use the qc test results for material acceptance purposes for each lot with that soil type .
if the resolution test result is not within num lbftnum of the contractors qc test the verification test result will be used for material acceptance purposes .
num density testing when a verification or iv density test fails the acceptance criteria retest the site within a num foot radius and the following actions will be taken num return to table of contents num .
if the qc retest meets the acceptance criteria and meets the num num criteria when compared with the verification or iv test the engineer will accept those lots .
num .
if the qc retest does not meet the acceptance criteria and compares favorably with the verification or iv test rework and retest the lot .
the engineer will reverify those lots .
num .
if the qc retest and the verification or iv test do not compare favorably complete a new comparison analysis as defined in num .
once acceptable comparison is achieved retest the lots .
the engineer will perform new verification testing .
acceptance testing will not begin on a new lot until the contractor has a gauge that meets the comparison requirements .
record qc test results in the density logbook on approved department forms provided by the engineer .
submit the original completed density logbook to the engineer at final acceptance .
num soil classification the engineer will verify the qc test results if the verification and the qc test results both match the soil utilization symbol listed in standard plans index num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained for resolution testing .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform the resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with aashto tnum tnum and tnum and classified in accordance with aashto mnum .
the engineer will compare the resolution test results with the qc test results .
if the resolution test matches the qc soil utilization symbol the engineer will use the qc soil utilization symbol for material acceptance purposes .
if the resolution test result does not match the contractors qc soil utilization symbol the verification test results will be used for material acceptance purposes .
num organic content the engineer will verify the qc test results if the verification test results satisfy the organic content test criteria in standard plans index num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained for resolution testing .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm numtnum .
if the resolution test results satisfy the required criteria material of that soil type will be verified and accepted .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reject the material and reconstruct with acceptable material .
num disposition of defective materials assume responsibility for removing and replacing all defective material as defined in section num .
alternately submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num to determine the disposition of the material .
num maintenance and protection of work .
while construction is in progress maintain adequate drainage for the roadbed at all times .
maintain a shoulder at least num feet wide adjacent to all pavement or base construction in order to provide support for the edges .
maintain all earthwork construction throughout the life of the contract and take all reasonable precautions to prevent loss of material from the roadway due to the action of wind or water .
repair at no expense to the department except as otherwise provided herein any slides washouts settlement subsidence or other mishap which may occur prior to final acceptance of num return to table of contents the work .
perform maintenance and protection of earthwork construction in accordance with section num .
maintain all channels excavated as a part of the contract work against natural shoaling or other encroachments to the lines grades and crosssections shown in the plans until final acceptance of the project .
num construction .
num construction tolerances shape the surface of the earthwork to conform to the lines grades and crosssections shown in the plans .
in final shaping of the surface of earthwork maintain a tolerance of num foot above or below the crosssection with the following exceptions num .
shape the surface of shoulders to within num foot of the crosssection shown in the plans .
num .
shape the earthwork to match adjacent pavement curb sidewalk structures etc .
num .
shape the bottom of conveyance ditches so that the ditch impounds no water .
num .
when the work does not include construction of base or pavement shape the entire roadbed shoulder point to shoulder point to within num foot above or below the plan crosssection .
num .
when the work includes permitted linear stormwater management facilities shape the swales and ditch blocks to within num feet of the crosssection shown in the plans .
ensure that the shoulder lines do not vary horizontally more than num foot from the true lines shown in the plans .
num operations adjacent to pavement carefully dress areas adjacent to pavement areas to avoid damage to such pavement .
complete grassing of shoulder areas prior to placing the final wearing course .
do not manipulate any embankment material on a pavement surface .
when shoulder dressing is underway adjacent to a pavement lane being used to maintain traffic exercise extreme care to avoid interference with the safe movement of traffic .
num method of measurement .
num general when payment for excavation is on a volumetric basis the quantity to be paid for will be the volume in cubic yards calculated by the method of average end areas unless the engineer determines that another method of calculation will provide a more accurate result .
the material will be measured in its original position by field survey or by photogrammetric means as designated by the engineer unless otherwise specified under the provisions for individual items .
where subsoil excavation extends outside the lines shown in the plans or authorized by the engineer including allowable tolerances and the space is backfilled with material obtained in additional authorized roadway or borrow excavation the net fill plus shrinkage allowance will be deducted from the quantity of roadway excavation or borrow excavation to be paid for as applicable .
the quantity of all material washed blown or placed beyond the authorized roadway crosssection will be determined by the engineer and will be deducted from the quantity of roadway excavation or borrow excavation to be paid for as applicable .
num return to table of contents subsoil excavation that extends outside the lines shown in the plans or authorized by the engineer including allowable tolerances will be deducted from the quantity to be paid for as subsoil excavation .
num roadway excavation the measurement will include only the net volume of material excavated between the original ground surface and the surface of the completed earthwork except that the measurement will also include all unavoidable slides which may occur in connection with excavation classified as roadway excavation .
the pay quantity will be the plan quantity provided that the excavation was accomplished in substantial compliance with the plan dimensions and subject to the provisions of num and num .
on designated numr projects regular excavation will be paid for at the contract lump sum price provided that the excavation was accomplished in substantial compliance with the plan dimension .
num borrow excavation measurement will be made on a loose volume basis measured in trucks or other hauling equipment at the point of dumping on the road .
if measurement is made in vehicles level the material to facilitate accurate measurement .
unsuitable material excavated from borrow pits where truck measurement is provided for and from any borrow pits furnished by the contractor will not be included in the quantity of excavation to be paid for .
num lateral ditch excavation the measurement will include only material excavated within the lines and grades indicated in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the measurement will include the full stationtostation length shown in the plans or directed by the engineer and acceptably completed .
excavation included for payment under section num will not be included in this measurement .
the pay quantity will be the plan quantity provided that the excavation was accomplished in substantial compliance with the plan dimensions and subject to the provisions of num and num .
num channel excavation the measurement will include only material excavated within the lines and grades indicated in the plans or in accordance with authorized plan changes .
the measurement will include the full stationtostation length shown in the plans including any authorized changes thereto .
if shoaling occurs subsequent to excavation of a channel and the engineer authorized the shoaled material to remain in place the volume of any such material remaining within the limits of channel excavation shown in the plans will be deducted from the measured quantity of channel excavation .
num subsoil excavation the measurement will include only material excavated within the lines and grades indicated in the plans including the tolerance permitted therefore or as directed by the engineer .
when no item for subsoil excavation is shown in the contract but subsoil excavation is subsequently determined to be necessary such unanticipated subsoil excavation will be paid for as provided in num .
num embankment the quantity will be at the plan quantity .
where payment for embankment is not to be included in the payment for the excavation and is to be paid for on a cubic yard basis for the item of embankment the plan quantities to be paid for will be calculated by the method of average end areas unless the engineer determines that another method of calculation will provide a more accurate result .
the measurement will include only material actually placed above the original ground line within the lines and grades indicated in the plans num return to table of contents or directed by the engineer .
the length used in the computations will be the stationtostation length actually constructed .
the original ground line used in the computations will be as determined prior to placing of embankment subject to the provisions of num and no allowance will be made for subsidence of material below the surface of the original ground .
if there are authorized changes in plan dimensions or if errors in plan quantities are detected plan quantity will be adjusted as provided in num .
where the work includes excavation of unsuitable material below the finished grading template or original ground line whichever is lower as defined in num the original ground line is defined as the surface prior to beginning excavation except that this surface is not outside the permissible tolerance of lines and grades for subsoil excavation as indicated in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
any overrun or underrun of plan quantity for subsoil excavation which results in a corresponding increase or decrease in embankment will be considered as an authorized plan change for adjustment purposes as defined in num .
no payment will be made for embankment material used to replace unsuitable material excavated beyond the lines and grades shown in the plans or ordered by the engineer .
in no case will payment be made for material allowed to run out of the embankment on a flatter slope than indicated on the crosssection .
the contractor shall make his own estimate on the volume of material actually required to obtain the pay section .
num basis of payment .
num general prices and payments for the various work items included in this section will be full compensation for all work described herein including excavating dredging hauling placing and compacting dressing the surface of the earthwork maintaining and protecting the complete earthwork and hauling .
the department will not allow extra compensation for any reworking of materials .
the department will compensate for the cost of grassing or other permanent erosion control measures directed by the engineer as provided in the contract for similar items of roadway work .
num excavation num items of payment when no classification of material is indicated in the plans and bids are taken only on regular excavation the total quantity of all excavation specified under this section will be paid for at the contract unit price for regular excavation .
when separate classifications of excavation are shown in the proposal the quantities of each of the various classes of materials so shown will be paid for at the contract unit prices per cubic yard for regular excavation lateral ditch excavation subsoil excavation and channel excavation as applicable and any of such classifications not so shown will be included under the item of regular excavation except that if there is a classification for lateral ditch excavation shown and there is no classification for channel excavation any channel excavation will be included under the item of lateral ditch excavation .
as an exception on designated projects regular excavation will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
num basic work included in payments prices and payments will be full compensation for all work described under this section except for any excavation or embankment which is specified to be included for payment under other items .
such prices and payments will include hauling any reworking that may be necessary to accomplish final disposal as shown in the plans the dressing of shoulders ditches and slopes removal of trash vegetation etc .
from the previously graded roadway where no item for clearing and grubbing is shown in the plans and compacting as required .
num return to table of contents num additional depth of subsoil excavation where subsoil excavation is made to a depth of num to num feet below the depth shown in the plans such excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid .
where subsoil excavation is made to a depth greater than num feet and up to num feet deeper than the depth shown in the plans such excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid plus num of such unit price .
additional extra depth more than num feet below such plan depth will be considered as a change in the character of the work and will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
where no subsoil excavation is shown in a particular location on the original plans payment for extra depth of subsoil will begin num feet below the lowest elevation on the grading template .
num borrow excavation when the item of borrow excavation is included in the contract price and payment will also include the cost of furnishing the borrow areas and any necessary clearing and grubbing thereof the removal of unsuitable material that it is necessary to excavate in order to obtain suitable borrow material and also the costs incurred in complying with the provisions of num .
num materials excluded from payment for the excavation no payment for excavation will be made for any excavation covered for payment under the item of embankment .
no payment will be made for the excavation of any materials which is used for purposes other than those shown in the plans or designated by the engineer .
no payment will be made for materials excavated outside the lines and grades given by the engineer unless specifically authorized by the engineer .
as an exception in operations of roadway excavation all slides and falls of insecure masses of material beyond the regular slopes that are not due to lack of precaution on the part of the contractor will be paid for at the contract unit price for the material involved .
the removal of slides and falls of material classified as lateral ditch excavation or as subsoil excavation will not be paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit price for the pay quantity of these materials measured as provided in num .
num embankment num general price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all material for constructing the embankment all excavating dredging pumping placing and compacting of material for constructing the embankment complete dressing of the surface of the roadway maintenance and protection of the completed earthwork and the removal of rubbish vegetation etc .
from the roadway where no clearing and grubbing of the area is specified in the plans .
also such price and payment in each case will specifically include all costs of any roadway lateral ditch or channel excavation unless such excavation is specifically shown to be paid for separately regardless of whether the materials are utilized in the embankment .
num excluded material no payment will be made for the removal of muck or overburden from the dredging or borrow areas .
no payment will be made for embankment material used to replace muck or other unsuitable material excavated beyond the lines and grades shown in the plans or ordered by the engineer .
num clearing and grubbing no payment will be made for any clearing and grubbing of the borrow or dredging areas .
where no clearing and grubbing of such areas is num return to table of contents specified in the plans the cost of any necessary clearing and grubbing will be included in the contract unit or lump sum price for embankment .
num cost of permits rights and waivers where the contractor provides borrow or dredging areas of his own choosing the cost of securing the necessary permits rights or waivers will be included in the contract price for embankment .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num regular excavation per cubic yard .
item no .
num num borrow excavation per cubic yard .
item no .
num num lateral ditch excavation per cubic yard .
item no .
num num subsoil excavation per cubic yard .
item no .
num num channel excavation per cubic yard .
item no .
num num embankment per cubic yard .
item no .
num num regular excavation numr projects lump sum .
num return to table of contents section num flowable fill num description .
furnish and place flowable fill as an alternative to compacted soil as approved by the engineer .
applications for conventional flowable fill include beddings encasements closures for tanks and pipes and general backfill for trenches embankments and walls .
applications for cellular concrete flowable fill include beddings encasements closures for tanks and pipes and general backfill for embankments and walls .
num materials .
meet the following requirements fine aggregatenum section num portland cementsection num water section num admixturesnumsection num ground tire rubber gtrnum section num fly ash slag and other pozzolanic materials section num preformed foam astm c num num .
any clean fine aggregate with num passing a num inch mesh sieve and not more than num passing a no .
num sieve may be used .
num .
high air generators or foaming agents may be used in lieu of conventional air entraining admixtures and shall be added at jobsite and mixed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
gtr may reduce the amount of high air generators or foaming agents used .
num .
gtr may replace up to num of the fine aggregate .
num mix design .
conventional flowable fill is a mixture of portland cement fly ash fine aggregate admixture and water .
flowable fill contains a low cementitious content for reduced strength development .
cellular concrete flowable fill is a low density concrete made with cement water and preformed foam to form a hardened closed cell foam material .
cellular concrete flowable fill may also contain fine aggregate fly ash slag and admixtures .
submit mix designs to the engineer for approval .
the following are suggested mix guides for excavatable nonexcavatable and cellular concrete flowable fill excavatable nonexcavatable cellular concrete cement num lbydnum num lbydnum min num lbydnum pozzolans or slag none num lbydnum optional water air num num num day compressive strength maximum num psi minimum num psi minimum num psi unit weight num lbftnum num lbftnum num lbftnum fine aggregate optional num return to table of contents excavatable nonexcavatable cellular concrete mix designs shall produce a consistency that will result in a flowable selfleveling product at time of placement .
the requirements for percent air compressive strength and unit weight are for laboratory designs only and are not intended for jobsite acceptance requirements .
fine aggregate shall be proportioned to yield num ydnum .
in cellular concrete preformed foam shall be proportioned at the job site to yield num ydnum in accordance with the design requirements .
num production and placing .
use flowable fill manufactured at a production facility that meets the requirements of num .
deliver flowable fill using concrete construction equipment .
revolution counter are waived .
place flowable fill by chute pumping or other methods approved by the engineer .
tremie flowable fill through water .
cellular concrete flowable fill may not be placed within three feet of the bottom elevation for roadway base courses .
num construction requirements .
use straps soil anchors or other approved means of restraint to ensure correct alignment when flowable fill is used as backfill for pipe or where flotation or misalignment may occur .
protect flowable fill from freezing for a period of num hours after placement .
place flowable fill to the designated fill line without vibration or other means of compaction .
do not place flowable fill during inclement weather e.g .
rain or ambient temperatures below numf .
take all necessary precautions to prevent any damages caused by the hydraulic pressure of the fill during placement prior to hardening .
provide the means to confine the material within the designated space .
num acceptance .
acceptance of flowable fill will be based on the following documentation and a minimum temperature of flowable fill at the point of delivery of numf .
submit a delivery ticket to the engineer for each load of flowable fill delivered to the worksite .
ensure that each ticket contains the following information num .
project designation num .
date num .
time num .
class and quantity of flowable fill num .
actual batch proportions num .
free moisture content of aggregates num .
quantity of water withheld .
leave the fill undisturbed until the material obtains sufficient strength .
sufficient strength is num psi penetration resistance as measured using a hand held penetrometer in accordance with astm cnum .
provide a hand held penetrometer to measure the penetration resistance of the hardened flowable fill .
num basis of payment .
when the item of flowable fill is included in the contract payment will be made at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
such price and payment will include all cost of the mixture in place and accepted determined as specified above .
no measurement and payment will be made for material placed outside the neat line limits or outside the adjusted limits or for unused or wasted material .
num return to table of contents payment will be made under item no .
num num flowable fill per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num excavation for structures and pipe num description .
excavate for box culverts pipes retaining walls headwalls for pipes and drains catch basins drop inlets manholes and similar structures .
construct and remove cofferdams sheeting bracing etc .
pump or otherwise dewater foundations remove and dispose of any existing structures or portions of structures not covered by other items in the contract including foundations abutments piers wings and all other materials obstructions etc .
found necessary to clear the site for the proposed work backfill dispose of surplus material and perform final cleaning as may be necessary for the proper execution of the work .
this section does not include excavation for bases or pavements curbs curb and gutter valley gutter ditch pavement or rubble gutter .
num trench excavation safety system and shoring special trench excavation when performing trench excavation in excess of num feet in depth comply with the occupational safety and health administrations osha trench safety standards num cfr num subpart p and all subsequent revisions or updates adopted by the department of labor and employment security .
ensure that trench boxes are wide enough to accommodate compaction and density testing .
submission of bid and subsequent execution of the contract will serve as certification that all trench excavation in excess of num feet in depth will be in compliance with section num florida statutes .
consider all available geotechnical information when designing the trench excavation safety system .
consider these and any more stringent trench safety standards as minimum contract requirements .
num classification .
consider all materials excavated as unclassified and as excavation regardless of the material encountered .
num cofferdams .
num construction num methods construct all foundations by open excavation and shore brace or protect the foundation openings with cofferdams .
provide cofferdams or cribs for foundation construction below the bottom of the footings .
provide sufficient clearance in the cofferdam interiors to permit construction of forms and inspection of their exteriors and for pumping equipment .
num protection of concrete construct cofferdams to protect green concrete against damage from a sudden rising of the water and to prevent damage by erosion .
do not leave timber or bracing in cofferdams or cribs that extend into the substructure masonry except where permitted in writing by the engineer .
num placing in the dry for placing footings in the dry the engineer may require cofferdam sheeting to be driven to an elevation num feet below the elevation of the bottom of the footings and require sufficient pumping equipment to dewater and maintain the cofferdam in a comparatively dry condition .
num return to table of contents num working drawings for substructure work submit drawings showing the proposed method of cofferdam construction and other details left to choice or not fully shown in the plans .
obtain the engineers approval of the type and clearance of cofferdams insofar as such details affect the character of the finished work .
for other details of design that do not affect the character of the finished work assume responsibility for the successful construction of the work .
retain a professional engineer registered in the state of florida to prepare the above construction drawing and keep a signed and sealed copy on hand at the site at all times .
num removal unless otherwise provided remove cofferdams or cribs with all sheeting and bracing after completion of the substructure without disturbing or marring the finished masonry .
num excavation .
num requirements for all excavation perform all excavation to foundation materials satisfactory to the engineer regardless of the elevation shown in the plans .
remove rock boulders or other hard lumpy or unyielding material to a depth of num inches below the bottom of pipes and box culverts elevations .
remove muck or other soft material to the depth indicated in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num earth excavation num foundation material other than the rock when masonry is to rest on an excavated surface other than rock take special care to avoid disturbing the bottom of the excavation and do not remove the final foundation material to grade until just before placing the masonry .
in case the foundation material is soft or mucky the engineer may require excavation to a greater depth and to backfill to grade with approved material .
num foundation piles where foundation piles are used complete the excavation of each pit before driving the piles .
after the driving is completed remove all loose and displaced material leaving a smooth solid and level bed to receive the masonry .
num removal of obstructions remove boulders logs or any unforeseen obstacles encountered in excavating .
compensation will be in accordance with the requirements of num .
num rock excavation clean all rock and other hard foundation material remove all loose material and cut all rock to a firm surface .
either level step vertically and horizontally or serrate the rock as may be directed by the engineer .
clean out all seams and fill them with concrete or mortar .
num pipe trench excavation excavate trenches for pipes to the elevation of the bottom of the pipe and to a width sufficient to provide adequate working room .
remove soil not meeting the classification specified as suitable backfill material in num to a depth of num inches below the bottom of the pipe elevation .
where the soils permit ensure that the trench sides are vertical up to at least the midpoint of the pipe .
for pipe lines placed above the natural ground line place and compact the embankment prior to excavation of the trench to an elevation at least num feet above the top of the pipe and to a width equal to four pipe diameters and then excavate the trench to the required grade .
for pipe trenches utilizing trench boxes ensure that the trench box used is of sufficient width to permit thorough tamping of bedding material under and around the pipes as specified in num .
do not disturb the installed pipe and its embedment when moving trench boxes .
move the trench box carefully to avoid excavated wall displacement or damage .
as the trench num return to table of contents box is moved fill any voids left by the trench box and continuously place and compact the backfill material adjacent to and all along the side of the trench box walls to fill any voids created by the trench box .
num preservation of channel .
num general unless shown in the plans do not excavate outside of caissons cribs cofferdams or sheet piling and do not disturb the natural stream bed adjacent to the structure .
if excavating or dredging at the site of the structure before sinking caissons cribs or cofferdams complete the foundation and backfill all such excavations to the original ground surface or other required elevation with material satisfactory to the engineer .
num removal of excavated materials do not allow materials that are deposited adjacent to the stream area to infiltrate the water areas .
leave the stream in its original condition .
num disposal of surplus .
use suitable excavated materials for backfilling over or around the structure .
dispose of unsuitable materials .
meet the disposal requirements pertaining to water pollution contained in section num and in num .
num pumping .
pump from the interior of any foundation enclosure in such manner as to preclude the possibility of any portion of the concrete materials being carried away .
do not pump while placing concrete or for a period of at least num hours thereafter unless using a suitable pump separated from the concrete work by a watertight wall .
num backfilling .
num general requirements for structures and pipe num general backfill in the dry whenever normal dewatering equipment and methods can accomplish the needed dewatering .
a lot is defined as one lift of backfill material placement not to exceed num feet in length or a single run of pipe connecting two successive structures whichever is less .
backfill for structures and pipe compacted in one operation will be considered as one lot within the cover zone .
backfill around structures compacted separately from the pipe will be considered as separate lots .
backfill on each side of the pipe for the first lift will be considered a separate lot .
backfill on opposite sides of the pipe for the remaining lifts will be considered separate lots unless the same compactive effort is applied .
same compactive effort is defined as the same type of equipment make and model making the same number of passes on both sides of the pipe .
for multiple phase backfill a lot shall not extend beyond the limits of the phase .
when placing backfill within trench box each lift of backfill is considered a lot .
placement of backfill within trench box limits will be considered a complete operation before trench box is moved for next backfill operation .
when the trench box is moved for next backfill operation this will start new lots for each lift .
follow the density testing frequency in num .
num equipment and methods provide normal dewatering equipment including but not limited to surface pumps sump pumps wellpoints and header pipe and trenchingdigging machinery .
provide normal dewatering methods including but not limited to constructing shallow surface drainage trenchesditches using sand blankets perforated pipe drains sumps and siphons .
num return to table of contents num backfill materials backfill to the original ground surface or subgrade surface of openings made for structures with a sufficient allowance for settlement .
the engineer may require that the material used for this backfill be obtained from a source entirely apart from the structure .
use only material accepted by the engineer .
do not allow heavy construction equipment to cross over culvert or storm sewer pipes until placing and compacting backfill material to the finished earthwork grade or to an elevation at least num feet above the crown of the pipe .
num use of anum material in the backfilling of trenches anum material may be used from a point num inches above the top of the pipe up to the elevation shown in the standard plans as the elevation for undercutting of anum material .
num time of placing backfill do not place backfill against any masonry or concrete abutment wingwall or culvert until the engineer has given permission to do so and in no case until the masonry or concrete has been in place seven days or until the specified num day compressive strength occurs .
num placement and compaction place the material in horizontal layers not exceeding num inches compacted thickness in depth above water level behind abutments wingwalls and end bents or end rest piers under the haunches of the pipes and around box culverts and all structures including pipe culverts .
when the backfill material is deposited in water compact as specified in num and num .
num thick lift requirements the contractor may elect to place material in thicker lifts of no more than num inches compacted thickness above the soil envelope if the embankment material is classified as group num in the table below .
if the embankment material is classified as group num in the table below and the contractor chooses to place material in thicker lifts of no more than num inches compacted thickness above the soil envelope then the contractor must demonstrate with a successful test section that density can be achieved .
thick lift around structures is only allowed above the soil envelope of the connecting pipe .
notify the engineer in writing prior to beginning construction of a test section .
construct a test section of the length of one lot .
perform five quality control qc tests at random locations within the test section .
all five tests must meet the density required by num and be verified by the department .
identify the test section with the compaction effort and soil classification in the log book .
in case of a change in compaction effort or soil classification construct a new test section .
when a qc test fails the requirements of num or when the qc tests can not be verified construct a new test section .
the contractor may elect to place material in num inches compacted thickness at any time .
group aashto soil class maximum lift thickness thick lift control test section requirements within cover zone above soil envelope within cover zone above soil envelope num anum num inches num inches na not needed anum no .
num sieve num num anum num inches without control test section na maximum of num inches per num anum no .
num sieve num anum anum anum anum anum anum num return to table of contents group aashto soil class maximum lift thickness thick lift control test section requirements within cover zone above soil envelope within cover zone above soil envelope anum liquid limit num num additional requirements for structures other than pipe num density where the backfill material is deposited in water obtain a num inch layer of comparatively dry material thoroughly compacted by tamping before verifying the layer and density requirements .
meet the requirements of num .
num box culverts for box culverts over which pavement is to be constructed compact around the structure to an elevation not less than num inches above the top of the structure using rapidstriking mechanical tampers .
num other limited areas compact in other limited areas using mechanical tampers or approved hand tampers until the cover over the structure is at least num inches thick .
when hand tampers are used deposit the materials in layers not more than num inches thick using hand tampers suitable for this purpose with a face area of not more than num square inches .
take special precautions to prevent any wedging action against the masonry and step or terrace the slope bounding the excavation for abutments and wingwalls if required by the engineer .
num culverts and piers backfill around culverts and piers on both sides simultaneously to approximately the same elevation .
num compaction under wet conditions where wet conditions do not permit the use of mechanical tampers compact using hand tampers .
use only anum material for the hand tamped portions of the backfill .
when the backfill has reached an elevation and condition such as to make the use of the mechanical tampers practical perform mechanical tamping in such manner and to such extent as to transfer the compaction force into the sections previously tamped by hand .
num additional requirements for pipe greater than num inches inside diameter num general trenches for pipe may have up to four zones that must be backfilled .
lowest zone the lowest zone is backfilled for deep undercuts up to within num inches of the bottom of the pipe .
bedding zone the zone above the lowest zone is the bedding zone .
usually it will be the backfill which is the num inches of soil below the bottom of the pipe .
when rock or other hard material has been removed to place the pipe the bedding zone will be the num inches of soil below the bottom of the pipe .
cover zone the next zone is backfill that is placed after the pipe has been laid and will be called the cover zone .
this zone extends to num inches above the top of the pipe .
the cover zone and the bedding zone are considered the soil envelope for the pipe .
top zone the top zone extends from num inches above the top of the pipe to the base or final grade .
num material num lowest zone backfill areas undercut below the bedding zone of a pipe with coarse sand or other suitable granular material obtained from the grading operations on the project or a commercial material if no suitable material is available .
num return to table of contents num soil envelope in both the bedding zone and the cover zone of the pipe backfill with materials classified as anum anum or anum .
material classified as anum may be used if the pipe is concrete pipe .
num top zone backfill the area of the trench above the soil envelope of the pipe with materials allowed on standard plans index num .
num compaction num lowest zone compact the soil in the lowest zone to approximately match the density of the soil in which the trench was cut .
num bedding zone if the trench was not undercut below the bottom of the pipe loosen the soil in the bottom of the trench immediately below the approximate middle third of the outside diameter of the pipe .
if the trench was undercut place the bedding material and leave it in a loose condition below the middle third of the outside diameter of the pipe .
compact the outer portions to meet the density requirements of the acceptance criteria .
place the material in lifts no greater than num inches compacted thickness .
num cover zone before placing the cover zone material lay pipe according to section num .
excavate for pipe bells before laying pipe .
place the material in num inch layers compacted thickness evenly deposited on both sides of the pipe and compact with mechanical tampers suitable for this purpose .
hand tamp material below the pipe haunch that can not be reached by mechanical tampers .
meet the requirements of in num .
num top zone place the material in layers not to exceed num inches in compacted thickness .
meet the requirements of the density acceptance criteria .
num backfill under wet conditions where wet conditions are such that dewatering by normal pumping methods would not be effective the procedure outlined below may be used when specifically authorized by the engineer in writing .
the department will pay for any select material which is not available from the grading as unforeseeable work .
the department will not pay for select material that might be used by the contractor for his own convenience instead of dewatering .
the department will permit the use of granular material below the elevation at which mechanical tampers would be effective but only material classified as anum .
place and compact the material using timbers or hand tampers until the backfill reaches an elevation such that its moisture content will permit the use of mechanical tampers .
when the backfill has reached such elevation use normally acceptable backfill material .
compact the material using mechanical tampers in such manner and to such extent as to transfer the compacting force into the material previously tamped by hand .
the department will permit the use of coarse aggregate below the elevation at which mechanical tampers would be effective .
use coarse aggregate as specified in section num for aggregate size number num num num num num num or num .
place the coarse aggregate such that it will be stable and firm .
fully wrap the aggregate with a layer of type dnum filter fabric as specified in section num .
do not place coarse aggregate within num feet of the ends of the trench or ditch .
use normally accepted backfill material at the ends .
num acceptance program .
num general requirements meet the requirements of num except replace the requirements of num with num num with num and num with num .
num return to table of contents num reduced testing frequency obtain the engineers approval in writing for the option to reduce density testing frequency to one test every two lots or one every four lots for trench box operations if the following requirements are met a .
resolution testing was not required for six consecutive verified lots .
b .
resolution testing was required for any of the six consecutive verified lots but qc test data was upheld .
identify the substantiating tests in the density log book and notify the engineer in writing prior to starting reduced frequency of testing .
generate random numbers for selecting test locations for the lots under consideration .
when qc test frequency is reduced obtain the engineers approval in writing to place more than one lot over an untested lot .
do not apply reduced testing frequency for the first and last lift of pipe .
assure similar compaction efforts for the untested sections .
if the verification test fails and qc test data is not upheld by resolution testing the qc testing will revert to the original frequency .
num acceptance criteria num density obtain a minimum qc density in any lot of num of the standard proctor maximum density as determined by fm numtnum or the requirements of num when applicable .
when the cover height below the bottom of base under asphalt pavement below concrete pavement or below unpaved ground exceeds num inches compact the pipe backfill in the cover zone to a density of at least num of the standard proctor maximum density as determined by fmnumtnum .
for density requirements around drainage structures obtain a minimum qc density in any lot of num of the standard proctor maximum density as determined by fm numtnum for a distance of one pipe diameter but not less than num feet from the outside face of the structure .
num exceptions to structures and pipe density requirements compact the backfill to a firmness approximately equal to that of the soil next to the pipe trench in locations outside the plane described by a one vertical to two horizontal slope downward from the roadway shoulder point or the gutter line in accordance with standard plans index num num or num .
apply num when compacting sidedrain pipe backfill under driveways serving a property that is not a single residential lot .
num additional requirements num frequency conduct standard proctor maximum density sampling and testing at a minimum frequency of one test per soil type .
the summary of tests and frequency is shown in the table below .
test name quality control verification standard proctor maximum density one per soil type one per soil type density one per lot one per four consecutive lots and for wet conditions the first lift not affected by water soil classification and organic content one per standard proctor maximum density one per standard proctor maximum density num return to table of contents num verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures .
meet the requirements of num .
num site restoration .
wherever the existing site is disturbed solely for the purpose of constructing or removing box culverts pipes inlets manholes etc .
completely replace and restore the site to the engineers satisfaction without additional compensation .
num cleaning up .
upon completion of the work leave the structure and all adjacent areas in a neat and presentable condition clear up all temporary structures rubbish and surplus materials and leave the space under the structure unobstructed and in such shape that drift will not collect nor scour or be induced .
pile all material from existing structures that have been removed neatly on the bank unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
pull false work piling unless the engineer permits it to be cut or broken off in which case it will be cut or broken off at least num feet below the ground line or stream bed .
num method of measurement .
when direct payment for excavation for structures is provided in the proposal and such payment is on a unit basis such excavation will be measured in its original position by the cross section method to determine the amount of material .
the cubic yard volume of excavation used as a basis of payment will then be that material actually removed below the original ground line or stream bed but not including that shown in the plans to be paid for either as regular excavation subsoil excavation lateral ditch excavation or channel excavation or which is included in the item for grading and except that no payment will be made for material removed in excavating for footings or foundations outside of an area which is bounded by vertical planes num inches outside of the limits of the footing and parallel thereto .
for pipe trenches the width used to be in the calculation shall be the diameter of the pipe plus num inches .
num basis of payment .
num when no direct payment provided when direct payment for excavation for structures is not provided for in the proposal all work specified in this section other than as specified in num through num shall be included in the contract price for the concrete or for other items covering the applicable structure .
num direct payment when direct payment for work under this section is provided the contract price per cubic yard measured as provided in num as shown in the proposal shall be full compensation for all the work specified in this section except such work as is specifically stipulated to be paid for separately in num through num .
num excavation below plan grade when excavation of material below plan grade is called for in the plans or authorized by the engineer and payment for excavation for structures is on a cubic yard basis the material excavated below plan grade will be included in the measurement for this item .
payment for the material used for the backfill will be made as specified in num .
num strengthening foundations the work of strengthening the foundations as provided in num shall be paid for as provided in num unless such work is covered by a bid item .
num return to table of contents num backfilling for additional support the work of providing additional support by backfilling with sand or other satisfactory material where called for by the engineer as specified in num shall be paid for as provided in num .
num removal and replacement of existing pavement for pavement curb etc .
which is removed only in order to construct pipe culverts or storm sewers as specified in num all costs of such removal and replacement shall be included in the costs of the pipe or other structure for which it is removed unless otherwise provided for in the contract .
num removal and replacement of material unsuitable for backfill when it can not reasonably be anticipated from information contained in the plans that material excavated for the structure will be unsuitable for use as backfill and such material proves to be unsuitable for this use the work of disposing of such material away from the site will be paid for as unforeseeable work and the work of bringing in substitute material for the backfill will be paid for as specified for the particular case shown below num .
no additional payment will be made for backfill materials obtained from surplus material available from the normal excavation or grading operations .
num .
when the necessary material is not available from the normal excavation or grading operations and the contract includes an item for borrow excavation backfill material authorized to be obtained from designated borrow areas will be included in the volume of borrow excavation to be paid for .
num .
when the necessary material is not available from the normal excavation or grading operations and no separate item for borrow excavation is included in the contract any backfill material obtained by increasing the volume of excavation within the roadway right of way will be measured and paid for as regular excavation subject to the provisions of num .
num .
when authorization is given for obtaining the material from outside the right of way and from other than designated borrow areas such excavation will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
num .
where pipe bedding is provided as specified in num by the use of select granular material the quantity of such select material obtained either as commercial material or from material from the grading operations other than in the immediate vicinity of the pipe to be bedded as authorized by the engineer will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard for select bedding material .
no payment for this material will be made for material available from the excavation for the pipe culvert or from other material available from the grading operations at a location not sufficiently remote as to require loading on trucks .
num pay items payment for the work under this section when provided for directly shall be made under item no .
num num excavation for structures per cubic yard .
item no .
num num select bedding material per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num geosynthetic reinforcement num description .
this section specifies the construction requirements for geosynthetics used in geosynthetic reinforced soil slopes and geosynthetic reinforced foundations constructed on soft insitu soils .
furnish and place geosynthetics and any associated facing material or drainage blankets .
num responsibility .
construct the geosynthetic reinforced feature including materials method and installation based on information provided in the contract documents and the geosynthetic suppliers recommendations .
submit shop drawings in accordance with section num showing the details and distribution of the selected geosynthetics that meet the design shown in the plans .
alternate designs optimizing the selected geosynthetic materials may be submitted .
for alternate designs submit complete design calculations and details which include plan view elevation view and details in accordance with the contract documents .
these shall show the extent number of layers of geosynthetic reinforcement minimum properties of each geosynthetic reinforcement layer vertical spacing of geosynthetic reinforcement orientation of geosynthetic facing details details at special structures or obstructions typical construction sequence and top and bottom elevations of the geosynthetic reinforcement .
calculations shall be submitted to substantiate the design meets the requirements of chapter num of the fdot design manual and in accordance with the contract plans .
as a minimum these shall clearly show the derivation of reinforcement requirements i.e .
type spacing length etc .
and determination of all design parameters and factors .
all plans and calculations are to be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of florida .
num materials .
num geosynthetic materials use materials meeting the requirements of section num and are listed on the approved product list apl .
deliver geosynthetic materials including facing and drainage elements to the job site in unopened shipping packages labeled with the suppliers name and product name .
during shipping and storage protect the geosynthetic from physical damage debris and from temperatures greater than numf .
follow the suppliers recommendations regarding protection from direct sunlight .
at the time of installation the engineer will reject the material if it has defects tears punctures flaws deterioration or other damage .
however if approved by the engineer the contractor may repair torn or punctured sections by placing a patch over the damaged area .
replace or repair any rejected geosynthetic at no additional expense to the department .
num backfill materials use only free draining backfill material in the reinforced fill volume as shown in the plans meeting the following gradation limits as determined in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum sieve size percent passing num inches num num inch num to num num return to table of contents sieve size percent passing no .
num num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num do not use backfill material containing more than an average of num by weight of organic material as determined by fm numtnum and by averaging the test results for three randomly selected representative samples from each stratum or stockpile of a particular material .
consider the stratum or stockpile unsuitable for construction of the reinforced fill volume if an individual test value exceeds num .
use backfill with a maximum plasticity index of six as determined by aashto tnum and a maximum liquid limit of num as determined by aashto tnum .
use backfill materials with a ph between num and num as determined by fm num .
when metal pipes or other metal items are embedded in the backfill use backfill with a ph between num and num .
do not use soil cement or lime stabilized backfill unless approved by the engineer .
have the backfill material tested for every soil type for ph by a department approved independent testing laboratory prior to placement .
submit a signed and sealed certification by a professional engineer registered in the state of florida that the results have met the requirements of this section .
num construction .
num general obtain from the geosynthetic supplier technical instructions guidance in preconstruction activities and onsite technical assistance during construction .
submit a copy of any instructions provided by the supplier to the engineer prior to beginning installation .
num reinforced soil slopes num preparation remove all existing vegetation and all unsuitable foundation materials .
prepare the foundation in accordance with section num except as noted herein .
proof roll the graded area with a vibratory roller weighing a minimum of num tons or a sheepsfoot roller where appropriate exerting a compression of at least num pounds psi on the tamper foot for at least five passes in the presence of the engineer or as directed by the engineer .
remove and replace any soft or loose foundation subsoils that are in the opinion of the engineer incapable of sustaining the required proof rolling in accordance with section num .
provide proof rolled ground surfaces which are uniform smooth and free of abrupt changes in slope debris and irregularities that might damage the reinforcement .
promptly repair and restore to their original condition any areas outside the limits of disturbance shown in the plans which are damaged as part of this work at no expense to the department .
make every possible effort to avoid such damage .
num geosynthetic placement place the geosynthetics at the proper elevation location and orientation as shown in the plans .
in general place the geosynthetics used for slope stabilization such that its primary direction of tensile strength is perpendicular to the plan face of the slope .
pull the geosynthetic material tight and secure it as necessary to lay flat against the soil prior to fill placement .
place adjacent rolls of geosynthetic to maintain num horizontal coverage at the face of the slope .
when placing geosynthetic for curved embankments do not allow less num return to table of contents than num horizontal coverage or an unreinforced horizontal spacing greater than num feet at the end of the reinforcement farthest from the face of the slope .
do not allow vertical spacing of the geosynthetic layers to exceed the spacing shown on the shop drawings .
do not make any splices or seams in the primary direction of tensile strength in the geosynthetic without approval of the engineer .
when splices in the primary direction are approved make splices full width of the geosynthetic strip by using a similar material with similar strength .
use a splice mechanism that allows a minimum of num load transfer from piece to piece of geosynthetic .
make only one splice per length of geosynthetic .
do not place splices within num feet of the slope face within num feet below top of slope or horizontally adjacent to another splice .
place only that amount of geosynthetic material including facing and drainage material which will be covered in a single days production .
do not operate equipment directly on the geosynthetics .
operate equipment such that no turning movements occur on the areas where geosynthetic is in place with less than num inches of fill cover .
fill and compact ruts of more than num inches in depth as they develop .
num backfill placement perform work in accordance with an approved qc plan meeting the requirements of num .
a lot is defined as a single lift of finished embankment not to exceed num feet in length .
maintain uniform moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction throughout each layer of material .
use backfill material having a placement moisture content within num on the dry side of optimum .
do not place wet backfill with moisture content greater than optimum in the fill .
spread backfill material over the geosynthetic in the direction of geosynthetic overlaps .
do not stockpile backfill materials on the installed geosynthetics .
avoid construction procedures or equipment which in the opinion of the engineer will cause excessive mudwaving .
compact the backfill using either smooth wheel or rubber tire rollers .
do not use sheepsfoot grid rollers or other types of equipment employing a foot .
at the end of each days operation slope the backfill surface in order to permit runoff of rainwater away from the slope face or provide some other positive drainage .
do not exceed the maximum allowable lift thickness in section num .
num repairs replace geosynthetic reinforcement damaged during or after installation at no expense to the department .
repair geosynthetics damaged during or after installation only after the supplier establishes that the interior and exterior stability is not affected and after obtaining the engineers approval .
make such repairs as follows remove all backfill material from the damaged area of the reinforcement geosynthetic plus an additional num feet in all directions beyond the limits of damage .
place a patch consisting of the same material as the reinforcement geosynthetic over the damaged area .
overlap the undamaged reinforcement geosynthetic with the patch a minimum of num feet in all directions .
then replace and compact backfill material in accordance with num .
num reinforced foundations constructed on soft insitu soils num preparation for some applications involving reinforcement of soft insitu soils the engineer may require that some vegetation be left in place .
if directed in the plans or by the engineer cut trees to within num inches of the ground line and leave the stumps in place .
remove fallen trunks limbs etc .
greater than num inches in diameter .
num backfill placement meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num geosynthetic placement position and orient the geosynthetics over prepared surfaces .
place a geotextile filter of a type recommended by the designer of the geosynthetic system under the reinforcement geosynthetic .
cut and overlap geosynthetics as necessary to accommodate curves .
overlap or join ends and sides of adjacent geosynthetic courses as shown in the plans and in accordance with num .
make any overlaps in geosynthetics in the same direction that covering embankment will be spread .
take care to ensure that the geosynthetic sections do not separate at overlaps during construction .
pull the geosynthetic material tight by hand to a tension that removes all slack .
num repairs meet the requirements of num .
num certification .
submit certification from the supplier at least ten days prior to placement that the products used are the same products listed on the apl are in accordance with the project design requirements and is recommended by the supplier for use at this location .
acceptance of furnished material will be based on the suppliers certification and visual inspection by the engineer .
num acceptance program .
num general requirements meet the requirements of num except delete the requirements of num num and num and num .
num maximum density determination determine the maximum qc density in accordance with fm numtnum method d. determine the maximum density in accordance with aashto tnum method c. perform gradation tests on the sample collected in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum .
num density testing requirements ensure compliance with the requirements of nuclear density testing in accordance with fm numtnum .
determine the inplace moisture content for each density test .
use fm num determination of moisture content by means of a calcium carbide gas pressure moisture tester or fm num laboratory determination of moisture content by granular soils by use of a microwave oven for moisture determination .
num acceptance criteria for select backfill obtain a density in each lot of at least num of the maximum density as determined by aashto tnum .
num optional acceptance criteria for anum and anum materials obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum dry density as determined by aashto tnum .
the combined width from both reinforced fill volume and retained fill material may be considered the same lot if both volumes comprise the same material and both are compacted with the same procedure lift thickness equipment and compacting effort .
num frequency conduct sampling and testing at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
the engineer will perform verification sampling and tests at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
num return to table of contents test name quality control qc verification maximum density one per soil type one per soil type density one per lot one per four lots soil classification gradation ll pi one per maximum density one per maximum density organic content one per soil type one per soil type in addition test for ph at a minimum frequency of one test per soil type at point of placement according to num .
the engineer will collect enough material to split and create two separate samples and retain one for resolution at point of placement until lots represented by the samples are accepted .
num test selection and reporting determine test locations including stations and offsets using the random number generator approved by the engineer .
do not use note pads or work sheets to record data for later transfer to the density log book .
notify the engineer upon successful completion of qc testing on each lot .
num verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures .
num maximum density determination the engineer will collect enough material to split and create two separate samples and retain one for resolution until lots represented by the samples are accepted .
the engineer will meet the requirements of num except replace aashto tnum method c with fm numtnum method d. if the contractor selects the optional acceptance criteria the engineer will verify the qc results of aashto tnum method c in accordance with num .
num density testing meet the requirements of num .
num gradation the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result meets the gradation limits set forth in the gradation table of num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained in num .
the state materials office smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required gradation limits the lots will be verified .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required gradation limits reconstruct the lots with acceptable material .
the engineer will perform new verification testing .
num liquid limit and plasticity index llpi the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result satisfies the plasticity index and liquid limit criteria set forth in num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained in num .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with aashto tnum and aashto tnum respectively .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required criteria lots of that soil type will be verified .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reconstruct the corresponding lots with acceptable material .
the engineer will perform new verification testing .
num soil classification the engineer will meet the requirements of num except test the sample retained in num instead of taking the additional one .
num organic content the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result satisfies the organic content test criteria set forth in num .
otherwise the engineer will num return to table of contents collect three additional samples .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm numtnum and by averaging the test results for three randomly selected samples from at least one lift per soil type .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required criteria material of that soil type will be verified and accepted .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reject the material and reconstruct with acceptable material .
num ph the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result satisfies the ph test criteria set forth in num .
otherwise the engineer will collect an additional sample .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm num .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required criteria material of that soil type will be verified and accepted .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reject the material and reconstruct with acceptable material .
num method of measurement .
num geosynthetic reinforced soil slopes the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square feet of the projected vertical height of the slope face measured from the top of slope to the proposed final ground line at the toe of slope and from the beginning to end limits as shown in the plans regardless of the length or number of layers of geosynthetic within the reinforced volume and including any reinforcement required below the toe of slope elevation .
num geosynthetic reinforced foundations over soft soils the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square yards of the embankment to be reinforced as shown in the plans regardless of the length or number of layers of geosynthetic within the reinforced soil volume and including any reinforcement required below the original ground elevation .
num basis of payment .
num geosynthetic reinforced soil slopes price and payment will be full compensation for all work materials and services specified in this section including design and shop drawings geosynthetic materials facing materials andor treatment installation testing and required submittals .
the cost and placement of all backfill material will be included in the pay quantity for embankment or borrow excavation as applicable .
num geosynthetic reinforced foundations over soft soils price and payment will be full compensation for all work materials and services specified in this section including geosynthetic materials geotextile filter materials facing materials drainage materials installation testing and required submittals .
the cost and placement of all backfill will be included in the pay quantity for embankment or borrow excavation as applicable .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num geosynthetic reinforced soil slopes per square foot .
item no .
num num geosynthetic reinforced foundations over soft soils per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num stabilizing num description .
stabilize designated portions of the roadbed to provide a firm and unyielding subgrade having the required bearing value specified in the plans .
num materials .
num commercial material meet the requirements of section num .
num local material submit test results to the engineer at least num days prior to the stabilization operation .
num local stabilizing material sample and test material from each source and meet the requirements of section num .
the engineer will verify the quality control qc test results meet the requirements of section num .
if the qc and verification results do not compare the engineer will take one additional sample of material from the source in question and the state materials office smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
if the resolution test results satisfy the required criteria material from that source will be verified and accepted .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reject the material .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap obtain the engineers approval in writing for the option to use num rap material .
material must be milled and stockpiled without blending or contaminating with any other material .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap blended material rap blended material is defined as material meeting the requirements of num and num except for the limits for organic content .
if the rap blended material meets the requirements of num and num then the blended material will be classified as local stabilizing material .
provide test results to the engineer and obtain their approval in writing before using rap blended material .
the engineer will verify that the qc test results meet the acceptance criteria otherwise the engineer will perform resolution testing procedures specified in num .
num existing base obtain the engineers approval in writing before using existing base .
when the material from an existing base is used as all or a portion of the stabilizing additives no further testing is required unless directed by the engineer .
num granular subbase the engineer may allow at no additional cost to the department the substitution of num inches of granular subbase meeting the requirements of num and num only when num inches of type b stabilization requiring a limerock bearing ratio lbr value of num is specified in accordance with standard plans index num .
num construction methods .
num general prior to the beginning of stabilizing operations construct the area to be stabilized to an elevation such that upon completion of stabilizing operations the completed stabilized subgrade will conform to the lines grades and crosssection shown in the plans .
prior to spreading any additive stabilizing material bring the surface of the roadbed to a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the proposed finished surface .
construct mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts retaining wall systems shoulderonly areas sidewalk and shared use path areas meeting the requirements of num except replace embankment with subgrade .
num return to table of contents isolated mixing operations will be considered as separate lots .
curb pads and shoulders compacted separately shall be considered separate lots .
isolated compaction operations will be considered as separate lots .
for multiple phase construction a lot shall not extend beyond the limits of the phase .
num application and acceptance of stabilizing material after completing the roadbed grading operations determine the type and quantity if any of stabilizing material necessary for compliance with the bearing value requirements .
before using any fossil fuel combustion products ffcps submit documentation at the preconstruction meeting or no later than num days prior to delivery of ffcps to the project signed and sealed by the specialty engineer that these materials meet the requirements of num f.s .
notify the engineer of the approximate quantity to be added before spreading .
when additive stabilizing materials are required spread the material uniformly over the area to be stabilized .
the engineer may perform independent verification iv sampling and testing if variability in the stabilizing material is observed during inspection after spreading on the roadway .
if the iv test results do not meet the requirements of section num then remove and replace the failing lots with acceptable material .
the engineer reserves the right to reject stabilizing material that contains excessive deleterious substances .
num mixing perform mixing using rotary tillers a plant or other equipment meeting the approval of the engineer .
the subgrade may be mixed in one course if the equipment and method of construction provides the uniformity particle size limitation compaction and other desired results of num .
thoroughly mix the area to be stabilized throughout the entire depth and width of the stabilizing limits .
perform the mixing operations as specified either in place or in a plant regardless of whether the existing soil or any select soils placed within the limits of the stabilized sections have the required bearing value without the addition of stabilizing materials .
num mixed material requirements at the completion of the mixing ensure the gradation of the material within the limits of the area being stabilized is such that num will pass a num inch sieve .
break down or remove from the stabilized area materials including clay lumps or lumps made of claysize particles any particle size num microns or less not meeting the gradation requirements .
after mixing remove any existing lumps of clay or claysized particles greater than one inch that do not meet the requirements of num or this section from the stabilized area .
the final product must meet the acceptance requirements of num .
num classification and bearing value meet the soil utilization and bearing value requirements for the subgrade in accordance with num .
num compaction after completing the mixing operations and satisfying the requirements for bearing value uniformity and particle size compact the materials at a moisture content permitting the specified compaction in num .
if the moisture content of the material is improper for attaining the specified density either add water or allow the material to dry until reaching the proper moisture content for the specified compaction .
num finish grading shape the completed stabilized subgrade to conform with the finished lines grades and crosssection indicated in the plans .
check the subgrade using elevation stakes or other means approved by the engineer .
num condition of completed subgrade after completing the stabilizing and compacting operations ensure that the subgrade is firm and substantially unyielding to the extent that it will support construction equipment and will have the bearing value required by the plans .
num return to table of contents remove all soft and yielding material and any other portions of the subgrade which will not compact readily and replace it with suitable material so that the whole subgrade is brought to line and grade with proper allowance for subsequent compaction .
num maintenance of completed subgrade after completing the subgrade as specified above maintain it free from ruts depressions and any damage resulting from the hauling or handling of materials equipment tools etc .
the contractor is responsible for maintaining the required density until the subsequent base or pavement is in place including any repairs replacement etc .
of curb and gutter sidewalk etc .
which might become necessary in order to recompact the subgrade in the event of underwash or other damage occurring to the previously compacted subgrade .
perform any such recompaction at no expense to the department .
construct and maintain ditches and drains along the completed subgrade section .
num acceptance program for mixed materials .
num general requirements num initial equipment comparison meet the requirements of num .
num initial production lot meet the requirements of num .
num density over num meet the requirements of num .
num quality control tests num modified proctor maximum density determination collect enough material to split and create three separate samples .
determine test locations including stations and offsets using the random number generator approved by the department .
retain the verification and resolution samples for the department until the engineer accepts the lots represented by the samples .
determine modified proctor maximum density and optimum moisture content by sampling and testing the material in accordance fm numtnum .
num density testing requirements meet the requirements of num .
num bearing value requirements test the stabilized subgrade sample collected in num to determine the lbr in accordance with fm num .
within the entire limits of the width and depth of the areas to be stabilized obtain the required minimum bearing value at the frequency in num .
for any area where the bearing value obtained is deficient from the value indicated in the plans in excess of the tolerances established herein spread and mix additional stabilizing material in accordance with num .
perform this reprocessing for the full width of the roadway being stabilized and longitudinally for a distance of num feet beyond the limits of the area in which the bearing value is deficient .
determine the quantity of additional stabilizing material to be used in reprocessing .
num undertolerances in bearing value requirements the undertolerances are allowed for the following specified bearing values specified bearing value undertolerance lbr num num lbr num num lbr num and under num num unsoaked lbr requirements if unsoaked lbr is desired submit request for approval to the engineer .
upon approval by the engineer to consider num return to table of contents the use of unsoaked lbr randomly sample and test from three locations in the initial lot for both soaked and unsoaked lbr in accordance with fm num .
ensure all of the tests achieves the lbr value shown in the table below .
continue testing unsoaked lbr at the frequency shown in num .
discontinue unsoaked lbr testing if any unsatisfactory qc lbr test result is obtained or resolution determines an unsatisfactory lbr .
the following unsoaked bearing value requirement is based on tests performed on samples obtained after completing mixing operations specified bearing value unsoaked bearing value required undertolerance lbr num lbr num num num soil classification and organic content testing perform soil classification tests on the sample collected in num in accordance with aashto tnum aashto tnum aashto tnum and fm numtnum .
the engineer may waive the soil classification and organic content testing requirements for existing base or granular subbase materials .
classify soils in accordance with aashto mnum to determine compliance with soil utilization requirements as specified in standard plans index num .
if the stabilizing material used is num rap or rap blended material then replace fm numtnum with fm num excluding gradation analysis .
the following testing requirements must be met .
test method criteria aashto mnum soil symbol s fm numtnum average of num organic content num individual organic content result num aashto tnum liquid limit num aashto tnum plastic index num fm num asphalt content num replace fm numt num with fm num excluding gradation analysis for num rap or rap blended material num department verification meet the requirements of num except the engineer will conduct the verification tests in order to accept all materials and work associated with num .
num reduced testing frequency meet the requirements of num .
num payment for resolution tests meet the requirements of num .
num mixing depth requirements report depth requirements in the earthwork records system ers measured to the nearest num inch .
the difference between the individual measured depth thickness on the roadway and the plan target thickness must not exceed num inches .
the difference between the lot average average of the three individual measured depth thickness and the plan target thickness must not exceed num inch .
no undertolerance of mixing depth is allowed .
as an exception to the above mixing requirements where the subgrade is of rock the engineer may waive the mixing operations and the work of stabilizing and the department will not pay for stabilization for such sections of the roadway .
meet the required plan mixingdepths by measuring from the proposed final grade line .
determine test locations including stations and offsets using the random number num return to table of contents generator approved by the department .
notify the engineer a minimum of num hours before checking mixing depths .
record results on department approved forms .
num density acceptance criteria num general within the entire limits of the width and depth of the areas to be stabilized other than as provided in num obtain a minimum density at any location of num of the modified proctor maximum density as determined by fm numt num .
num exceptions to density requirements the contractor need not obtain the minimum density specified in num in the upper num inches of areas to be grassed under the same contract .
compact these areas to a reasonably firm condition as directed by the engineer .
num additional requirements num frequency conduct qc sampling and testing at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
the engineer will perform verification sampling and tests at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
test name quality control verification verification for shoulderonly shared use path and sidewalk construction modified proctor maximum density one per two consecutive lots one per eight consecutive lots one per four lots lbr gradation llpi and soil classification organic content asphalt content density one per lot one per four lots one per two lots stabilizing mixing depth three per num feet witness qc witness qc replace organic content with asphalt content for num rap or rap blended material only .
num verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures num bearing value the engineer will collect a sample at a location other than the location where the sample was collected in num and test the stabilized subgrade for determination of the lbr in accordance with fm num .
the engineer will select test locations including stations and offsets using a random number generator based on the lots under consideration .
num unsoaked lbr the engineer will sample and test the initial lot for one soaked and one unsoaked lbr if consideration of the unsoaked lbr has been approved .
num resolution procedure if the departments verification test meets the requirements of num the engineer will accept the corresponding lots .
otherwise the engineer will collect an additional sample in the same lot the verification sample was obtained .
smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by smo will perform resolution testing on the additional sample .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm num .
num return to table of contents if the resolution testing results meet the requirements of num num then the engineer will accept the lots in question .
otherwise reprocess the corresponding lots in accordance with num and retest in accordance with num .
num modified proctor maximum density determination meet the requirements of num except replace fm numtnum with fm numtnum .
num density testing meet the requirement of num num soil classification meet the requirements of num with the exception that the limits will be in accordance with num .
num organic content meet the requirements of num with the exception that the limits will be in accordance with num .
num asphalt content if the material used to stabilize is num rap or rap blended material meet the requirement of num except replace fm numtnum with fm num exclude gradation analysis and meet the limits of num .
num mixing depth the engineer will witness the contractors mixing depth checks to ensure compliance with num .
the engineer will select test locations including stations and offsets using a random number generator .
the department will witness the mixing depth checks .
num .
if the depth checks meet the requirements of num the engineer will accept that numfoot section .
num .
if the depth checks confirm shallow depth remix the numfoot section to an appropriate depth and remeasure in accordance with num .
the engineer will repeat the witness process .
num .
if the depth checks confirm extra deep mixing conduct an additional qc density test after compaction for the bottom num inches of the subgrade for that numfoot section in addition to a qc density test for the top num inches .
the additional density test must meet the requirements of num .
num disposition of defective materials meet the requirements of num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will constitute full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section including furnishing spreading and mixing of all stabilizing material required and any reprocessing of stabilization areas necessary to attain the specified bearing value .
the department will make full payment for any areas where the existing subgrade materials meet the design bearing value requirements without the addition of stabilizing additives as well as areas where the contractor may elect to place select highbearing materials from other sources within the limits of the stabilizing .
if the item of borrow excavation is included in the contract any stabilizing materials obtained from designated borrow areas will be included in the pay quantity for borrow excavation .
payment will be made under item no .
num num stabilization per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num prepared soil layer num description .
num finish soil layer unless otherwise called for in the plans prepare a num inch thick layer of existing soil mixed with imported material if necessary to achieve the ph and organic matter levels required in section num that is favorable to turf and ground cover growth over areas of the project which are to be seeded seeded and mulched or planted by mixing in an organic material compost or commercially available soil amendments .
prepare finish soil layer in areas to be sodded when called for in the plans .
num organic soil layer when required by a permit prepare a num inch thick layer of organic soil at locations shown in the plans .
num blanket material when required by a permit place a layer of blanket material at the locations and to the depth shown in the plans .
num materials .
num finish soil layer and organic soil layer meet the requirements of section num .
num blanket material meet the material classification shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
num ownership of surplus materials .
the department will retain ownership of all materials suitable for construction of the prepared soil layer until the final job requirements have been fulfilled .
unless otherwise shown in the contract documents upon final acceptance contractor shall take ownership of any surplus materials and dispose of in accordance with num .
where temporary storage of apparent surplus materials within the rightofway may be impractical the materials may be stockpiled outside the rightofway in areas provided by the contractor until needed on the project or declared surplus .
with the engineers written approval the contractor may dispose of excess material with the stipulation that any portion required to fulfill job requirements will be replaced with equally suitable material at no cost to the department .
no extra compensation is allowed for any rehandling involved under the provisions of this subarticle .
num construction methods .
construct the surface of the earthwork to such lines and elevations that will provide a surface conforming to the plan lines and elevations upon completion of the prepared soil operations .
leave the surface of the earthwork in a roughened and loose condition .
prevent contamination of the materials by other construction operations .
remove and replace all materials which fail to meet the required soil classification or become contaminated after placement and correct any slippage of this material at no cost to the department .
spread the appropriate material uniformly over areas to receive treatment .
num finish soil layer after spreading mix the material with the underlying soil to a combined depth of num inches unless otherwise called for in the plans .
continue mixing to provide a uniform finish soil layer true to line and grade .
num organic soil layer spread materials to the depth of num inches .
num return to table of contents num blanket material place the blanket material to the depth shown in the plans .
num acceptance testing .
the engineer reserves the right to waive or reduce testing requirements for shoulder treatment projects as defined in standard plans index num .
immediately after completion of construction operations sample and test the prepared soil layer at a testing laboratory qualified under num .
a lot is defined as num shoulder miles .
take random quality control qc samples at a minimum of one sample per lot of prepared surface .
when the source of added material changes the engineer will require an additional sample .
average four sequential lots representing num shoulder miles to determine compliance with section num .
raise the organic matter content of any individual lot with an organic matter content below num to at least num .
the engineer will take a verification sample at a minimum frequency of one sample per num lots .
if the verification sample fails below num for organics but the qc sample taken in the corresponding lot passes the engineer will obtain a resolution sample within the same lot to resolve the non comparison .
the engineer reserves the right to take and test additional samples to determine specification compliance .
for failing samples take and test additional samples as directed by the engineer to delineate areas that need retreatment .
perform retreatment at no additional cost to the department .
perform additional testing of retreated areas at locations directed by the engineer to determine specification compliance .
submit all test results to the engineer .
num finish soil layer test sampled material for organic matter content ph primary macronutrients n p k and secondary macronutrients s ca mg content .
acquire from the soil testing laboratory fertilizer recommendations for the specific plants to be grown in the area .
do not seed seed and mulch or place sod until acceptable values for organic content and ph are obtained in accordance with the requirements of num .
num organic soil layer test sampled material for organic matter content in accordance with the requirements of num .
num blanket material test blanket material for depth in accordance with the plans and for soil classification in accordance with aashto mnum .
add materials as necessary to achieve the required depth .
num disposition of defective materials assume responsibility for removing and replacing all defective material as defined in section num .
alternately submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num to determine the disposition of the material .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be the plan quantity for the following items meeting the requirements of this section completed and accepted num .
the area in square yards of finish soil layer .
num .
the area in square yards of organic soil layer .
num .
the area in square yards of blanket material .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for completing all work specified in this section including furnishing hauling and placing materials to the lines and grades shown in the plans .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num num prepared soil layer per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num cracking and reseating existing concrete pavement num description .
perform controlled cracking of concrete pavement and reseating of the cracked slabs by rolling tamping etc .
on the underlying subgrade to provide a firm base for asphalt concrete surfacing .
num equipment .
num for cracking provide pneumatic or gravitytype breakers or other specifically approved equipment that ensures controlled cracking to the size and extent of uniformity etc .
specified .
control the fall of gravitytype breakers by leads so that the fall will be straight and vertical .
use hammers for both pneumatic and gravitytype breakers of a type that will crack the concrete cleanly and not punch or unnecessarily shatter the concrete .
num for reseating provide vibratory compacting equipment or traffic rollers .
use traffic rollers that weigh at least num tons .
num construction requirements .
num protection of new construction and adjacent structures perform cracking and reseating work prior to beginning all new construction which this work might endanger or disturb .
perform cracking and reseating in a manner that will not damage any existing structures which are to remain and repair any damage to such structures that this work causes by this work at no expense to the department .
num cracking and seating for the cracked slabs make clean fractures as near vertical as practicable .
do not punch the pieces into the subgrade but firmly seat them thereon to as uniform a contour as is practicable .
num special requirements for asphaltsurfaced pavement where the existing concrete pavement is covered with an asphalt surface remove the asphalt surfacing after the cracking operation on test areas approximately num by num feet at locations selected by the engineer in order to determine if the required results are being obtained in the cracking operations .
prepare at least one such test area for each days operation and prepare additional areas if deemed necessary by the engineer .
num dimensions of slabs ensure that the cracked slabs have no dimension greater than num feet .
in the event that the required results in the cracking are not being obtained adjust the spacing of blows or the height of drop of the blows as necessary to obtain the required results with the equipment being used .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards of existing concrete pavement acceptably cracked and reseated on the subgrade .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for performing and completing all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num num reseating concrete pavement per square yard .
num return to table of contents base courses section num rock base num description .
construct a base composed of base rock .
do not use recycled concrete aggregate rca base on interstate roadways .
num materials .
num general meet the requirements of section numfor the particular type of base to be constructed .
the contractor may use more than one source of base rock on a single contract provided that a single source is used throughout the entire width and depth of a section of base .
obtain approval from the engineer before placing material from more than one source .
place material to ensure total thickness single source integrity at any station location of the base .
intermittent placement or blending of sources is not permitted .
base rock may be referred to hereinafter as rock .
the reuse of existing base may be considered provided it meets the requirements of this section .
submit as a cost savings initiative proposal in accordance with section num .
num existing rock meet the following requirements for use of existing rock on the same project num .
notify the engineer in writing prior to excavating existing rock .
num .
submit a process control plan herein referred to as plan consisting of the following a .
locations where existing rock will be removed from the roadway .
b .
locations where existing rock will be used for new construction .
c. method of excavation transport and placement to ensure excavated rock will be kept separate from other approved stockpiles .
excavation methods that may result in damage to the rock rendering it unfit to be used as base will not be approved .
d. proposed measures to prevent contamination and segregation .
e. proposed locations and methods for constructing stockpiles for sampling and testing .
f. method for sampling and reporting test results .
num .
the engineer will coordinate the review of the plan with the district materials office .
num .
upon the engineers review of the plan build a preliminary stockpile not to exceed num cubic yards .
num .
collect and test a minimum of three samples from the preliminary stockpile .
once the stockpile has been sampled do not add any additional material to the stockpile .
determine compliance with num with the exception of carbonate contents .
reject any stockpile if the limerock bearing ratio lbr is less than num .
the district materials office will sample and test the preliminary stockpile to verify compliance with this section .
num .
if all test results meet the requirements of this section the engineer will notify the contractor in writing of the approved status of the preliminary stockpile based on the analysis of test data performed by the district materials office .
num return to table of contents num .
if the use of existing rock is approved continue to produce additional stockpiles not exceeding num cubic yards .
ensure the rock meets the requirements of this section by sampling and testing each new stockpile at a minimum frequency of one sample per num cubic yards .
once a stockpile has been sampled do not add additional material to that stockpile .
the district materials office may also perform sampling and testing .
materials will be accepted if test results meet the requirements of this section .
num .
after num consecutive quality control qc lbr test results meet the requirements of the section and no individual lbr test is less than num the sampling and testing frequency may be reduced to a minimum frequency of one sample per num cubic yards for each stockpile .
notify the engineer in writing prior to reducing testing frequency .
if any qc lbr test result falls below num or a stockpile is rejected revert to original sampling frequency of one sample per num cubic yards .
num .
construct a new preliminary stockpile if there is a change in material conditions not addressed in the plan are encountered or if production varies from the approved plan .
num equipment .
use mechanical rock spreaders equipped with a device that strikes off the rock uniformly to laying thickness capable of producing even distribution .
for crossovers intersections and ramp areas roadway widths of num feet or less the main roadway area when forms are used and any other areas where the use of a mechanical spreader is not practicable the contractor may spread the rock using bulldozers or blade graders .
num transporting rock .
transport the rock to its point of use over rock previously placed if practicable and dump it on the end of the preceding spread .
hauling and dumping on the subgrade will be permitted only when in the engineers opinion these operations will not be detrimental to the subgrade .
num spreading rock .
num method of spreading spread the rock uniformly .
remove all segregated areas of fine or coarse rock and replace them with properly graded rock .
num number of courses when the specified compacted thickness of the base is greater than num inches construct the base in multiple courses of equal thickness .
individual courses shall not be less than num inches .
the thickness of the first course may be increased to bear the weight of the construction equipment without disturbing the subgrade .
if through field tests the contractor can demonstrate that the compaction equipment can achieve density for the full depth of a thicker lift and if approved by the engineer the base may be constructed in successive courses of not more than num inches compacted thickness .
the engineer will base approval on results of a test section constructed using the contractors specified compaction effort .
notify the engineer prior to beginning construction of a test section .
construct a test section of the length of one lot .
perform five qc density tests at random locations within the test section .
at each test site test the bottom num inches in addition to the entire course thickness .
all qc tests and a department verification test must meet the density required by num .
identify the test section with the compaction effort and thickness in the logbook .
remove the materials above the bottom num inches at no expense to the num return to table of contents department .
the minimum density required on the thicker lift will be the average of the five results obtained on the thick lift in the passing test section .
maintain the exposed surface as close to undisturbed as possible no further compaction will be permitted during the test preparation .
if unable to achieve the required density remove and replace or repair the test section to comply with the specifications at no additional expense to the department .
the contractor may elect to place material in num inches compacted thickness at any time .
once approved a change in the source of base material will require the construction of a new test section .
do not change the compaction effort once the test section is approved .
the engineer will periodically verify the density of the bottom num inches during thick lift operations .
the engineer may terminate the use of thick lift construction and instruct the contractor to revert to the num inches maximum lift thickness if the contractor fails to achieve satisfactory results or meet applicable specifications .
num rock base for shoulder pavement unless otherwise permitted complete all rock base shoulder construction at any particular location before placing the final course of pavement on the traveled roadway .
when dumping material for the construction of a rock base on the shoulders do not allow material capable of scarring or contaminating the pavement surface on the adjacent pavement .
immediately sweep off any rock material that is deposited on the surface course .
num compacting and finishing base .
num general construct mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts and retaining wall systems meeting the requirements of num except replace embankment with base .
construct shoulderonly areas shared use paths and sidewalks .
meet the requirements of num except replace embankment with base meeting the acceptance criteria of num .
shoulders compacted separately shall be considered separate lots .
num single course base after spreading scarify the entire surface then shape the base to produce the required grade and crosssection free of scabs and laminations after compaction .
num multiple course base clean the first course of foreign material then blade and bring it to a surface crosssection approximately parallel to the finished base .
before spreading any material for the upper courses allow the engineer to make density tests for the lower courses to determine that the required compaction has been obtained .
after spreading the material for the top course scarify finish and shape its surface to produce the required grade and crosssection free of scabs and laminations after compaction .
num moisture content when the material does not have the proper moisture content to ensure the required density wet or dry it as required .
when adding water uniformly mix it in to the full depth of the course that is being compacted .
during wetting or drying operations manipulate as a unit the entire width and depth of the course that is being compacted .
num thickness requirements within the entire limits of the length and width of the finished base meet the specified plan thickness in accordance with the requirements of num num .
num correction of defects num contamination of base material if at any time the subgrade material becomes mixed with the base course material dig out and remove the mixture and reshape and compact the subgrade .
then replace the materials removed with clean base material and shape and compact as specified above .
perform this work at no expense to the department .
num return to table of contents num cracks and checks if cracks or checks appear in the base either before or after priming which in the opinion of the engineer would impair the structural efficiency of the base remove the cracks or checks by rescarifying reshaping adding base material where necessary and recompacting .
num compaction of widening strips where base construction consists of widening strips and the trench width is not sufficient to permit use of standard base compaction equipment compact the base using vibratory compactors trench rollers or other special equipment which will achieve the density requirements specified herein .
when multiple course base construction is required compact each course prior to spreading material for the overlaying course .
num acceptance program .
num general requirements meet the requirements of num except use num instead of num num instead of num and num instead of num .
num acceptance criteria num density within the entire limits of the width and depth of the base obtain a minimum density in any lot of num of modified proctor maximum density as determined by fm numtnum method d or the pit proctor when using the pit proctor option .
for shoulder only areas and shared use paths obtain a minimum density of num of the modified proctor maximum density as determined by fm numtnum method d or the pit proctor when using the pit proctor option .
num frequency conduct qc sampling and testing at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
the engineer will perform verification sampling and tests at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts and retaining wall systems test name quality control verification modified proctor maximum density one per eight consecutive lots one per num consecutive lots density one per lot one per four lots roadway surface ten per lot witness roadway thickness three per lot witness shoulderonly shared use path and sidewalk construction test name quality control verification modified proctor maximum density one per two lots one per four lots density one per lot one per two lots surface five per num feet witness thickness three per num consecutive feet witness num pit proctor in lieu of modified proctor maximum density testing at the roadway notify the engineer in writing that the contractor option to use the pit proctor supplied by the department will be used .
the modified proctor maximum density frequency num return to table of contents requirements of num shall not apply .
the department will determine the pit proctor from statistical analysis of the base rock modified proctor maximum density at department approved mines .
for posting of mines and pit proctors for each calendar quarter refer to the state materials office internet website at httpwww.fdot.govmaterials .
use the current posted pit proctor value in lieu of the modified proctor maximum density required by num .
use the current posted pit proctor value for density acceptance during the quarter corresponding to the posting .
notify the engineer in writing if returning to the provisions of num and num but do not reelect to use the pit proctor until the start of the next calendar quarter .
num additional requirements num quality control testing num modified proctor maximum density requirement collect enough material to split and create three separate samples and retain two for the engineers verification and resolution testing until the engineer accepts the num lots represented by the samples .
num depth and surface testing requirements notify the engineer a minimum of num hours before checking base depths and surface checking .
determine test locations including stations and offsets using the random number generator approved by the department .
do not perform depth and surface checks until the engineer is present to witness .
enter test results into the departments database .
perform thickness check on the finished base or granular subbase component of a composite base .
provide traffic control coringboring equipment and an operator for the coringboring equipment .
traffic control is to be provided in accordance with the standard maintenance of traffic requirements of the contract .
the thickness is considered deficient if the measured depth is over num inch less than the specified thickness .
correct all deficient areas of the completed base by scarifying and adding additional base material .
as an exception if authorized by the department such areas may be left in place without correction and with no payment .
check the finished surface of the base course with a template cut to the required crown and with a num foot straightedge laid parallel to the centerline of the road .
correct all irregularities greater than num inch to the satisfaction of the engineer by scarifying and removing or adding rock as required and recompact the entire area as specified hereinbefore .
num surface thickness reduced testing frequency when no resolution testing is required for num consecutive verified lots or if required the qc test data was upheld reduce the qc surface andor thickness checks to one half the minimum requirements as stated in num e.g .
reduce frequency from ten per lot to ten per two lots by identifying the substantiating tests and notifying the engineer in writing prior to starting reduced frequency of testing .
if the verification test fails and qc test data is not upheld by resolution testing the qc testing will revert to the original frequency of num .
the results of the independent verification testing will not affect the frequency of the qc testing .
num department verification tests num maximum density the engineer will randomly select one of the remaining two split samples and test in accordance with fm numtnum method d. num thickness and surface testing requirements the department will witness the base depth and surface checks to ensure compliance with num num .
if the qc test results are not deficient as defined in num the lot or numfoot section will be accepted .
if the qc test results are deficient resolve deficiencies in accordance num return to table of contents with num .
repeat acceptance testing .
provide traffic control coringboring equipment and an operator for the coringboring equipment .
num verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures num modified proctor maximum density the engineer will compare the verification test results of num to the corresponding qc test results .
if the test result is within num lbftnum of the qc test result the lots will be verified .
otherwise the engineer will collect the resolution split sample corresponding to the verification sample tested .
the state materials office or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the state materials office will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm numtnum method d. the engineer will compare the resolution test results with the qc test results .
if the resolution test result is within num lbftnum of the corresponding qc test result the engineer will use the qc test results for material acceptance purposes for each corresponding set of lots .
if the resolution test result is not within num lbftnum of the corresponding qc test the engineer will collect the remaining verification split sample for testing .
verification test results will be used for material acceptance purposes for the lots in question .
num pit proctor when using the pit proctor option the engineer will select a random location to sample and test at the minimum frequency in the table below to obtain an independent verification iv maximum density as determined by fm numtnum method d. the engineer will collect enough material to split and hold a sample for resolution testing .
test name mainline pavement lanes turn lanes ramps parking lots concrete box culverts and retaining wall systems shoulderonly shared use path and sidewalk construction iv modified proctor maximum density one per num consecutive lots one per num consecutive lots the engineer will compare the iv results with the pit proctor .
if the iv result is lower than or equal to the pit proctor plus num pcf keep the option to use the pit proctor .
if the iv result is more than num pcf higher than the pit proctor the engineer will test the resolution sample and compare the resolution result with the pit proctor .
if the resolution result is lower than or equal to the pit proctor plus num pcf keep the option to use the pit proctor .
otherwise return to the provisions of num num num and num .
num density when a verification or independent verification density test does not meet the requirements of num acceptance criteria retest at a site within a num feet radius of the verification test location and observe the following num .
if the qc retest meets the acceptance criteria and compares favorably with the verification or independent verification test the engineer will accept the lots in question .
num .
if the qc retest does not meet the acceptance criteria and compares favorably with the verification or independent verification test rework and retest the material in that lot .
the engineer will reverify the lots in question .
num .
if the qc retest and the verification or independent verification test do not compare favorably complete a new equipmentcomparison analysis as defined in num .
once acceptable comparison is achieved retest the lots .
the engineer will perform new num return to table of contents verification testing .
acceptance testing will not begin on a new lot until the contractor has a gauge that meets the comparison requirements .
num thickness and surface testing requirements resolve deficiencies in accordance with num .
num priming and maintaining .
num priming apply the prime coat only when the base meets the specified density requirements and when the moisture content in the top half of the base does not exceed the optimum moisture of the base material .
at the time of priming ensure that the base is firm unyielding and in such condition that no undue distortion will occur .
ensure the prime coat adheres to the base course .
num maintaining maintain the true crown and template with no rutting or other distortion while applying the surface course .
num calculations for average thickness of base .
for bases that are not mixed in place the engineer will determine the average thickness from the measurements specified in num calculated as follows num .
when the measured thickness is more than num inch greater than the design thickness shown on the typical crosssection in the plans it will be considered as the design thickness plus num inch .
num .
average thickness will be calculated per typical crosssection for the entire job as a unit .
num .
any areas of base left in place with no payment will not be included in the calculations .
num .
where it is not possible through borings to distinguish the base materials from the underlying materials the thickness of the base used in the measurement will be the design thickness .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity adjusted as specified below .
num authorized normal thickness base the surface area of authorized normal thickness base to be adjusted will be the plan quantity as specified above omitting any areas not allowed for payment under the provisions of num and omitting areas which are to be included for payment under num .
the adjustment shall be made by adding or deducting as appropriate the area of base represented by the difference between the calculated average thickness determined as provided in num and the specified normal thickness converted to equivalent square yards of normal thickness base .
num authorized variable thickness base where the base is constructed to a compacted thickness other than the normal thickness as shown on the typical section in the plans as specified in the plans or ordered by the engineer for providing additional depths at culverts or bridges or for providing transitions to connecting pavements the volume of such authorized variable thickness compacted base will be calculated from authorized lines and grades or by other methods selected by the engineer converted to equivalent square yards of normal thickness base for payment .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all the work specified in this section including dust abatement correcting all defective surface and deficient thickness removing cracks and checks as provided in num the prime coat application as directed in num and the additional rock required for crack elimination .
payment shall be made under item no .
num num optional base per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num graded aggregate base num description .
construct a base course composed of graded aggregate .
num materials .
use graded aggregate material produced from department approved sources which yields a satisfactory mixture meeting all the requirements of these specifications after it has been crushed and processed as a part of the mining operations .
the contractor may furnish the material in two sizes of such gradation that when combined in a central mix plant pugmill the resultant mixture meets the required specifications .
use graded aggregate base material of uniform quality throughout substantially free from vegetable matter shale lumps and clay balls and having a limerock bearing ratio value of not less than num .
use material retained on the no .
num sieve composed of aggregate meeting the following requirements soundness loss sodium sulfate aashto tnum num percent wear aashto tnum grading a group num aggregates num group num aggregates num group num this group of aggregates is composed of limestone marble or dolomite .
group num this group of aggregates is composed of granite gneiss or quartzite .
use graded aggregate base material meeting the following gradation sieve size percent by weight passing num inch num num num inch num to num num inch num to num num inch num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num for group num aggregates ensure that the fraction passing the no .
num sieve has a plasticity index aashto tnum of not more than num and a liquid limit aashto tnum of not more than num and contains not more than num of the weight passing the no .
num sieve .
for group num aggregates ensure that the material passing the no .
num sieve has a sand equivalent aashto tnum value of not less than num .
the contractor may use graded aggregate of either group num or group num but only use one group on any contract .
graded aggregate may be referred to hereinafter as aggregate .
num return to table of contents num equipment .
provide equipment meeting the requirements of num .
num transporting aggregate .
transport aggregate as specified in num .
num spreading aggregate .
spread aggregate as specified in num .
num compacting and finishing base .
num general meet the requirements of num with density requirements of num .
num singlecourse base construct as specified in num .
num multiplecourse base construct as specified in num .
num moisture content meet the requirements of num .
num density requirements after attaining the proper moisture conditions uniformly compact the material to a density of not less than num of the maximum density as determined by fm numt num method d. for shoulder only areas and shared use paths obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum density as determined by fm numt num method d. num density tests meet the requirements of num .
num correction of defects meet the requirements of num .
num dust abatement minimize the dispersion of dust from the base material during construction and maintenance operations by applying water or other dust control materials .
num testing surface .
test the surface in accordance with the requirements of num .
num priming and maintaining .
meet the requirements of num .
num thickness requirements .
meet the requirements of num .
num calculations for average thickness of base .
calculations for determining the average thickness of base will be made in accordance with num .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square yards completed and accepted .
num authorized normal thickness base the surface area of authorized normal thickness base will be the plan quantity area omitting any areas not allowed for payment under the provisions of num and omitting areas which are to be included for payment under num .
the area for payment of authorized normal thickness base will be the surface area determined as provided above adjusted by adding or deducting as appropriate the area of base represented by the difference between the calculated average thickness determined as provided in num and the specified normal thickness converted to equivalent square yards of normal thickness base .
num return to table of contents num authorized variable thickness base as specified in num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including dust abatement correcting all defective surface and deficient thickness removing cracks and checks and the additional aggregate required for such crack elimination .
payment will be made under item no .
num num optional base per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num reworking limerock base num description .
rework or rework and widen the existing rock base by adding new limerock material as required by the plans .
construct adjacent turnouts entirely with new limerock .
num materials .
meet the limerock material requirements as specified in section num if new limerock is needed .
the contractor may use limerock of either miami oolite or ocala formation but only use limerock of one formation on any contract .
num equipment .
provide equipment meeting the requirements of num .
num existing bituminous surfaces .
num asphalt concrete remove asphalt concrete surfaces from the base prior to excavating trenches or scarifying the rock .
dispose of removed materials as specified in num .
num bituminous surface treatment remove and dispose of existing bituminous surface treatment only when specifically specified in the plans .
otherwise the contractor may mix the existing bituminous surfacing in with the existing limerock material .
num trenches and subgrade .
where widening the existing base excavate trenches along the edges of the existing pavement to the width and depth indicated in the plans .
excavate the trenches before scarifying the existing base .
shape compact and maintain the subgrade of the trenches and turnouts as specified in num except that when stabilization of the subgrade is not included in the plans do not compact the trenches unless the native underlying material has been disturbed .
dispose of all excavated materials as specified in num .
num spreading shaping and compacting rock .
num general scarify and disk or otherwise loosen the existing base to such extent that no pieces larger than num num inches in greatest dimension remain bonded together .
then spread the material to the full width of the proposed new base course and to a grade and cross section roughly parallel to the finished grade .
meet the requirements of num .
num widening strips where the widening strips are not of sufficient width to permit the use of standard compaction equipment compact the rock in accordance with num .
num construction sequence do not spread any material for the upper course until the engineer has made the density tests on the lower course and has determined that the specified compaction requirements have been met .
then construct the second course of new limerock in accordance with the requirements of num through num .
num priming and maintaining .
meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
num base the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted including the areas of widened base and of turnouts constructed of new limerock material .
num limerock material the quantity to be paid for will be the number of cubic yards of only the new limerock material actually placed in the road and accepted .
the quantity will be determined by measurement in loose volume in truck bodies at the point of dumping on the road with proper deduction for all materials wasted left in trucks or otherwise not actually used in the road .
for this purpose level the material in the truck bodies to facilitate accurate measurement .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for performing all work specified in this section including prime coat application as specified in num except all earthwork required for this work and the work of removal and disposal of the existing bituminous surfaces if required as indicated in the plans .
when the plans do not provide for direct payment for such work the cost will be included in the contract unit price for reworking limerock base .
payment will be made under item no .
num num reworking limerock base per square yard .
item no .
num num limerock new material per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num limerock stabilized base num description .
construct a base course composed of roadbed soil stabilized with limerock .
num materials .
meet the limerock material requirements as specified in section num .
num equipment .
num for mixing for mixing in the roadway provide a heavyduty rotary tiller or other equipment approved by the engineer as equally effective for this work .
num for compaction select the equipment for compacting the stabilized material except that for the final finish use a steelwheeled roller .
num preparation of roadbed .
complete the area to be stabilized to the lines shown in the plans and to a grade parallel to the finished elevation of the stabilized base before adding the stabilizing material .
ensure that the elevation of the roadbed is such that the base will conform to the typical crosssection upon completing the work .
dispose of any surplus excavated materials resulting from this work as specified in num .
num incorporation of stabilizing material and mixingin .
num spreading and mixing place the limerock on the areas to be stabilized and spread it uniformly to the loose depth shown in the plans or ordered by the engineer .
then thoroughly mix the limerock with the soil .
perform mixing as soon as practicable but not later than one week after placing the limerock on the road .
do not spread more limerock in advance of the mixing operations than can be mixedin with the soil within one week .
num further mixing operations repeat the mixing operations as often as may be necessary to distribute the limerock uniformly throughout the soil as determined by the engineer .
further manipulate the material to uniformly distribute the limerock throughout the width and depth of the base course .
num plant mixing the contractor may mix the soil limerock and water using the central plantmix method in lieu of mixing in place provided he obtains a uniform mixture with the proper amount of water .
num shaping surface after mixing shape the surface so it conforms to the grade and typical crosssection shown in the plans after compacting .
num depth of mixing stabilizing material ensure that the depth of mixing of the stabilizing material is in accordance with the following table num return to table of contents specified base thickness inches required mixing depth inches minimum maximum num num num num num num num num num in the event that the measured depth of mixing is less than the minimum specified above remix the base course as directed by the engineer until the stabilizing material is distributed to the required depth throughout the base course .
where the measured depth of mixing exceeds the maximum limits specified in the table add num inch loose measure of stabilizing material for each num inch of mixing depth in excess of the allowable depth but in no case less than num inch of material for any excess depth and mix the added material in the top num inches of the base as specified in num and num at no expense to the department .
the department will not include the volume of stabilizing material which is added to compensate for excess mixing depth in the pay quantity and will not allow any additional compensation for the extra mixing required .
num compacting and finishing base .
meet the requirements of num .
num testing surface .
test the surface in accordance with the requirements of num .
num priming and maintaining .
meet the requirements of num .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantities to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
num quantity of limerock the quantity to be paid for will be as specified in num num .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing hauling placing spreading mixing compacting prime coat application as specified in num and finishing all limerock stabilizing material any necessary excavating below the finished grade of the base to provide for placing the stabilizing material and disposing of all surplus excavation resulting from this work .
where extra limerock material is placed at locations of culverts etc .
as detailed in the plans the volume of such material determined as provided above will be included in the quantity of limerock material to be paid for but no adjustment will be made in the area of base to be paid for .
payment will be made under item no .
num num limerock stabilized base per square yard .
item no .
num num limerock material per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num superpave asphalt base num description .
construct a superpave asphalt concrete base course as defined in these specifications .
base course mixes are designated as type bnum .
the contractor may use a type spnum mixture traffic level b c d or e in lieu of a type bnum .
obtain superpave asphalt base from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
num general use materials that conform to the requirements of division iii .
specific references are as follows superpave pg asphalt binder section num coarse aggregate stone slag or crushed gravel section num fine aggregate section num num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap rap may be used as a component material of the asphalt mixture provided the requirements of num are met .
num general composition of mixture .
num general compose the asphalt mixture using a combination of aggregate coarse fine or mixtures thereof mineral filler if required and asphalt binder material .
size grade and combine the aggregate fractions to meet the grading and physical properties of the mix design .
aggregates from various sources may be combined .
num mix design unless otherwise specified design the mix such that all requirements for a type spnum traffic level b or c mixture as specified in section num are met .
num gradation classification use a fine mix as defined in num .
num aggregate consensus properties meet the aggregate consensus properties at design as specified in num .
meet the criteria specified for a depth of top of pavement layer from surface of greater than num inches .
num mix design revisions meet the requirements of num .
num contractors process control .
meet the requirements of num num and num .
num acceptance of the mixture .
the mixture will be accepted in accordance with the requirements of num .
when the total plan quantity of type bnum mix for the project is less than num tons the engineer will accept the mix on the basis of visual inspection .
use the permissible variations from longitudinal and transverse grades as specified in num .
num plant methods and equipment .
meet requirements of section num with the following modifications num return to table of contents num paving equipment a motor grader may be used to spread the first course of multiple course bases when the subgrade will not support the use of a mechanical spreader .
the engineer will not require mechanical spreading and finishing equipment for the construction of base widening strips less than num feet in width or where the shape or size of the area will not accommodate mechanical spreading and finishing equipment .
num compaction equipment in areas where standard rollers can not be accommodated vibratory rollers supplemented with trucks motor graders or other compaction equipment approved by the engineer may be used .
num construction requirements .
num general meet the general construction requirements of section num with the following modifications num temperature limitations spread the mixture only when the air temperature is at least numf .
do not place the material on frozen subgrade .
num tack coat unless otherwise authorized by the engineer apply a tack coat between successive layers of base material .
num thickness of layers construct each course in layers not to exceed num inches compacted thickness .
num thickness requirements .
num general the total thickness of the type b asphalt layers will be the plan thickness as shown in the contract documents .
before paving propose a thickness for each individual layer meeting the requirements of this specification which when combined with other layers as applicable will equal the plan thickness .
for construction purposes the plan thickness and individual layer thickness will be converted to spread rate based on the maximum specific gravity of the asphalt mix being used as well as the minimum density level as shown in the following equation spread rate lbs .
per square yard t x gmm x num where t thickness in .
plan thickness or individual layer thickness gmm maximum specific gravity from the verified mix design the weight of the mixture shall be determined as provided in num .
for target purposes only spread rate calculations should be rounded to the nearest whole number .
num spread rate tolerance control the average spread rate on a daily basis to within plus or minus num of the target spread rate for the individual layers established by the engineer .
when the average daily spread rate is outside this tolerance from the target adjust the spread rate to the required value established by the engineer .
the engineer will periodically verify the spread rate at the job site during the paving operation .
num allowable deficiencies the engineer will allow a maximum deficiency from the specified spread rate for the total thickness as follows num .
for pavement of a specified thickness of num inches or more num pounds per square yard .
num .
for pavement of a specified thickness of less than num inches num pounds per square yard .
num pavement exceeding allowable deficiency in spread rate where the deficiency in spread rate for the total thickness is in excess of num pounds per square yard for num return to table of contents pavements with a specified thickness of num inches or more or in excess of num pounds per square yard for pavements with a specified thickness of less than num inches the engineer may require removal and replacement at no cost or may require a correction as specified in num .
the engineer may require the contractor to core the pavement for thickness in order to determine the area of pavement with deficient thickness .
as an exception to the above the contractor may leave pavement outside the main roadway in place without compensation when the engineer allows even though the deficiency exceeds the tolerance as specified above .
the department will not compensate the contractor for any pavement removed or for the work of removing such pavement .
num correcting deficiency by adding new surface material in the event the total thickness as determined by the spread rate is excessively deficient as defined above and if approved by the engineer for each particular location correct the deficient thickness by adding new surface material and compacting it using a rolling pattern as approved by the engineer .
the engineer will determine the area to be corrected and the thickness of new material added .
perform all overlaying and compacting at no expense to the department .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity .
for each pay item the pay area will be adjusted based upon the following formula pay area surface area actual tonnage placedadjusted plan quantity tonnage .
where the adjusted plan quantity tonnage is calculated by multiplying the plan quantity square yards including any engineer approved quantity revisions times the spread rate as defined in num and dividing by num pounds per ton except the pay items tonnage weighted average gmm is used instead of the design gmm as defined in num .
the pay area shall not exceed num of the designed surface area .
prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num num .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including the applicable requirements of sections num num and num .
the bid price for the asphalt mix will include the cost of the liquid asphalt binder or the asphalt recycling agent and the tack coat application as directed in num .
payment will be made under item no .
num num optional base per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num reclaimed asphalt pavement base num description .
construct a base course composed of reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material .
use rap material as a base course only on nonlimited access paved shoulders shared use paths or other nontraffic bearing applications .
num materials .
obtain the rap material by either milling or crushing an existing asphalt pavement .
use material so that at least num by weight pass a num inch sieve and is graded uniformly down to dust .
when the rap material is from a department project and the composition of existing pavement is known the engineer may approve material on the basis of the composition .
when the composition of obtained rap is not known the following procedure will be used for approval num .
conduct a minimum of six extraction gradation analyses of the rap material .
take samples at random locations in the stockpile .
the average asphalt cement content of the six stockpile samples must be num or greater with no individual result below num .
num .
request the engineer to make a visual inspection of the stockpile of rap material .
based on this visual inspection of the stockpiled material and the results of the contractors extraction gradation analyses the engineer will determine the suitability of the materials .
num .
the engineer may require crushing of stockpiled material to meet the gradation criterion .
perform all crushing before the material is placed .
num spreading rap material .
num method of spreading spread the rap with a blade or device which strikes off the material uniformly to laying thickness and produces an even distribution of the rap .
the contractor may also place the rap material directly from the milling machine into the trench by a conveyor .
when placing the rap material by conveyor directly from the milling machine obtain the engineers approval of the milling process .
num number of courses when the specified compacted thickness of the base is greater than num inches construct the base in two courses .
place the first course to a thickness of approximately one half the total thickness of the finished base or sufficient additional thickness to bear the weight of construction equipment without disturbing the subgrade .
except as might be permitted by the engineer for special cases conduct all rap base construction operations for shoulders before placing the final pavement on the adjacent traveled roadway .
num compacting and finishing base .
num general meet the requirements of num num singlecourse base construct as specified in num .
num multiplecourse base construct as specified in num .
num moisture content meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num density requirements compact the material to a density of not less than num of maximum density as determined by fm numtnum .
where the width of the base construction is not sufficient to permit use of standard base compaction equipment perform compaction using vibratory compactors trench rollers or other special equipment which will provide the density requirements specified herein .
num density tests meet the requirements of num with the exception of num .
within the entire limits of the width and depth of the base obtain a minimum density in any lot of num of the maximum density as determined by fm numtnum .
num thickness requirements meets the thickness requirements of num .
num testing surface .
test the surface in accordance with the requirements of num .
num priming and maintaining .
num priming apply the prime coat only when the base meets the specified density requirements and the moisture content in the top half of the base is within num of optimum .
at the time of priming ensure that the base is firm unyielding and in such condition that no undue distortion will occur .
the engineer will not allow priming if the surface is dry dusty or sloughing .
num maintaining meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents section num optional base course num description .
construct a base course composed of one of the optional materials shown on the typical crosssections .
num materials .
meet the material requirements as specified in the section covering the particular type of base to be constructed .
graded aggregate section num asphalt section num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap section num limerock section num shell base section num shellrocksection num cemented coquina section num recycled concrete aggregate rca section num only for use on nonlimited access paved shoulders shared use paths or other nontraffic bearing applications .
do not use on interstate roadways .
num selection of base option .
the plans will include typical crosssections indicating the various types of base construction material and thickness allowable .
when base options are specified in the plans use only those options .
when base options are not specified select one base option as allowed for each typical crosssection shown in the plans .
only one base option is permitted for each typical crosssection .
see tables num and num for optional base materials thickness and additional restrictions .
notify the engineer in writing of the base option selected for each typical crosssection at least num calendar days prior to beginning placement of base material .
table num optional base groups num through num base materials base group base group pay item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num limerock lbr num num num num num num num num cemented coquina lbr num num num num num num num num shell rock lbr num num num num num num num num bank run shell lbr num num num num num num num num recycled concrete aggregate lbr num num num num num num num num graded aggregate base lbr num num num num num num num num type bnum num num num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents table num optional base groups num through num base materials base group base group pay item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bnum and num granular subbase lbr num num rap base num num num num do not use on interstate roadways .
num the construction of both the subbase and type bnum will be bid and used as optional base .
granular subbases include limerock cemented coquina shell rock bank run shell recycled concrete aggregate and graded aggregate base .
all subbase thicknesses are num minimum .
num based on minimum practical thickness .
num only for use on nonlimited access paved shoulders shared use paths or other nontraffic bearing applications .
num to be used for widening three feet or less .
table numcontinued optional base groups num through num base materials base group base group pay item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num limerock lbr num num num num num num num num num num cemented coquina lbr num num num num num num num num num num shell rock lbr num num num num num num num num num num bank run shell lbr num num num num num num num num num num recycled concrete aggregate lbr num num num num num num num num num num num graded aggregate base lbr num num num num num type bnum num num num num num num num num bnum and num granular subbase lbr num num num num num num num num num rap base num num do not use on interstate roadways .
num the construction of both the subbase and type bnum will be bid and used as optional base .
granular subbases include limerock cemented coquina shell rock bank run shell recycled concrete aggregate and graded aggregate base .
all subbase thicknesses are num minimum .
num based on minimum practical thickness .
num only for use on nonlimited access paved shoulders shared use paths or other nontraffic bearing applications .
num to be used for widening three feet or less .
table num limited use optional base groupsnum base materials base group base group pay item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num limerock stabilized lbr num num num num num num num num shell lbr num num num num num num num num shell stabilized lbr num num num num num num num return to table of contents table num limited use optional base groupsnum base materials base group base group pay item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sandclay lbr num num num num num num num num soil cement num psi plant mixed num num num num num num num num soil cement num psi road mixed num num num num num soil cement num psi plant mixed num num num num num num num num num num use only when specified in the plans .
num based on minimum practical thicknesses .
num construction requirements .
construct the base in accordance with the section covering the particular type of base to be constructed .
graded aggregate section num asphalt section num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap section num limerock section num shell base section num shell rock section num cemented coquina section num recycled concrete aggregate rca section num only for use on nonlimited access paved shoulders shared use paths or other nontraffic bearing applications .
do not use on interstate roadways .
num variation in earthwork quantities .
the plans will identify the optional materials used by the department for determining the earthwork quantities roadway excavation borrow excavation subsoil excavation subsoil earthwork or embankment .
the department will not revise the quantities for those items having final pay based on plan quantity to reflect any volumetric change caused by the contractors selection of a different optional material .
num thickness requirements .
num measurements for nonasphalt bases meet the requirements of num .
for subbases meet the thickness requirements of num .
the engineer will determine the thickness of asphalt base courses in accordance with num .
num correction of deficient areas for nonasphalt bases correct all areas of the completed base having a deficiency in thickness in excess of num inch by scarifying and adding additional base material .
as an exception if authorized by the engineer such areas may be left in place without correction and with no payment .
num return to table of contents for asphalt bases correct all areas of deficient thickness in accordance with num num .
num calculation of average thickness of base .
for bases that are not mixed in place the engineer will determine the average thickness from the measurements specified in num calculated as follows num .
when the measured thickness is more than num inch greater than the design thickness shown on the typical crosssection in the plans it will be considered as the design thickness plus num inch .
num .
average thickness will be calculated per typical crosssection for the entire job as a unit .
num .
any areas of base left in place with no payment will not be included in the calculations .
num .
where it is not possible through borings to distinguish the base materials from the underlying materials the thickness of the base used in the measurement will be the design thickness .
num .
for superpave asphalt base course the average spread rate of each course shall be constructed in compliance with num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square yards omitting any areas where underthickness is in excess of the allowable tolerance as specified in num .
the pay area will be the surface area determined as provided above adjusted in accordance with the following formula plan thickness pay area surface area calculated average thickness per num num the pay area shall not exceed num of the surface area .
there will be no adjustment of the pay area on the basis of thickness for base courses constructed utilizing mixedinplace operations .
for superpave asphalt base course the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square yards .
the pay area will be adjusted in accordance with num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including tack coat between base layers prime coat cover material for prime coat bituminous material used in bituminous plant mix and cement used in soilcement .
for superpave asphalt base course a pay adjustment based upon the quality of the material will be applied in accordance with num .
where the plans include a typical crosssection which requires the construction of an asphalt base only price adjustments for bituminous material provided for in num will apply to that typical crosssection .
for typical crosssections which permit the use of asphalt or other materials for construction of an optional base price adjustments for bituminous material provided for in num will not apply .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num num optional base per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num turnout construction num description .
construct turnouts or extend existing turnouts on resurfacing and wideningresurfacing projects .
the department does not include placing of asphalt concrete surface course over turnouts in this section .
num materials .
for base material for turnouts use any material currently specified by the department for base or surface construction except do not use hot bituminous mixtures intended for use as open graded friction course .
proportion bituminous mixtures in accordance with a jobmix formula approved by the department .
in general the engineer will accept the material on the basis of visual inspection with no testing required .
num excavation .
excavate the area over which turnout construction is to be accomplished to the dimensions shown in the plans or the standard plans .
if the surface of the underlying soil is disturbed during the excavation operation compact it to the approximate density of the surrounding undisturbed soil .
if an existing paved turnout lies within the specified limits for turnout construction leave the existing base and surface in place as directed by the engineer .
num spreading compacting and finishing base .
uniformly spread base material over the prepared area to a depth which will upon completion of compaction and finishing result in turnout base conforming with the specified lines and elevations .
then strike off the base material to a plane paralleling the finished surface and compact it in a manner similar to that used in the construction of roadway base .
the engineer will not require any specific density .
finish the surface to the specified grade and crosssection .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square yards except when turnout construction is specified to be paid for by weight of mixture the weight will be measured as specified in num .
prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including excavating compacting excavated areas furnishing material placing compacting and finishing of base and incidental work .
the cost of any bituminous material used in hot bituminous mix or for prime coat or tack coat between base layers will not be paid for separately .
num return to table of contents payment will be made under item no .
num num turnout construction per square yard .
item no .
num num turnout construction asphalt per ton .
num return to table of contents section num asphalt treated permeable base num description .
construct asphalt treated permeable base atpb and outlet pipe for use under concrete pavement in accordance with the details shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
meet the plant and equipment requirements of section num and the general construction requirements of section num except as noted below .
num materials .
meet the following requirements coarse aggregate stone slag or crushed gravel grade no .
num or numsection num superpave pg asphalt binder pg num num num hydrated lime num aashto mnum type num polyvinylchloride pipe num section num polyethylene pipe num section num geosynthetic material section num num .
use pg num in the atpb containing num heatstable antistrip additive by weight of asphalt from an approved source .
introduce and mix the antistrip additive at the terminal .
num .
for mixtures containing granite add hydrated lime at a dosage rate of num by weight of the total dry aggregate in lieu of adding num antistrip additive .
submit certified test results for each shipment of hydrated lime indicating compliance with the specifications .
in addition meet the requirements of num and num .
num .
use either polyvinyl chloride pipe or polyethylene pipe unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
num composition of mixture .
num general use atpb composed of a combination of coarse aggregate and asphalt cement .
use a mix design verified by the engineer .
num mix design submit a proposed mix design along with representative samples of all component materials to the engineer at least two weeks before the scheduled start of production .
establish the design asphalt content within the range of num num by weight of total mixture .
during the mix design process the engineer may adjust the asphalt content within the num num range .
the engineer may increase or decrease the specified asphalt content during production of the mix after testing and visual inspection .
ensure that a minimum of num of the aggregate is coated .
there will be no separate payment for the bituminous material in the mix .
establish the mix temperature within the range of numf to numf or as approved by the engineer .
num control of quality .
provide the necessary control of the atpb and construction in accordance with the applicable provisions of num and num .
num return to table of contents num acceptance of the mixture at the plant .
the atpb mixture will be accepted at the plant with respect to num with the following exceptions num .
the mixture will be accepted with respect to gradation pnum if no .
num stone is used and pnum if no .
num stone is used and asphalt binder content pb only .
num .
testing in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum and conditioning of the mix prior to testing will not be required as part of num .
num .
the standard lot size will be num tons with each lot subdivided into four equal sublots of num tons each .
num .
initial production requirements of num do not apply .
num .
the betweenlaboratory precision values described in table num are modified to include pnum and pnum with a maximum difference per fm numtnum figure num .
num .
table num master production range is replaced by table num .
table num atpb master production range characteristic tolerance num asphalt binder content target num passing num inch sieve if using no .
num stone target num passing num inch sieve if using no .
num stone target num num tolerances for sample size of n num from the verified mix design num individual test tolerances for atpb production in the event that an individual quality control test result of a sublot for gradation pnum if no .
num stone is used and p num if no .
num stone is used or asphalt binder content does not meet the requirements of table num take steps to correct the situation and actions taken shall be reported to the engineer .
in the event that two consecutive individual quality control test results for gradation pnum if no .
num stone is used and pnum if no .
num stone is used or asphalt binder content do not meet the requirements of table num the lot will be automatically terminated and production of the mixture stopped until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved .
evaluate any material represented by the failing test result in accordance with num .
num acceptance of the mixture at the roadway .
acceptance of the contractors methods of placement and compaction will be based upon the completion of a num foot test section initially and at other times as determined by the engineer acceptable to the engineer prior to further placement .
in the event that the placementcompaction method deviates from the approved method cease placement of the mix until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num temperature and storage limitations .
place the atpb material when the atmospheric temperature is above numf and rising .
do not use atpb material that was mixed more than two hours prior to placement .
num return to table of contents num construction requirements .
num placement ensure that the structural course on which atpb is to be placed conforms to the compaction and elevation tolerances specified in the contract documents and is free of loose or extraneous material .
fill any area of the structural course which is lower than the grade established by the plans with structural course material at no additional cost to the department .
place and compact atpb in one lift with a compacted thickness of plus num inches or minus num inch except the trench which includes the subdrainage pipe in accordance with these specifications lines grades dimensions and notes as shown in the plans .
place and compact atpb material around the subdrainage pipe for the full width of the trench in layers not exceeding num inches loose measure .
do not displace or damage the subdrainage pipe or filter fabric .
remove and replace all atpb material which is greater than num inch below the grade shown in the plans or in the opinion of the engineer is damaged or contaminated at no additional cost to the department .
num compaction compact the atpb by one of the following methods num .
a steelwheeled tandem roller which will produce an operating weight of not more than num pli of drum width .
num .
a steelwheeled tandem roller weighing from num to num tons .
compact the atpb material in the static mode only as approved by the engineer .
begin compaction as soon as the surface temperature has cooled to numf or as approved by the engineer and complete compaction before the surface temperature has cooled to numf .
if necessary cool the atpb material with water .
num surface requirements ensure that the finished surface of the atpb does not vary more than plus or minus num inch from the grade shown in the plans .
the engineer may approve removal of high spots to within specified tolerance by a method which does not produce contaminating fines .
remove and replace atpb material that is outside the established tolerance at no additional cost to the department .
grinding or milling will not be permitted .
num subdrainage pipe and geosynthetic material .
place the subdrainage pipe and geosynthetic material filter fabric in accordance with the plans and standard plans index num .
num outlet pipe .
install outlet fittings and pipes concurrent with subdrainage pipe to provide positive gravity drainage and eliminate soil intrusion .
the engineer will restrict installation of additional sections of atpb until appropriate outlets are installed .
ensure that all fittings and materials are designed and installed to eliminate soil intrusion into the system .
connect the open end of the outlet pipe into either an existing drainage structure existing ditch pavement or terminate with a concrete apron .
do not block the drainage system at any time .
ensure that at the time of inspection and project acceptance all outlet pipes and concrete aprons are clear of earth material vegetation and other debris .
num return to table of contents num compensation .
meet the requirements of num with the following exceptions num .
pay factors will be calculated for asphalt binder content and the percentages passing the num inch and the num inch sieves only .
num .
table num replaces table num .
num .
table num replaces table num .
num .
the composite pay factor in num is replaced with the following cpf num x pf num inch or num inch num x pf ac note use the pf for the num inch sieve if no .
num stone is used in the mixture or use the pf for the num inch sieve if no .
num stone is used in the mixture .
table num small quantity pay table for atpb pay factor numtest deviation numtest average deviation asphalt binder content num num num num num num num num num num inch sieve if using no .
num stone num num num num num num num num num num inch sieve if using no .
num stone num num num num num num num num num num num table num specification limits for atpb quality characteristic specification limits asphalt binder content target num passing num inch sieve if using no .
num stone target num passing num inch sieve if using no .
num stone target num num low quality material .
meet the requirements of num .
for atpb use the master production range defined in table num in lieu of table num .
num method of measurement .
num asphalt treated permeable base the quantity of atpb to be paid for will be the plan quantity in cubic yards completed and accepted subject to num .
no allowance will be made for atpb placed outside plan dimensions unless otherwise ordered by the engineer .
num return to table of contents prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num .
num outlet pipe the quantity of outlet pipe to be paid for will be the length in feet measured in place along the centerline and gradient of the pipe completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
num asphalt permeable base price and payment will be full compensation for work specified in this section including furnishing all labor materials including the atpb material geosynthetic material and subdrainage pipe tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num outlet pipe price and payment will be full compensation for work specified in this section including removal of existing shoulder pavement trench excavation pipe and fittings standard aprons galvanized hardware cloth rodent screens grouting around and stubbing into existing or proposed drainage structures or ditch pavement restoration of ditch pavement sod and other areas disturbed by the contractor backfill in place disposal of excess materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num asphalt treated permeable base per cubic yard .
item no .
num num edgedrain outlet pipe per foot .
num return to table of contents section num cement treated permeable base num description .
num general construct cement treated permeable base and outlet pipe as shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
use any one of the types of pipe listed in num unless a particular type is specifically required by the contract documents .
use only perforated pipe and do not use open joints .
num concrete plant and cement concrete pavement meet the requirements of section num for plant and equipment and section num for general construction requirements .
work will be accepted in accordance with the applicable provisions in section num .
num materials .
meet the following requirements coarse aggregate section num portland cementsection num water section num polyvinylchloride pipe section num polyethylene pipe section num geotextile fabric section num for cement treated permeable base the concrete requirements of section num are modified as follows use type i or ii portland cement no fly ash or other pozzolans permitted .
composition grade of coarse aggregate stone num or num maximum watercement ratio num minimum cement factor num lbftnum maximum slump range not applicable fine aggregate none admixtures none the engineer will approve the watercement ratio .
num lbsftnum do not use materials which contain hardened lumps crusts or frozen matter or are contaminated with dissimilar material .
num control of quality .
num general meet the provisions of this section and chapter num of the materials manual concrete production facilities guidelines which may be view at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
num concrete design mix submit the proposed design mix prior to production on the concrete mix design form for the engineers approval .
use only cement treated permeable base design mixes having prior approval of the engineer .
furnish sufficient material of each component when requested by the engineer for verification of the proposed mix design by the state materials office .
verify the unit weight num return to table of contents requirements as determined in accordance with fm num .
also submit one of the following with the design mix submittal num .
evidence from three sets of production data either from department acceptance tests or independently verifiable commercial mixes that cement treated permeable base produced in accordance with the proposed design mix meets the requirements of this section .
num .
test data from a single trial batch of a num ydnum minimum is required which demonstrates that the cement treated permeable base produced using the proposed mix designated ingredients and designated watercement ratio meets the requirements of this section .
num batch adjustment materials meet the theoretical yield requirements of the approved mix design .
inform the engineer of any adjustments to the approved mix design .
note any batch adjustments and record the actual quantities incorporated into the mix on the concrete delivery ticketcertification form .
num delivery certification submit to the engineer a complete delivery ticketcertification form with each batch of cement treated permeable base prior to unloading at the site .
num acceptance of placement .
acceptance of the contractors method of placement and compaction will be based upon the completion of a num foot test section acceptable to the engineer prior to further placement .
for the purpose of acceptance and partial payment each days production will be divided into lots as specified in section num and in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num num and num .
num temperature requirements .
place cement treated permeable base only when the atmospheric temperature is above numf and rising .
num construction requirements .
num placement ensure that the structural course on which cement treated permeable base is to be placed conforms to the compaction and elevation tolerances specified in the plans and is free of loose or extraneous material .
fill any area of the structural course which is lower than the grade established by the plans with structural course material at no additional cost to the department .
place and compact cement treated permeable base in one course except the trench which includes the subdrainage pipe in accordance with these specifications lines grades dimensions and notes as shown in the plans .
placement may be accomplished by either the fixedform or the slipform method .
place and compact cement treated permeable base material around the subdrainage pipe for the full width of the trench in layers not exceeding num inches loose measure .
do not displace or damage the subdrainage pipe or filter fabric .
remove and replace all cement treated permeable base material which is greater than num inch below the grade shown in the plans or is not covered with the next layer of material within five calendar days after initial placement or in the opinion of the engineer is damaged or contaminated at no additional cost to the department .
num compaction compact the cement treated permeable base by one of the following methods .
num return to table of contents num .
one complete coverages with a steelwheeled twoaxle tandem roller weighing between num and num tons in static mode .
num .
by vibratory plates or screeds .
there will be no density requirements for cement treated permeable base .
num curing sprinkle the cement treated permeable base surface with a fine spray of water every two hours for a period of eight hours or cover with polyethylene sheets for three or four calendar days .
begin the curing process the morning after placement of the base .
num surface requirements ensure that the finished surface of the cement treated permeable base does not vary more than num inch from the grade shown in the plans .
the engineer may approve removal of high spots to within the specified tolerance by a method which does not produce contaminating fines .
remove and replace cement treated permeable base material that is above tolerance at no additional cost to the department .
neither grinding nor milling will be permitted .
num sampling and testing .
the engineer will take random samples of the cement treated permeable base at the point of placement in accordance with fm num to determine the unit weight .
cement treated permeable base not within num lbsftnumof the unit weight of the approved mix design will be rejected .
remove and replace all rejected cement treated permeable base at no cost to the department .
num subdrainage pipe and geotextile material .
place the subdrainage pipe and geotextile material filter fabric in accordance with the plans and standard plans index num .
num outlet pipe .
install outlet fittings and pipes concurrent with subdrainage pipe to provide positive gravity drainage and eliminate soil intrusion .
the engineer will restrict installation of additional sections of cement treated permeable base until appropriate outlets are installed .
ensure that all fittings and materials are designed and installed to eliminate soil intrusion into the system .
connect the open end of the outlet pipe into either an existing drainage structure existing ditch pavement or terminate with a concrete apron .
do not block the drainage system at any time .
ensure that at the time of inspection and project acceptance all outlet pipes and concrete aprons are clear of earth material vegetation and other debris .
num method of measurement .
num cement treated permeable base the quantity of cement treated permeable base to be paid for will be the plan quantity in cubic yards completed and accepted subject to num num .
num outlet pipe the quantity of outlet pipe to be paid for will be the length in feet completed and accepted measured in place along the centerline and gradient of the outlet pipe .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
num cement treated permeable base price and payment will be full compensation for work specified in this section including furnishing all labor materials including the cement treated permeable base material geotextile and subdrainage pipe tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num outlet pipe price and payment will be full compensation for work specified in this section including removal of existing shoulder pavement trench excavation pipe and fittings standard aprons galvanized hardware cloth rodent screens grouting around and stubbing into existing or proposed inlets and drainage structures or paved ditches restoration of ditch pavement and other areas disturbed by the contractor backfill in place and disposal of excess materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num cement treated permeable base per cubic yard .
item no .
num num edgedrain outlet pipe per foot .
num return to table of contents section num granular subbase num description .
construct a granular subbase as a component of an optional base .
num materials .
select one of the materials listed below and conform to the following requirements graded aggregate num limerock section num bank run shell section num shell rock section num cemented coquina section num recycled concrete aggregate rca section num do not use on interstate roadways .
num construction methods .
for the subbase material selected construct the subbase in conformance with the following graded aggregate section num limerock section num bank run shell section num shell rock section num cemented coquina section num recycled concrete aggregate rca section num do not use on interstate roadways .
straightedge and hardplaning provisions will not apply .
compact the subbase to a minimum of num of the maximum density as determined under aashto fm num tnum method d. priming is not required .
when granular subbase is substituted for subgrade on shoulders achieve a minimum of num density of the maximum density as determined under aashto fm num tnum method d. num thickness requirements .
num general do not substitute granular subbase materials in excess of the tolerance specified for the asphalt portion of the optional base .
num measurements when the department is ready to measure the finished subbase provide the coring equipment and the operator and include this in the unit price for optional base .
the engineer will select the coring locations and make the acceptance measurements .
thickness measurements will be taken through num inch diameter holes .
for subbase areas greater than num ydnum the minimum frequency of measurement will be one per num feet of roadway .
for smaller subbase areas the minimum frequency of measurement will be one per num ydnum of subbase .
num maximum allowable thickness the maximum allowable thickness of the subbase is num num inches .
remove and replace areas of subbase exceeding the maximum allowable thickness .
num return to table of contents num minimum allowable thickness the minimum allowable thickness of the subbase is num num inches .
remove and replace areas not meeting the minimum allowable thickness .
if authorized by the engineer additional asphalt may be substituted to achieve the full combined optional base thickness .
num return to table of contents bituminous treatments surface courses and concrete pavement section num prime and tack coats num description .
apply bituminous prime coats on previously prepared bases and apply bituminous tack coats on previously prepared bases and on existing pavement surfaces .
num materials .
num prime coat for prime coat use a product listed on the departments approved product list apl meeting the requirements of num or other types and grades of bituminous material if specified in the contract documents .
where prime coats are to be diluted certify the dilution was done in accordance with the specific dilution requirements for each product and for each load of material used .
the contractor may select any approved prime coat unless the contract documents indicate the use of a specific material .
the engineer may allow types and grades of bituminous material other than those specified above if the contractor can show the alternate material will properly perform the function of prime coat material .
num cover material for prime coat uniformly cover the primed base by a light application of cover material .
however if using eprnum prime material the engineer may waive the cover material requirement if the primed base is not exposed to general traffic and construction traffic does not mar the prime coat so as to expose the base .
the contractor may use either sand or screenings for the cover material .
for the sand meet the requirements as specified in num or num and for the screenings meet the requirements as specified in num .
if the primed base course will be exposed to general traffic apply a cover material coated with num to num asphalt cement .
apply the asphalt coated material at approximately num pounds per square yard .
roll the entire surface of asphalt coated prime material with a traffic roller as required to produce a reasonably dense mat .
num tack coat unless the contract documents call for a specific type or grade of tack coat use pg num meeting the requirements of num heated to a temperature from num to numf or use an undiluted emulsion listed on the apl meeting the requirements of num .
heat the emulsion to the temperature recommended by the tack coat manufacturer .
for night paving use pg num tack coat .
the engineer may approve an emulsified tack coat for night paving if the contractor demonstrates at the time of use the emulsion will break and not affect the progress of the paving operation .
num equipment .
num pressure distributor provide a pressure distributor equipped with pneumatic tires having a sufficient width of rubber in contact with the road surface to avoid breaking the bond or forming a rut in the surface .
ensure the distance between the centers of openings of the outside nozzles of the spray bar is equal to the width of the application required plus or minus two inches .
ensure the outside nozzle at each end of the spray bar has an area of opening not less than num or more than num in excess of the other nozzles .
ensure all other nozzles have uniform num return to table of contents openings .
when the application covers less than the full width the contractor may allow the normal opening of the end nozzle at the junction line to remain the same as the interior nozzles .
num sampling device equip all pressure distributors and transport tanks with an approved spigottype sampling device .
num temperature sensing device equip all pressure distributors and transport tanks with an approved dial type thermometer .
use a thermometer with a temperature range from num to numf no greater than numf increments and a minimum dial diameter of two inches .
locate the thermometer near the midpoint of the tanks length and within the middle third of the tanks height or as specified by the manufacturer if in a safe and easily accessible location .
enclose the thermometer in a well with a protective window or by other means as necessary to keep the instrument clean and in the proper working condition .
num contractors quality control .
provide the necessary quality control of the prime and tack coats and application in accordance with the contract requirements .
if the application rate varies by more than num gallon per square yard from the rate set by the engineer or varies beyond the range established in num or num immediately make all corrections necessary to bring the spread rate into the acceptable range .
the engineer may take additional measurements at any time .
the engineer will randomly check the contractors measurement to verify the spread rate .
num cleaning base and protection of adjacent work .
before applying any bituminous material remove all loose material dust sand dirt caked clay and other foreign material which might prevent proper bond with the existing surface for the full width of the application .
take particular care in cleaning the outer edges of the strip to be treated to ensure the prime or tack coat will adhere .
when applying prime or tack coat adjacent to curb and gutter valley gutter or any other concrete surfaces cover such concrete surfaces except where they are to be covered with a bituminous wearing course with heavy paper or otherwise protect them as approved by the engineer while applying prime or tack coat .
remove any bituminous material deposited on such concrete surfaces .
num weather limitations .
do not apply prime and tack coats when the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is less than numf at the location where the application is to be made or when weather conditions or the surface conditions are otherwise unfavorable .
num application of prime coat .
num general clean the surface to be primed and ensure the moisture content of the base does not exceed the optimum moisture .
heat the prime coat material to the temperature recommended by the prime coat manufacturer .
apply the material with a pressure distributor .
determine the application amount based on the character of the surface .
use an amount sufficient to coat the surface thoroughly and uniformly with no excess .
num application rate use an application rate as defined in table num .
control the application rate within the minimum and plus num gallon per square yard of the minimum application rate .
the minimum application rate may be adjusted by the engineer to meet specific num return to table of contents field conditions .
determine and record the application rate a minimum of twice per day once at the beginning of each days production and as needed to control the operation .
table num prime coat minimum application rates base type minimum application rate galydnum limerock limerock stabilized shellrock recycled concrete aggregate and local rock bases num sandclay cemented coquina shell and shell stabilized bases num num sprinkling if required by the engineer lightly sprinkle the base with water and roll it with a traffic roller in advance of the prime coat application .
num partial width of application if traffic conditions warrant the engineer may require the application be made on only onehalf the width of the base at one time in which case use positive means to secure the correct amount of bituminous material at the joint .
num application of tack coat .
num general where the engineer requires a tack coat prior to laying a bituminous surface apply the tack coat as specified herein below .
num where required place a tack coat on all asphalt layers prior to constructing the next course .
in general the engineer will not require a tack coat on primed bases except in areas that have become excessively dirty and can not be cleaned or in areas where the prime has cured to the extent all bonding effect has been lost .
num method of application apply the tack coat with a pressure distributor except on small jobs if approved by the engineer apply it by other mechanical devices or by hand methods .
heat the bituminous material to a suitable temperature as designated by the engineer and apply it in a thin uniform layer .
num application rate use an application rate defined in table num .
control the application rate within plus or minus num gallon per square yard of the target application rate .
the target application rate may be adjusted by the engineer to meet specific field conditions .
determine and record the application rate a minimum of twice per day once at the beginning of each days production and again as needed to control the operation .
when using pg num multiply the target application rate by num .
table num tack coat application rates asphalt mixture type underlying pavement surface target tack rate galydnum base course structural course dense graded friction course newly constructed asphalt layers num minimum milled surface or oxidized and cracked pavement num concrete pavement num open graded friction course newly constructed asphalt layers num milled surface num num return to table of contents num curing and time of application apply tack coat sufficiently in advance of placing bituminous mix to permit drying but do not apply tack coat so far in advance that it might lose its adhesiveness as a result of being covered with dust or other foreign material .
num protection keep the tack coat surface free from traffic until the subsequent layer of bituminous hot mix has been laid .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantity specified will be the volume in gallons of bituminous material actually applied and accepted .
this spread rate will be determined from measurements made by the contractor and verified by the engineer based on tank calibrations as specified in num .
where it is specified prime coat or tack coat material is to be diluted with water the amount specified for the spread rate will be the volume after dilution .
num calibration of tanks ensure all distributors used for applying tack or prime coats are calibrated prior to use by a reliable and recognized firm engaged in calibrating tanks .
submit a certification of calibration and the calibration chart to the engineer prior to use .
in lieu of a volumetrically calibrated distributor use a distributor equipped with a calibrated meter approved by the engineer .
num temperature correction measure the volume and increase or decrease the volume actually measured to a corrected volume at a temperature of numf .
make the correction for temperature by applying the applicable conversion factor k as shown below .
for petroleum oils having a specific gravity numfnumf above num k num per degree .
for petroleum oils having a specific gravity numfnumf of between num and num k num per degree .
for emulsified asphalt k num per degree .
when volumecorrection tables based on the above conversion factors are not available use the following formula in computing the corrections for volumetric change k t num v v num where v volume of bituminous material at numf pay volume .
vnum volume of bituminous material as measured .
k correction factor coefficient of expansion .
t temperature in f of bituminous material when measured .
num basis of payment .
there is no direct payment for the work specified in this section it is incidental to and is to be included in the other items of related work .
num return to table of contents section num hot mix asphalt plant methods and equipment num general .
this section specifies the basic equipment and operational requirements for hot mix asphalt including warm mix asphalt production facilities used in the construction of asphalt pavements and bases .
establish and maintain a quality control system that provides assurance that all materials and products submitted for acceptance meet contract requirements .
num quality control qc requirements .
num minimum producer qc requirements perform as a minimum the following activities num .
stockpiles a .
assure materials are placed in the correct stockpile b .
assure good stockpiling techniques c. inspect stockpiles for separation contamination segregation and other similar items d. properly identify and label each stockpile .
num .
incoming aggregate a .
obtain gradations and bulk specific gravity gsb values from aggregate supplier for reference b .
determine the gradation of all component materials and routinely compare gradations and gsb values to mix design .
num .
cold bins a. calibrate the cold gatefeeder belt for each material b .
determine cold gatefeeder belt settings c. observe operation of cold feeder for uniformity d. verify accuracy of all settings e. verify that the correct components are being used and that all modifiers or additives or both are being incorporated into the mix .
num .
batch plants a .
determine percent used and weight to be pulled from each bin to assure compliance with the mix design b .
check mixing time c. check operations of weigh bucket and scales .
num .
drum mixer plants a .
determine aggregate moisture content b. calibrate the weigh bridge on the charging conveyor .
num .
control charts maintain qc data and charts updated daily for all qc sampling and testing and make available upon demand .
provide the following charts a .
all components used to determine the composite pay factor no .
num sieve no .
num sieve asphalt binder content air voids and density b. gradation of incoming aggregate c. gradation asphalt binder content and maximum specific gravity gmm of rap num return to table of contents d. any other test result or material characteristic as determined by the contractor necessary for process control .
the above listed minimum activities are to be considered normal activities necessary to control the production of hot mix asphalt at an acceptable quality level .
depending on the type of process or materials some of the activities listed may not be necessary and in other cases additional activities may be required .
the frequency of these activities will also vary with the process and the materials .
when the process varies from the defined process average and variability targets the frequency of these activities will be increased until the proper conditions have been restored .
num minimum process control testing requirements perform as a minimum the following activities at the testing frequencies provided in table num .
qc tests used in the acceptance decision may be used to fulfill these requirements .
table num asphalt plant materials testing frequencies material property minimum testing frequency aggregate gradation once per num tons of incoming aggregate asphalt mix asphalt binder content if daily production num tons once per day if daily production num tons twice per day .
asphalt mix bulk specific gravity gmb if daily production num tons once per day if daily production num tons twice per day .
asphalt mix gradation if daily production num tons once per day if daily production num tons twice per day .
asphalt mix maximum specific gravity gmm if daily production num tons once per day if daily production num tons twice per day .
asphalt mix temperature each of first num loads then once every num loads thereafter per day per mix design .
rap asphalt binder content once per num tons rap rap gradation once per num tons rap rap maximum specific gravity gmm once per num tons rap if less than num tons of mix is produced on each of successive days of production resulting in a cumulative quantity of greater than num tons then perform the indicated test .
num personnel qualifications provide qc technicians in accordance with section num .
num hot mix asphalt testing laboratory requirements furnish a fully equipped asphalt laboratory at the production site .
the laboratory must be qualified under the departments laboratory qualification program as described in section num .
in addition the laboratory shall meet the following requirements num return to table of contents num .
area the effective working area of the laboratory shall be a minimum of num square feet with a layout of which will facilitate multiple tests being run simultaneously by two technicians .
this area does not include the space for desks chairs and file cabinets .
any variations shall be approved by the engineer .
num .
lighting the lighting in the lab must be adequate to illuminate all areas of the work .
num .
temperature control equip the lab with heating and air conditioning units that provide a satisfactory working environment .
num .
ventilation equip the lab with exhaust fans that will remove all hazardous fumes from within the laboratory in accordance with osha requirements .
num .
equipment and supplies furnish the lab with the necessary sampling and testing equipment and supplies for performing contractor qc and department verification sampling and testing .
a detailed list of equipment and supplies required for each test is included in the appropriate fdot aashto or astm test method .
in the event testing equipment goes out of service during production the contractor may elect to use replacement equipment at another laboratory qualified as described in section num for up to num hours upon notification of the engineer .
num .
personal computer provide a personal computer capable of running a microsoft exceltm spreadsheet program along with a printer .
num .
communication provide a telephone and fax machine with a private line for the use of the testing facilitys qc personnel .
in addition provide an internet connection capable of uploading data to the departments database and for email communications .
num requirements for all plants .
num general design manufacture coordinate and operate the asphalt plant in a manner that will consistently produce a mixture within the required tolerances and temperatures specified .
num electronic weigh systems equip the asphalt plant with an electronic weigh system that has an automatic printout is certified every six months by an approved certified scale technician and meets monthly comparison checks with certified truck scales as specified in num num .
weigh all plant produced hot mix asphalt on the electronic weigh system regardless of the method of measurement for payment .
include as a minimum the following information on the printed delivery ticket num .
sequential load number num .
project number num .
date num .
name and location of plant num .
mix design number num .
place for handrecording mix temperature num .
truck number num .
gross tare and net tonnage per truck as applicable num .
daily total tonnage of mix for the mix design print the delivery ticket with an original and at least one copy .
furnish the original to the engineer at the plant and one copy to the engineer at the paving site .
utilize any one of the following three electronic weigh systems .
num electronic weigh system on the truck scales provide an electronic weigh system on all truck scales which is equipped with an automatic recordation system that is num return to table of contents approved by the engineer .
use scales of the type that directly indicate the total weight of the loaded truck .
use scales meeting the requirements for accuracy condition etc .
of the bureau of weights and measures of the florida department of agriculture and recertify such fact every six months either by the bureau of weights and measures or by a registered scale technician .
num electronic weigh system on hoppers beneath a surge or storage bin provide an electronic weigh system on the hopper hopper scales or load cells beneath the surge or storage bin which is equipped with an automatic recordation system approved by the engineer .
num automatic batch plants with printout for batch plants provide an approved automatic printer system which will print the individual or cumulative weights of aggregate and liquid asphalt delivered to the pugmill and the total net weight of the asphalt mix measured by hopper scales or load cell type scales .
use the automatic printer system only in conjunction with automatic batching and mixing control systems that have been approved by the engineer .
num monthly electronic weigh system comparison checks check the accuracy of the electronic weighing system at the commencement of production and thereafter at least every num days during production by one of the following two methods and maintain a record of the weights in the scale check worksheet .
num .
electronic weigh system on truck scales num .
the engineer will randomly select a loaded truck of asphalt mix a loaded aggregate haul truck or another vehicle type approved by the engineer and record the truck number and gross weight from the contractors delivery ticket .
num .
weigh the selected truck on a certified truck scale which is not owned by the contractor and record the gross weight for the comparison check .
if another certified truck scale is not available the engineer may permit another set of certified truck scales owned by the contractor to be used .
the engineer may elect to witness the scale check .
num .
the gross weight of the loaded truck as shown on the contractors delivery ticket will be compared to the gross weight of the loaded truck from the other certified truck scale .
the maximum permissible deviation is num pounds per ton of load based on the certified truck scale weight .
num .
if the distance from the asphalt plant to the nearest certified truck scale is enough for fuel consumption to affect the accuracy of the comparison checks a fuel adjustment may be calculated by using the truck odometer readings for the distance measurement and num miles per gallon for the fuel consumption rate and num ounces per gallon for fuel weight .
num .
during production when an additional certified truck scale is not available for comparison checks the engineer may permit the contractor to weigh the truck on his certified scales used during production and then weigh it on another certified truck scale as soon the other scale is available for the comparison checks .
in addition to the periodic checks as specified above check the scales at any time the accuracy of the scales becomes questionable .
when such inaccuracy does not appear to be sufficient to seriously affect the weighing operations the engineer will allow a period of two calendar days for the contractor to conduct the required scale check .
however in the event the indicated inaccuracy is sufficient to seriously affect the mixture the engineer may require immediate shutdown until the accuracy of the scales has been checked and necessary num return to table of contents corrections have been made .
include the cost of all scale checks in the bid price for asphalt concrete at no additional cost to the department .
num .
electronic weigh system on hoppers beneath a surge or storage bin and automatic batch plants with printout num .
the engineer will randomly select a loaded truck of asphalt mix and record the truck number and the net weight of the asphalt mix from the contractors delivery ticket .
num .
weigh the selected truck on a certified truck scale which is not owned by the contractor and record the gross weight for the comparison check .
if another certified truck scale is not available the engineer may permit another set of certified truck scales owned by the contractor to be used .
the engineer may elect to witness the scale check .
num .
deliver the asphalt mix to the project then weigh the selected empty truck on the same certified truck scales .
record the tare weight of the truck .
num .
compare the net weight of the asphalt mix from the delivery ticket to the calculated net weight of the asphalt mix as determined by the certified truck scale weights .
the maximum permissible deviation is num pounds per ton of load based on the certified truck scale weight .
num .
use the fuel adjustment as specified in num when the distance from the asphalt plant to the nearest certified truck scale is enough for fuel consumption to affect the accuracy of the comparison checks .
num .
during production when an additional certified truck scale is not available for comparison checks the engineer may permit the contractor to load a truck with aggregate from the pugmill surge or storage bin and follow the above procedures to conduct the comparison checks as soon as certified truck scale is available .
if the check shows a greater difference than the tolerance specified above then recheck on a second set of certified scales .
if the check and recheck indicate that the printed weight is out of tolerance have a certified scale technician check the electronic weigh system and certify the accuracy of the printer .
while the system is out of tolerance and before its adjustment the engineer may allow the contractor to continue production only if provisions are made to use a set of certified truck scales to determine the truck weights .
num asphalt binder meet the following requirements num transportation deliver the asphalt binder to the asphalt plant at a temperature not to exceed numf and equip the transport tanks with sampling and temperature sensing devices meeting the requirements of num .
num storage equip asphalt binder storage tanks to heat the liquid asphalt binder to the temperatures required for the various mixtures .
heat the material in such a manner that no flame comes in contact with the binder .
heat or insulate all pipe lines and fittings .
use a circulating system of adequate size to ensure proper and continuous circulation during the entire operating period .
locate a thermometer reading from num to numf either in the storage tank or in the asphalt binder feed line .
maintain the asphalt binder in storage within a range of num to numf in advance of mixing operations .
locate a sampling device on the discharge piping exiting the storage tank or at a location as approved by the engineer .
provide a metal can of one quart capacity for binder sampling at the request of the engineer .
num aggregate meet the following requirements num stockpiles place each aggregate component in an individual stockpile and separate each from the adjacent stockpiles either by space or by a system of bulkheads .
num return to table of contents prevent the intermingling of different materials in stockpiles at all times .
identify each stockpile including rap as shown on the mix design .
form and maintain stockpiles in a manner that will prevent segregation .
if a stockpile is determined to be segregated discontinue the use of the material on the project until the appropriate actions have been taken to correct the problem .
num blending of aggregates stockpile all aggregates prior to blending or placing in the cold feed bins .
if mineral filler or hydrated lime is required in the mix feed or weigh it in separately from the other aggregates .
num cold feed bin provide a separate cold feed bin for each component of the fine and coarse aggregate required by the mix design .
equip the cold feed bins with accurate mechanical means for feeding the aggregate uniformly into the dryer in the proportions required for the finished mix to maintain uniform production and temperature .
when using rap as a component material prevent any oversized rap from being incorporated into the completed mixture by the use of a grizzly or grid over the rap bin inline roller or impact crusher screen or other suitable means .
if oversized rap material appears in the completed recycled mix take the appropriate corrective action immediately .
if the appropriate corrective actions are not immediately taken stop plant operations .
use separate bin compartments in the cold aggregate feeder that are constructed to prevent any spilling or leakage of aggregate from one cold feed bin to another .
ensure that each cold feed bin compartment has the capacity and design to permit a uniform flow of aggregates .
mount all cold feed bin compartments over a feeder of uniform speed which will deliver the specified proportions of the separate aggregates to the drier at all times .
if necessary equip the cold feed bins with vibrators to ensure a uniform flow of the aggregates at all times .
num gates and feeder belts provide each cold feed bin compartment with a gate and feeder belt both of which are adjustable to assure the aggregate is proportioned to meet the requirements of the mix design .
num screening unit remove any oversized pieces of aggregate by the use of a scalping screen .
do not return this oversized material to the stockpile for reuse unless it has been crushed and reprocessed into sizes that will pass the scalping screen .
ensure that the quantity of aggregates being discharged onto the screens does not exceed the capacity of the screens to actually separate the aggregates into the required sizes .
num dryer provide a dryer of satisfactory design for heating and drying the aggregate .
use a dryer capable of heating the aggregate to within the specified temperature range for any mix and equip the dryer with an electric pyrometer placed at the discharge chute to automatically register the temperature of the heated aggregates .
num asphalt binder control unit provide a satisfactory means either by weighing metering or volumetric measuring to obtain the proper amount of asphalt binder material in the mix within the tolerance specified for the mix design .
num contractors responsibilities acceptance of any automatic delivery ticket printout electronic weight delivery ticket other evidence of weight of the materials or approval of any particular type of material or production method will not constitute agreement by the department that such matters are in accordance with the contract documents and it shall be the contractors responsibility to ensure that the materials delivered to the project are in accordance with the contract documents .
num return to table of contents num additional requirements for batch plants .
num heating and drying heat and dry the aggregate before screening .
control the temperature of the aggregate so the temperature of the completed mixture at the plant falls within the permissible range allowed by this section .
num gradation unit provide plant screens capable of separating the fine and coarse aggregates and of further separating the coarse aggregate into specific sizes .
in addition equip the gradation unit with a scalping screen to restrict the maximum size of the aggregates .
in the event that the plant is equipped with cold feed bins that are capable of adequately controlling the gradation of the mixture the use of plant screens is optional .
num hot bins provide storage bins of sufficient capacity to supply the mixer when it is operating at full capacity .
provide hot bins with divided compartments to ensure separate and adequate storage of the appropriate fractions of the aggregate .
equip each compartment with an overflow chute of suitable size and location to prevent any backing up of material into other bins .
num weigh box or hopper equip the batch plant with a means for accurately weighing each bin size of aggregate and the mineral filler into the weigh box or hopper .
num pugmills utilize a pugmill capable of mixing the aggregate and the asphalt binder .
num additional requirements for drum mixer plants .
num weight measurements of aggregate equip the plant with a weighinmotion scale capable of measuring the quantity of aggregate and rap entering the dryer .
num synchronization of aggregate feed and asphalt binder feed couple the asphalt binder feed control with the total aggregate weight device including the rap feed in such a manner as to automatically vary the asphalt binder feed rate as necessary to maintain the required proportions .
num hot storage or surge bins equip the plant with either a surge bin or storage silo that is capable of storing an adequate amount of material to assure a uniform and consistent product .
num preparation of the mixture .
num mixing after the aggregate is dried and properly proportioned mix the aggregate along with any other components with the asphalt binder to produce a thoroughly and uniformly coated mixture .
do not produce the mix by altering the component blend percentage of the rap or sand by more than plus or minus num from the job mix formula on the approved mix design .
for mix designs using fractionated rap the combined blend change for all rap components must not exceed plus or minus num .
the plus or minus num maximum component change does not apply to crushed virgin aggregate components during production .
num storage if necessary store the asphalt mixture in a surge bin or hot storage silo for a maximum of num hours .
for fcnum mixtures store the asphalt mixture in a surge bin or hot storage silo for a maximum of one hour .
num mix temperature produce the mixture with a temperature within the master range as defined in table num .
num test requirements determine the temperature of the completed mixture using a quickreading thermometer through a hole in the side of the loaded truck immediately after loading .
locate a num inch hole on both sides of the truck body within the middle third of the length of the body and at a distance from num to num inches above the surface supporting the mixture .
if a truck body already has a hole located in the general vicinity of the num return to table of contents specified location use this hole .
at the engineers discretion the contractor may take the temperature of the load over the top of the truck in lieu of using the hole in the side of the truck .
num test frequency the normal frequency for taking asphalt mix temperatures will be for each day for each design mix on the first five loads and one out of every five loads thereafter .
take the temperature of the asphalt mix at the plant and at the roadway before the mix is placed at the normal frequency .
record the temperature on the front of the respective delivery ticket .
the engineer shall review the plant and roadway temperature readings and may take additional temperature measurements at any time .
if any single load at the plant or at the roadway is within the master range shown in table num but does not meet the criteria shown in table num for single measurements or the average of five consecutive measurements the temperature of every load will be monitored until the temperature falls within the specified tolerance range in table num at this time the normal frequency may be resumed .
for warm mix asphalt the contractor may produce the first five loads of the production day and at other times when approved by the engineer at a hot mix asphalt temperature not to exceed numf for purposes of heating the asphalt paver .
for this situation the upper tolerances of tables num and num as applied to the warm mix asphalt mix design do not apply .
for windrow paving in addition to the truck load temperature measurements noted above perform windrow temperature measurements at a frequency of one measurement per num feet of windrow placed .
check the temperature of the windrow asphalt mixture using a quickreading thermometer or directly in front of the windrow material transfer vehicle but not so close that paving must be stopped .
measure the temperature of the windrow beneath the exposed surface by shoveling away a portion of the windrow and then measuring the temperature .
for windrow temperature measurements the requirements of table num and num num apply .
num rejection criteria reject any load or portion of a load of asphalt mix at the plant or at the roadway with a temperature outside of its respective master range shown in table num .
notify the engineer of the rejection immediately .
table num mix temperature master range tolerance location acceptable temperature tolerance plant mixing temperature num f roadway mix in truck compaction temperature numf roadway mix in windrow compaction temperature numf numf table num mix temperature tolerance from verified mix design any single measurement numf average of any five consecutive measurements numf num transportation of the mixture .
transport the mix in trucks of tight construction which prevents the loss of material and the excessive loss of heat and previously cleaned of all foreign material .
after cleaning thinly num return to table of contents coat the inside surface of the truck bodies with soapy water or an asphalt release agent as needed to prevent the mixture from adhering to the beds .
do not allow excess liquid to pond in the truck body .
do not use a release agent that will contaminate degrade or alter the characteristics of the asphalt mix or is hazardous or detrimental to the environment .
petroleum derivatives such as diesel fuel solvents and any product that dissolves asphalt are prohibited .
provide each truck with a tarpaulin or other waterproof cover mounted in such a manner that it can cover the entire load when required .
when in place overlap the waterproof cover on all sides so that it can be tied down .
cover each load during cool and cloudy weather and at any time it appears rain is likely during transit with a tarpaulin or waterproof cover .
cover and tie down all loads of friction course mixtures .
num return to table of contents section num milling of existing asphalt pavement num description .
remove existing asphalt concrete pavement by milling to improve the rideability and cross slope of the finished pavement to lower the finished grade adjacent to existing curb before resurfacing or to completely remove existing pavement .
when milling to improve rideability the plans will specify an average depth of cut .
take ownership of milled material .
num equipment .
provide a milling machine capable of maintaining a depth of cut and cross slope to achieve the results specified in the contract documents .
use a machine with a minimum overall length outtoout measurement excluding the conveyor of num feet and a minimum cutting width of num feet .
equip the milling machine with a builtin automatic grade control system that can control the transverse slope and the longitudinal profile to produce the specified results .
to start the project the engineer will approve any commercially manufactured milling machine that meets the above requirements .
if it becomes evident after starting milling that the milling machine can not consistently produce the specified results the engineer will reject the milling machine for further use .
the contractor may use a smaller milling machine when milling to lower the grade adjacent to existing curb or other areas where it is impractical to use the above described equipment .
equip the milling machine with means to effectively limit the amount of dust escaping during the removal operation .
for complete pavement removal the engineer may approve the use of alternate removal and crushing equipment instead of the equipment specified above .
num construction .
num general remove the existing raised pavement markers rpms before milling .
include the cost of removing existing rpms in the price for milling .
when milling to improve rideability or cross slope remove the existing pavement to the average depth specified in the plans in a manner that will restore the pavement surface to a uniform crosssection and longitudinal profile .
the engineer may require the use of a stringline to ensure maintaining the proper alignment .
establish the longitudinal profile of the milled surface in accordance with the milling plans .
ensure the final cross slope of the milled surface parallels the surface cross slope shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
establish the cross slope of the milled surface by a second sensing device near the outside edge of the cut or by an automatic cross slope control mechanism .
the plans may waive the requirement of automatic grade or cross slope controls where the situation warrants such action .
operate the milling machine to minimize the amount of dust being emitted .
the engineer may require prewetting of the pavement .
num return to table of contents provide positive drainage of the milled surface and the adjacent pavement .
perform this operation on the same day as milling .
repave all milled surfaces no later than the day after the surface was milled .
if traffic is to be maintained on the milled surface before the placement of the new asphalt concrete provide suitable transitions between areas of varying thickness to create a smooth longitudinal riding surface .
produce a pattern of striations that will provide an acceptable riding surface .
the engineer will control the traveling speed of the milling machine to produce a texture that will provide an acceptable riding surface .
before opening an area which has been milled to traffic sweep the pavement and gutters with a power broom or other approved equipment to remove to the greatest extent practicable fine material which will create dust under traffic .
sweep in a manner to minimize the potential for creation of a traffic hazard and to minimize air pollution .
do not sweep or allow milled asphalt into inlets .
sweep the milled surface with a power broom before placing asphalt concrete .
in urban and other sensitive areas use a street sweeper or other equipment capable of removing excess milled materials and controlling dust .
obtain the engineers approval of such equipment contingent upon its demonstrated ability to do the work .
perform the sweeping operation immediately after the milling operations or as directed by the engineer .
num quality control requirements furnish a four foot long electronic level accurate to num degree approved by the engineer for the control of cross slope .
make this electronic level available at the jobsite at all times during milling operations .
calibrate and compare electronic levels in accordance with num at a minimum frequency of once per day before any milling operation .
multiple cuts may be made to achieve the required pavement configuration or depth of cut .
num cross slope measurement measure the cross slope of the milled surface by placing the level at the center of the lane and perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
record all the measurements to the nearest num on an approved form and submit the data to the engineer .
num cross slope measurement frequency num .
tangent sections measure the cross slope at a minimum frequency of one measurement every num feet per lane .
when the average absolute deviation is consistently within the acceptance tolerance in table num upon approval by the engineer the frequency of the cross slope measurements can be reduced to one measurement every num feet .
num .
superelevated sections measure the cross slope every num feet per lane within the length of full superelevation .
for curves where the length of full superelevation is less than num feet measure the cross slope at the beginning point midpoint and ending point of the fully superelevated section .
for transition sections measure the cross slope at control points identified in the plans or if not shown in the plans at a control point at a location of num cross slope .
num cross slope deviations and corrections calculate the absolute deviation of each cross slope measurement and the average of the absolute deviations of ten consecutive cross slope measurements .
the absolute deviation is the positive value of a num return to table of contents deviation .
in superelevated sections when the number of measurements is less than ten average the absolute deviation of all measurements .
if the average absolute deviation of any cross slope measurement falls outside the acceptance tolerance shown in table num stop the milling operations and make adjustments until the problem is resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
if an individual cross slope deviation falls outside the acceptance tolerance as shown in table num make corrections only in the deficient area to the satisfaction of the engineer at no cost to the department .
for pavement with multiple cuts the deficient areas not caused by the final cut may be left in place upon approval of the engineer .
all milling corrections shall be completed before placement of the asphalt course unless stated otherwise in the plans or as determined by the engineer .
the limits of deficient areas requiring correction may be verified and adjusted with more accurate measurement methods including survey instruments upon approval of the engineer and at no cost to the department .
should the contractor wish to have any required corrections waived submit a request to the engineer for approval .
the engineer may waive the corrections at no reduction in payment if the deficiencies are sufficiently separated so as not to significantly affect the final cross slope or project grade .
for intersections tapers crossovers transitions at the beginning and end of the project bridge approaches and similar areas adjust the cross slope to match the actual site conditions or as directed .
table num cross slope milling acceptance tolerance roadway feature individual absolute deviation average absolute deviation tangent section including turn lanes num num superelevated curve num num shoulder num num in the event the distance between two edges of deficient areas is less than num feet the correction work shall include the area between the deficient areas .
num verification the engineer will verify the contractors cross slope measurements by randomly taking a minimum of ten cross slope measurements per lane per mile in tangent sections at control points in transition sections and a minimum of three cross slope measurements in fully superelevated sections .
the engineer will measure the cross slope of the milled surface by placing the level at the center of the lane and perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
num cross slope deviations and corrections if the average absolute deviation or an individual cross slope deviation falls outside the acceptance tolerance in table num immediately make a comparison check at the qc test locations to verify the qc measurements in the section .
if the comparisons are beyond the acceptable comparison tolerance in accordance with num stop the milling operation until the issue is resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
correct any cross slope not meeting the individual deviation num return to table of contents acceptance tolerance at no cost to the department .
the engineer reserves the right to check the cross slope of the milled surface at any time by taking cross slope measurements at any location .
num milled surface .
provide a milled surface with a reasonably uniform texture within num inch of a true profile grade and with no deviation in excess of num inch from a straightedge applied to the pavement perpendicular to the centerline .
ensure the variation of the longitudinal joint between multiple cut areas does not exceed num inch .
the engineer may accept areas varying from a true surface in excess of the above stated tolerance without correction if the engineer determines they were caused by a preexisting condition which could not have reasonably been corrected by the milling operations .
correct any unsuitable texture or profile as determined by the engineer at no cost to the department .
the engineer may require remilling of any area where a surface lamination causes a non uniform texture to occur .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square yards over which milling is completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including hauling off and stockpiling or otherwise disposing of the milled material .
payment will be made under item no .
num num milling existing asphalt pavement per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num hot mix asphalt general construction requirements num description .
this section specifies the basic equipment and construction requirements for hot mix asphalt including warm mix asphalt pavements and bases .
establish and maintain a quality control system that provides assurance that all materials products and completed construction submitted for acceptance meet contract requirements .
num quality control qc requirements .
num minimum qc requirements perform as a minimum the following activities necessary to maintain process control and meet specification requirements num .
pavement density monitor the pavement temperature with an infrared temperature device so compaction is completed before the surface temperature of the pavement drops to the extent that effective compaction may not be achieved or the rollers begin to damage the pavement .
monitor the roadway density with either num inch diameter roadway cores a nuclear density gauge or other density measuring device at a minimum frequency of once per num feet of pavement .
num .
mix temperature determine the mix temperature at the roadway for the first five loads and one out of every five loads thereafter .
num .
mix spread rate monitor the mix spread rate at the beginning of each days production and as needed to control the operations at a minimum of once per num tons placed .
when determining the spread rate use at a minimum an average of five truckloads of mix .
num .
pavement texture monitor the pavement texture to minimize pavement segregation .
use density gauges infrared temperature measurement devices or roadway cores at the beginning of each days production and as necessary both at truck exchanges and during normal paving operations .
num .
reporting ensure the accuracy of the qc roadway reports on the departments approved form to reflect the actual surface area of the finished work and be in compliance with the requirements of the contract documents .
num personnel qualifications provide qc technicians in accordance with section num .
num limitations of operations .
num weather limitations do not transport asphalt mix from the plant to the roadway unless all weather conditions are suitable for the paving operations .
num limitations of paving operations num general place the mixture only when the surface upon which it is to be placed has been previously prepared is intact firm dry clean and the tack or prime coat with acceptable spread rate is properly broken or cured .
do not place friction course until the adjacent shoulder area has been dressed and grassed .
num ambient air temperature place the mixture only when the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat meets requirements of table num .
the minimum ambient temperature requirement may be reduced by numf when using warm mix technology if mutually agreed to by both the engineer and the contractor .
num return to table of contents table num ambient air temperature requirements for paving layer thickness or asphalt binder type minimum temperature f num inch num any mixture num inch containing a pg asphalt binder with a high temperature designation numc num any mixture num inch containing a pg asphalt binder with a high temperature designation numc num fcnum num numas an exception place the mixture at temperatures no lower than numf only when approved by the engineer based on the contractors demonstrated ability to achieve a satisfactory surface texture and appearance of the finished surface .
the minimum ambient temperature may be further reduced to numf when using warm mix technology if agreed to by both the engineer and the contractor .
num rain and surface conditions immediately cease transportation of asphalt mixtures from the plant when rain begins at the roadway .
do not place asphalt mixtures while rain is falling or when there is water on the surface to be covered .
once the rain has stopped standing water has been removed from the tacked surface to the satisfaction of the engineer and the temperature of the mixture caught in transit still meets the requirements as specified in num the contractor may then place the mixture caught in transit .
for windrow paving immediately cease dumping of asphalt material when rain begins at the roadway .
stop paving operations while rain is falling or where there is water on the surface to be covered .
remove windrowed asphalt mixture exposed to rain .
once the rain has stopped standing water has been removed from the tacked surface to the satisfaction of the engineer and the temperature of the mixture caught in transit still meets the requirements as specified in num the contractor may then windrow the remaining material caught in transit .
num wind do not place the mixture when the wind is blowing to such an extent that proper and adequate compaction can not be maintained or when sand dust etc .
are being deposited on the surface being paved to the extent the bond between layers will be diminished .
num surface preparation .
num cleaning before placing the mixture clean the surface of the base or underlying pavement of all loose and deleterious material by the use of power brooms or blowers supplemented by hand brooming where necessary .
num application over asphalt membrane interlayer ami where an asphalt mix is to be placed over a newly constructed ami do not sweep or otherwise disturb the cover material before placing the asphalt mix unless directed by the engineer .
num tacking apply a tack coat on all existing pavement surfaces that are to be overlaid with an asphalt mix as specified in section num and between successive layers of all asphalt mixes .
apply tack on a clean surface .
do not place tack while rain is falling or when there is water on the surface to be tacked .
once the rain has stopped standing water has been removed from the surface to be tacked to the satisfaction of the engineer the contractor may then apply tack .
apply a tack coat on freshly primed bases only when directed by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num paving equipment .
num general requirements use mechanicallysound equipment capable of consistently meeting specification requirements .
num asphalt paver num general provide a selfpropelled asphalt paver that can be steered and is equipped with a receiving and distribution hopper and a mechanical screed .
use a mechanical screed capable of adjustment to regulate the depth of material spread and to produce the desired crosssection .
when asphalt mix is placed in windrows operate windrow pickup equipment so substantially all of the mixture deposited on the roadbed is picked up and loaded into the paver .
prevent the windrow pickup equipment from contaminating the mixture .
num automatic screed control for all asphalt courses placed with an asphalt paver equip the paver with automatic longitudinal screed controls of either the skid type traveling stringline type or noncontact averaging ski type with a minimum length of num feet .
on the final layer of asphalt base overbuild structural courses and friction courses use the joint matcher instead of the skid traveling stringline or noncontact averaging ski on all passes after the initial pass .
equip the asphalt paver with electronic cross slope controls .
num screed width provide an asphalt paver with a screed width greater than num feet when required to pave full width lanes .
do not use extendable screed strikeoff devices that do not provide preliminary compaction of the mat in place of fixed screed extensions .
use a strikeoff device only on irregular areas that would normally be done by hand and on shoulders num feet or less in width .
when using the strikeoff device on shoulders instead of an adjustable screed extension demonstrate the ability to obtain acceptable texture density and thickness .
when using an extendable screed device to extend the screeds width on the full width lane or shoulder by num inches or greater the engineer will require an auger extension paddle or kicker device unless written documentation from the manufacturer is submitted stating these are not necessary .
num rollers num steelwheeled rollers provide compaction equipment capable of meeting the density requirements described in the specifications .
when density testing is not required and the standard rolling pattern is used provide a tandem steelwheeled roller weighing num to num tons for breakdown rolling .
for finish rolling use a separate roller weighing num to num tons .
variations from these requirements shall be approved by the engineer .
num traffic rollers provide compaction equipment capable of meeting the density requirements described in the specifications .
when density testing is not required and the standard rolling pattern is used provide a selfpropelled pneumatictired traffic roller equipped with at least seven smoothtread low pressure tires equipped with pads or scrapers on each tire .
maintain the tire pressure between num and num psi or as specified by the manufacturer .
use rollers with a minimum weight of num tons .
do not use wobblewheeled rollers .
variations from these requirements shall be approved by the engineer .
num prevention of adhesion do not allow the mixture to adhere to the wheels of any rollers .
do not use fuel oil or other petroleum distillates to prevent adhesion .
do not use any method which results in water being sprinkled directly onto the mixture .
num coring equipment furnish a suitable saw or drill for obtaining the required density cores .
num return to table of contents num hand tools provide the necessary hand tools such as rakes shovels and other similar tools and a suitable means for keeping them clean .
do not use diesel fuel or other petroleum based solvents contained in an open container for cleaning purposes on the paver .
num placing mixture .
num requirements applicable to all pavement types num alignment of edges place all asphalt mixtures by the stringline method to obtain an accurate uniform alignment of the pavement edge .
as an exception pavement edges adjacent to curb and gutter or other true edges do not require a stringline .
control the unsupported pavement edge to ensure it will not deviate from the stringline more than plus or minus num inches .
num paving width if necessary due to the traffic requirements place the mixture in strips in such a manner as to provide for the passage of traffic .
as an option where the road is closed to traffic place the mixture to the full width with machines traveling in echelon .
num mix temperature maintain the mix temperature at the time of paving within the master range as defined in num .
take mix temperatures on the roadway at the minimum frequency indicated in num .
any load or portion of a load of asphalt mix on the roadway with a temperature outside of the master range shall be rejected for use on the project .
immediately notify the engineer of the rejection .
remove any windrow material not meeting the temperature requirements of num from the area of deficient temperature and replace with new asphalt meeting the temperature requirements .
num speed of paver establish the forward speed of the asphalt paver based on the rate of delivery of the mix to the roadway but not faster than the optimum speed needed to adequately compact the pavement .
num thickness and spread rate of layers construct each layer as defined in the following table table num thickness and target spread rate requirements mix type specification section and article type sp num type fc num type b num atpb num num thickness control ensure the spread rate is within plus or minus num of the target spread rate .
when determining the spread rate use at a minimum an average of five truckloads of mix and at a maximum an average of num truckloads of mix except for windrow paving use an average of three truckloads of mix .
when the average spread rate is beyond plus or minus num of the target spread rate monitor the thickness of the pavement layer closely and adjust the construction operations .
when the average spread rate for two consecutive days is beyond plus or minus num of the target spread rate stop the construction operation until the issue is resolved .
num return to table of contents num maximum spread rate tolerances when an individual spread rate measured in accordance with num is beyond plus or minus num of the target spread rate stop the construction operation until the issue is resolved .
address the unacceptable pavement in accordance with num .
the following areas are exempt from a work stoppage based solely on the calculated spread rate median crossovers turnouts variable thickness overbuild courses leveling courses miscellaneous asphalt pavement as well as turn lanes and ramps less than num feet .
as an exception the engineer may allow the contractor to leave areas in place if it is determined by the engineer that the deficiency is not a significant detriment to the pavement quality .
for areas of deficient thickness a reduction to the pay item quantity will be made in accordance with num .
num correcting defects before starting any rolling check the surface correct any irregularities remove all drippings sand accumulations from the screed and fat spots from any source and replace them with satisfactory material .
do not skin patch .
when correcting a depression while the mixture is hot scarify the surface and add fresh mixture .
num hand work in limited areas where the use of the paver is impossible or impracticable the contractor may place and finish the mixture by hand .
num compacting mixture .
num general requirements when density testing for acceptance is required select equipment sequence and coverage number of times the roller passes over a given area of pavement of rolling to meet the specified density requirement .
regardless of the rolling procedure used complete the final rolling before the surface temperature of the pavement drops to the extent effective compaction may not be achieved or the rollers begin to damage the pavement .
no vibratory compaction in the vertical direction will be allowed for layers one inch or less in thickness or if the engineer or contract documents limit compaction to the static mode only .
compact these layers in the static mode only .
other nonvertical vibratory modes of compaction will be allowed if approved by the engineer however no additional compensation cost or time will be made .
num standard rolling procedure when density testing for acceptance is not required propose an alternative rolling pattern to be approved by the engineer or use the following standard rolling procedure num .
breakdown rolling provide two static coverages with a tandem steelwheeled roller following as close behind the paver as possible without pickup undue displacement or blistering of the mix .
num .
intermediate rolling provide five static coverages with a pneumatictire roller following as close behind the breakdown rolling operation as the mix will permit .
num .
finish rolling provide one static coverage with a tandem steelwheeled roller after completing the breakdown rolling and intermediate rolling but before the surface pavement temperature drops to the extent effective compaction may not be achieved or the rollers begin to damage the pavement .
num rolling procedures use procedures that will uniformly compact the pavement layer to the desired density level while meeting the appropriate smoothness requirements without damaging the pavement surface crushing aggregate or leaving excessive roller marks roller heads or ripples .
while rolling is in progress monitor the surface continuously and adjust the compaction operations to comply with the surface requirements .
num return to table of contents num compaction of areas inaccessible to rollers use hand tamps or other satisfactory means to compact areas which are inaccessible to a roller such as areas adjacent to curbs gutters bridges manholes etc .
num correcting defects do not allow the compaction equipment to deposit contaminants onto the pavement surface .
remove and replace any areas damaged by such deposits as directed by the engineer .
correct any depressions that develop before completing the rolling by loosening the mixture and adding new mixture to bring the depressions to a true surface .
should any depression remain after obtaining the final compaction remove the full depth of the mixture and replace it with enough new mixture to form a true and even surface .
correct all defects before laying the subsequent course .
num use of traffic roller use a traffic roller on the first overbuild course .
use a traffic roller or vibratory roller unless restricted by the contract documents on the first structural layer placed on an ami .
num compaction at bridge structures compact asphalt mixtures placed over bridge decks and approach slabs using static compaction only .
use the standard rolling procedure described in num or an alternative procedure approved by the engineer .
num joints .
num general when laying fresh mixture against the exposed edges of joints place it in close contact with the exposed edge to produce an even wellcompacted joint after rolling .
num transverse joints place the mixture as continuously as possible to minimize transverse joints .
when constructing permanent transverse joints meet the surface requirements as defined in num .
construct temporary transverse joints in such a manner to allow traffic to pass over it .
when resuming the paving operation construct a transverse joint by cutting back on the previously placed pavement at a location where the straightedge requirements are met .
at the project limits tie into the adjoining pavement layers as shown in the plans .
num longitudinal joints place each layer of pavement so all longitudinal construction joints are offset num to num inches laterally between successive layers .
plan offsets in advance so the longitudinal joints of the friction course are not in wheel path areas .
the longitudinal joints for friction course layers should be within num inches of the lane edge or at the center of the lane .
the engineer may waive this requirement where offsetting is not feasible due to the sequence of construction .
num placing asphalt next to concrete pavement when placing asphalt next to concrete pavement construct the joint as shown in the plans .
num surface requirements .
num general construct a smooth pavement with good surface texture and the proper crossslope .
num texture of the finished surface of paving layers produce a finished surface of uniform texture and compaction with no pulled torn raveled crushed or loosened portions and free of segregation bleeding flushing sand streaks sand spots or ripples .
some examples of pavement deficiencies are displayed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecspavement.shtm .
address any pavement not meeting the requirements of this specification in accordance with num .
for densegraded structural and densegraded friction course mixtures in areas not defined as density testing exceptions per num obtain for the engineer three num inch diameter roadway cores at locations visually identified by the engineer to be segregated .
for num return to table of contents areas that the engineer identifies as being segregated obtain and submit cores within num days of notification .
the engineer will determine the density of each core in accordance with fm num tnum and calculate the percent gmm of the segregated area using the average gmb of the roadway cores and the qc sublot gmm for the questionable material .
if the average percent gmm is less than num address the segregated area in accordance with num .
do not use asphalt concrete mixtures containing aggregates that cause a different color appearance in the final wearing surface unless the section is greater than or equal to one mile in length and across the full width of the pavement including shoulders and turn lanes .
exceptions to these requirements will be permitted if approved by the engineer .
num cross slope construct a pavement surface with cross slopes in compliance with the requirements of the contract documents .
furnish a four foot long electronic level accurate to num degree approved by the engineer for the control of cross slope .
make this electronic level available at the jobsite at all times during paving operations .
num qc calibration and comparison calibrate the electronic levels a minimum of once per day before paving operations begin in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
compare the qc level with the verification level before paving operations begin and at any time as directed .
if the comparison between the qc and verification levels is within plus or minus num the qc level is considered to compare favorably and can be used for measurement and acceptance of crossslopes .
if the levels do not compare favorably perform a second comparison using another calibrated electronic level department or contractor for resolution .
if the resolution level compares favorably with the qc level the qc level is considered to be verified .
if the resolution level does not compare favorably with the qc level discontinue the use of the qc electronic level and obtain another approved electronic level that meets the requirements of this specification .
the contractor assumes all risk associated with placing the pavement at the correct cross slope .
num cross slope measurement measure the cross slope of the compacted pavement surface by placing the level at the center of the lane and perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
record all measurements to the nearest num on an approved form and submit the data to the engineer .
num cross slope measurement frequency num .
tangent sections measure the crossslope at a minimum frequency of one measurement every num feet per lane .
when the average absolute deviation is consistently within the acceptance tolerance in table num upon the approval of the engineer the cross slope measurements may be reduced to one measurement every num feet .
num .
superelevated sections measure the cross slope every num feet per lane within the length of the full superelevation .
for curves where the length of full superelevation is less than num feet measure the cross slope at the beginning point midpoint and ending point of the fully superelevated section .
for transition sections measure the cross slope at control points identified in the plans or if not shown in the plans at a control point at the location of num cross slope .
num cross slope deviations and corrections calculate the absolute deviation of each cross slope measurement and the average of the absolute deviations of ten consecutive cross slope measurements .
the absolute deviation is the positive value of a deviation .
in superelevated sections when the number of measurements is less than ten average the absolute deviation of all measurements .
num return to table of contents if the average absolute deviation of any cross slope measurement falls outside the acceptance tolerance shown in table num stop the paving operation and make adjustments until the problem is resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
address in accordance with num all individual cross slope deviations outside the acceptance tolerances shown in table num .
complete all corrections before placement of the final pavement surface layer .
for pavement with multiple layers the deficient areas for the structural course may be left in place if approved by the engineer .
for friction course layers make corrections in accordance with num .
the limits of deficient areas requiring correction may be verified and adjusted with more accurate measurement methods including survey instruments upon approval of the engineer and at no cost to the department .
should the contractor wish to have any required corrections waived submit a request to the engineer for approval .
the engineer may waive the corrections at no reduction in payment if the deficiencies are sufficiently separated so as not to affect the pavements overall traffic safety surface drainage ride quality or surface texture .
for intersections tapers crossovers transitions at the beginning and end of the project bridge approaches and similar areas adjust the cross slope to match the actual site conditions or as directed by the engineer .
table num cross slope acceptance tolerance roadway feature individual absolute deviation average absolute deviation tangent section including turn lanes num num superelevated curve num num shoulder num num in the event the distance between two edges of deficient areas is less than num feet the correction work shall include the area between the deficient areas .
num verification the engineer will verify the contractors cross slope measurements by randomly taking a minimum of ten cross slope measurements per lane per mile in tangent sections at control points in transition sections and a minimum of three cross slope measurements in fully superelevated sections .
the engineer will measure the cross slope of the compacted pavement surface by placing the level at the center of the lane and perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
num cross slope deviations and corrections if the average absolute deviation or an individual cross slope deviation falls outside of the acceptance tolerance in table num immediately make a comparison check at the qc test locations to verify the qc measurements in the section .
if the comparisons are beyond the acceptable comparison tolerance in accordance with num stop the paving operations until the issue is resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
correct any cross slope not meeting the individual deviation acceptance tolerance in accordance with num at no cost to the department .
the engineer reserves the right to check the pavement cross slope at any time by taking cross slope measurements at any location .
num return to table of contents num pavement smoothness construct a smooth pavement meeting the requirements of this specification .
num general furnish a num foot manual and a num foot rolling straightedge meeting the requirements of fm num .
obtain a smooth surface on all pavement courses placed and then straightedge all layers as required by this specification .
num test method perform all straightedge testing in accordance with fm num in the outside wheel path of each lane .
the engineer may require additional testing at other locations within the lane .
num traffic control provide traffic control in accordance with section num and standard plans index num or num during all testing .
when traffic control can not be provided in accordance with index num or num submit an alternative traffic control plan as specified in num .
include the cost of this traffic control in the contract bid prices for the asphalt items .
num process control testing assume full responsibility for controlling all paving operations and processes such that the requirements of these specifications are met at all times .
num qc testing num general straightedge the final type sp structural layer and friction course layer in accordance with num with the exception that if the method of acceptance is by laser profiler then straightedging of the friction course layer is not required unless otherwise stated in the specifications .
if the projects method of acceptance is by laser profiler areas not suitable for testing with the laser profiler will be tested and accepted by straightedging .
test all pavement lanes and ramps where the width is constant and document all deficiencies in excess of num inch on a form approved by the engineer .
num straightedge exceptions straightedge testing will not be required in the following areas shoulders intersections tapers crossovers sidewalks shared use paths parking lots and similar areas or in the following areas when they are less than num feet in length turn lanes accelerationdeceleration lanes and side streets .
the limits of the intersection will be from stop bar to stop bar for both the mainline and side streets .
as an exception in the event the engineer identifies an objectionable surface irregularity in the above areas straightedge and address all deficiencies in excess of num inch in accordance with num .
the engineer may waive straightedge requirements for transverse joints at the beginning and end of the project at the beginning and end of bridge structures at manholes and at utility structures if the deficiencies are caused by factors beyond the control of the contractor as determined by the engineer .
in addition the engineer may also waive the straightedging requirements on ramps and superelevated sections where the geometrical orientation of the pavement results in an inaccurate measurement with the rolling straightedge .
num intermediate layers and temporary pavement when the design speed is num mph or greater and the intermediate type sp layer or temporary pavement is to be opened to traffic if the engineer identifies an objectionable surface irregularity straightedge and address all deficiencies in excess of num inch within num hours of placement in accordance with num .
num final type sp structural layer straightedge the final type sp structural layer in accordance with num either behind the final roller of the paving train or as a separate operation .
notify the engineer of the location and time of straightedge num return to table of contents testing a minimum of num hours before beginning testing .
the engineer will verify the straightedge testing by observing the qc straight edging operations .
address all deficiencies in excess of num inch in accordance with num .
when the final structural course is to be opened to traffic and the design speed is num mph or greater if any defect is num inch or greater the engineer may require deficiencies to be corrected within num hours after opening to traffic .
num friction course layer where required per num and in areas noted in num as not suitable for testing with the laser profiler straightedge the friction course layer in accordance with num either behind the final roller of the paving train or as a separate operation upon completion of all paving operations .
notify the engineer of the location and time of straightedge testing a minimum of num hours before beginning testing .
the engineer will verify the straightedge testing by observing the qc straightedging operations .
address all deficiencies in excess of num inch in accordance with num .
num acceptance num straightedge acceptance for areas of roadways where the design speed is less than num miles per hour and for areas of roadways where the design speed is greater than or equal to num miles per hour which are noted in num as not suitable for testing with the laser profiler acceptance for pavement smoothness of the friction course will be based on verified qc measurements using the straightedge as required by num .
the engineer will verify the straightedge testing by observing the qc straightedging operations .
num laser acceptance for areas of high speed roadways where the design speed is equal to or greater than num miles per hour acceptance testing for pavement smoothness of the friction course for mainline traffic lanes only will be based on the laser profiler .
ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes and other areas not suitable for testing with the laser profiler will be tested and accepted with the straightedge in accordance with num num and num .
the pavement smoothness of each lane will be determined by a laser profiler furnished and operated by the department in accordance with fm num and a report issued with the ride number rn reported to one decimal place .
if corrections are made as required following laser acceptance the pavement will not be retested for smoothness using the laser profiler .
for this testing the pavement will be divided into num mile segments .
partial segments equal to or greater than num mile will be considered as a num mile segment .
the pavement will be accepted as follows num .
for segments with a rn greater than or equal to num the pavement will be accepted at full pay .
num .
for segments with a rn less than num the engineer will further evaluate the data in num mile intervals for both wheel paths .
if the rn is num or above for all num mile intervals in both wheel paths the segment will be accepted at full payment .
if the rn is less than num for one or more num mile intervals the segment will be tested with the rolling straightedge in both wheel paths in accordance with fm num .
if approved by the engineer this straightedging may be completed in both wheel paths as part of the qc straightedging operations described in num before testing with the laser profiler .
notify the engineer of the location and time of straightedge testing a minimum of num hours before beginning testing .
the engineer will verify the straightedge num return to table of contents testing by observing the qc straightedging operations .
address all deficiencies in excess of num inch in accordance with num .
test and accept areas at the beginning and ending of the project bridge approaches and departures and areas where the segment is less than num mile with the straightedge in accordance with num and num .
num unacceptable pavement num corrections address all areas of unacceptable pavement at no cost to the department .
retest all corrected areas and assure the requirements of these specifications are met .
num structural layers correct all deficiencies as defined in the specifications in the type sp structural layers by removing and replacing the full depth of the layer extending a minimum of num feet on both sides where possible of the defective area for the full width of the paving lane .
as an option for high straightedge deficiencies only mill the pavement surface the full lane width to a depth and length adequate to remove the deficiency .
this option only applies if the structural layer is not the final surface layer .
num friction course correct deficiencies in the friction course or final surface layer by removing and replacing the full depth of the layer extending a minimum of num feet on both sides where possible of the defective area for the full width of the paving lane .
as an exception the engineer may allow the contractor to leave these areas in place if it is determined by the engineer that the deficiency is not a significant detriment to the pavement quality .
a reduction to the pay item quantity will be made in accordance with num .
num reduction in pay item quantity when the engineer elects to waive corrections the department will reduce the pay quantity for the pay item in question by the amount of material the contractor would have removed and replaced had the correction been made .
when the pay quantity is in tons the department will base the reduction on the volume of material the contractor would have removed the length by the lane width by layer thickness multiplied by the maximum specific gravity of the mix as determined through the following equation quantity tons l x w x t x gmm x num where l lane length ft. w lane width ft. t layer thickness in .
gmm maximum specific gravity from verified mix design for fcnum opengraded friction course the department will base the reduction on the area the contractor would have removed the length by lane width multiplied by a spread rate of num pounds per square yard as determined through the following equation quantity tons l x w x num where l lane length ft. w lane width ft. num return to table of contents num protection of finished surface .
keep sections of newly compacted asphalt concrete which are to be covered by additional courses clean until the successive course is laid .
do not dump embankment or base material directly on the pavement .
dress shoulders before placing the friction course on adjacent pavement .
equip blade graders operating adjacent to the pavement during shoulder construction with a num inch by num inch or larger board or other attachment providing essentially the same results attached to their blades so it extends below the blade edge and protects the pavement surface from damage by the grader blade .
to prevent rutting or other distortion protect sections of newly finished densegraded friction course and the last structural layer before friction course from traffic until the surface temperature has cooled below numf .
the contractor may use artificial methods to cool the pavement to expedite paving operations .
the department may direct the contractor to use artificial cooling methods when maintenance of traffic requires opening the pavement to traffic at the earliest possible time .
num return to table of contents section num superpave asphalt concrete num description .
num general construct a superpave asphalt concrete pavement with the type of mixture specified in the contract documents or when offered as alternates as selected .
superpave mixes are identified as type spnum type spnum or type spnum .
obtain superpave asphalt concrete from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
producers must meet the requirements of section num for plant and equipment and the general construction requirements of section num .
num traffic levels the requirements for type sp asphalt concrete mixtures are based on the design traffic level of the project .
the traffic levels for the project are as specified in the contract documents .
num gradation classification the superpave mixes are classified as fine and are defined in num .
the equivalent aashto nominal maximum aggregate size superpave mixes are as follows type spnum num mm type spnum num mm type spnum num mm num thickness the total thickness of the type sp asphalt layers will be the plan thickness as shown in the contract documents .
before paving propose a thickness for each individual layer meeting the requirements of this specification which when combined with other layers as applicable will equal the plan thickness .
for construction purposes the plan thickness and individual layer thickness will be converted to spread rate based on the maximum specific gravity of the asphalt mix being used as well as the minimum density level as shown in the following equation spread rate lbsydnum t x gmm x num where t thickness in .
plan thickness or individual layer thickness gmm maximum specific gravity from the verified mix design the weight of the mixture shall be determined as provided in num .
for target purposes only spread rate calculations should be rounded to the nearest whole number .
note plan quantities are based on a gmm of num corresponding to a spread rate of num lbsydnumin .
pay quantities will be based on the actual maximum specific gravity of the mix being used .
num layer thicknesses the allowable layer thicknesses for type sp asphalt concrete mixtures are as follows type spnum num to num inches type spnum num to num inches type spnum num to num inches num return to table of contents in addition to the minimum and maximum thickness requirements the following restrictions are placed on mixes when used as a structural course type spnum limited to the top two structural layers two layers maximum .
type spnum may not be used on traffic level d and e applications .
type spnum may not be used in the final top structural layer below fcnum mixtures .
type spnum mixtures are permissible in the layer directly below fcnum and fcnum mixtures .
num additional requirements the following requirements also apply to type sp asphalt concrete mixtures num .
a minimum num inch initial lift is required over an asphalt membrane interlayer ami .
num .
when construction includes the paving of adjacent shoulders less than or equal to num feet wide the layer thickness for the upper pavement layer and shoulder must be the same and paved in a single pass unless called for differently in the contract documents .
num .
all overbuild layers must be type sp asphalt concrete designed at the traffic level as stated in the contract documents .
use the minimum and maximum layer thicknesses as specified above unless called for differently in the contract documents .
on variable thickness overbuild layers the minimum and maximum allowable thicknesses will be as specified below unless called for differently in the contract documents .
type spnum num to num inches type spnum num to num inches type spnum num to num inches num .
variable thickness overbuild layers constructed using a type spnum or spnum mixtures may be tapered to zero thickness provided the contract documents require a minimum of num inches of densegraded mix placed over the variable thickness overbuild layer .
num materials .
num general requirements meet the material requirements specified in division iii .
specific references are as follows superpave pg asphalt binder section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregate section num num superpave asphalt binder unless specified otherwise in the contract documents use an asphalt binder grade as determined from table num .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material num general requirements rap may be used as a component of the asphalt mixture subject to the following requirements num .
when using a pg num asphalt binder limit the amount of rap material used in the mix to a maximum of num by weight of total aggregate .
as an exception amounts greater than num rap by weight of total aggregate can be used if no more than num by weight of the total asphalt binder comes from the rap material .
rap is not allowed in mixtures containing high polymer asphalt binder .
high polymer asphalt is defined in section num .
num .
assume full responsibility for the design production and construction of asphalt mixes which incorporate rap as a component material .
num return to table of contents num .
use rap from a department approved stockpile or millings from a department project .
num .
provide stockpiled rap material that is reasonably consistent in characteristics and contains no aggregate particles which are soft or conglomerates of fines .
num .
provide rap material having a minimum average asphalt binder content of num by weight of rap .
as an exception when using fractionated rap the minimum average asphalt binder content for the coarse portion of the rap shall be num by weight of the coarse portion of the rap .
the coarse portion of the rap shall be the portion of the rap retained on the no .
num sieve .
the engineer may sample the stockpiles to verify that this requirement is met .
num material characterization for mix design assume responsibility for establishing the asphalt binder content gradation and bulk specific gravity gsb of the rap material based on a representative sampling of the material by roadway cores or stockpile samples .
for roadway core samples assume responsibility for the degradation that will occur during the milling operation .
num rap stockpile approval prior to the incorporation of rap into the asphalt mixture stockpile the rap material and obtain approval for the stockpile by one of the following methods num .
continuous stockpile when rap is obtained from one or multiple sources and is either processed blended or fractionated and stockpiled in a continuous manner assure an adequate number of test results are obtained for stockpile approval .
test the rap material for gradation and asphalt content at a minimum frequency of one sample per num tons with a minimum of six test results .
test the rap material for gmm for gsb determination at a minimum frequency of one sample per num tons with a minimum of two test results .
based on visual inspection and a review of the test data the engineer will determine the suitability of the stockpiled material .
in addition address the details and specifics of the processing sampling testing and actions to be taken in the producer quality control qc plan .
num .
noncontinuous single stockpile when an individual stockpile is being constructed obtain representative samples at random locations and test the rap material for gradation and asphalt content at a minimum frequency of one sample per num tons with a minimum of six test results .
test the rap material for gmm for gsb determination at a minimum frequency of one sample per num tons with a minimum of two test results .
based on visual inspection and a review of the test data the engineer will determine the suitability of the stockpiled material .
once the rap stockpile has been approved do not add additional material without prior approval of the engineer .
determine the asphalt binder content and gradation of the rap material in accordance with fm num and fm numt num respectively .
establish the gsb of the rap material by using one of the following methods a .
calculate the gsb value based upon the effective specific gravity gse of the rap material determined on the basis of the asphalt binder content and maximum specific gravity gmm of the rap material .
the engineer will approve the estimated asphalt binder absorption value used in the calculation .
b .
measure the gsb of the rap aggregate in accordance with fm numt num and fm numt num .
obtain the aggregate by using a solvent extraction method .
num return to table of contents num pavement coring report when the contract includes milling of the existing asphalt pavement the pavement coring report may be available on the departments website .
num asphalt binder for mixes with rap select the appropriate asphalt binder grade based on table num .
obtain a sample of the mixture for the engineer within the first num tons of production and at a continuing frequency of one sample per num tons of mix .
the engineer reserves the right to change the asphalt binder grade at design based on the characteristics of the rap asphalt binder and reserves the right to make changes during production .
table num asphalt binder grade for mixes containing rap percent rap asphalt binder grade num num pg num num num pg num num pg num num recycled crushed glass recycled crushed glass may be used as a component of the asphalt mixture subject to the following requirements num .
consider the recycled crushed glass a local material and meet all requirements specified in num .
num .
limit the amount of recycled crushed glass to a maximum of num by weight of total aggregate .
num .
use an asphalt binder that contains a minimum of num antistripping agent by weight of binder .
the antistrip additive shall be one of the products listed on the approved product list apl .
the antistrip additive shall be introduced into the asphalt binder by the supplier during loading .
num .
do not use recycled crushed glass in friction course mixtures or in structural course mixtures which are to be used as the final wearing surface .
num general composition of mixture .
num general compose the asphalt mixture using a combination of aggregate coarse fine or mixtures thereof mineral filler if required and asphalt binder material .
size grade and combine the aggregate fractions to meet the grading and physical properties of the mix design .
aggregates from various sources may be combined .
num mix design num general design the asphalt mixture in accordance with aashto r num except as noted herein .
prior to the production of any asphalt mixture submit the proposed mix design with supporting test data indicating compliance with all mix design criteria to the engineer .
for traffic level b through e mix designs include representative samples of all component materials including asphalt binder .
allow the director of the office of materials a maximum of four weeks to either conditionally verify or reject the mix as designed .
for a traffic level a mixture meet the mix design criteria for a traffic level b mixture and for a traffic level d mixture meet the mix design criteria for a traffic level e mixture .
in addition a type sp mix one traffic level higher than the traffic level num return to table of contents specified in the contract documents may be substituted at no cost to the department .
based on the previous conditions the following substitutions are allowed traffic level e can be substituted for traffic level d. traffic level d or e can be substituted for traffic level c. traffic level c can be substituted for traffic level b .
traffic level b or c can be substituted for traffic level a .
the same traffic level and binder type that is used for the mainline traffic lanes may be placed in the shoulder at no additional cost to the department even if the conditions stated above are not met for the shoulder .
do not use more than four mix designs per nominal maximum aggregate size per traffic level per binder grade per year where the year starts at the notice to proceed .
exceeding this limitation will result in a maximum composite pay factor cpf of num as defined in num for all designs used beyond this limit .
warm mix technologies additives foaming techniques etc .
listed on the departments website may be used in the production of the mix .
the url for obtaining this information if available is httpwww.fdot.govmaterialsmacproductionwarmmixasphalt when warm mix technologies are used for mixtures containing a pg num num pg num or pg num binder a mixture will be considered a warm mix asphalt design if the mixing temperature is numf or less .
for mixtures containing a pg num or high polymer binder a mixture will be considered a warm mix asphalt design if the mixing temperature is numf or less .
the engineer will consider any marked variations from original test data for a mix design or any evidence of inadequate field performance of a mix design as sufficient evidence that the properties of the mix design have changed and the engineer will no longer allow the use of the mix design .
num mixture gradation requirements combine the coarse and fine aggregate in proportions that will produce an asphalt mixture meeting all of the requirements defined in this specification and conform to the gradation requirements at design as defined in aashto m num table num .
aggregates from various sources may be combined .
num mixture gradation classification plot the combined mixture gradation on an fhwa num power gradation chart .
include the control points from aashto m num tablenum as well as the primary control sieve pcs control point from aashto m num table num .
fine mixes are defined as having a gradation that passes above the primary control sieve control point and above the maximum density line for all sieve sizes smaller than the primary control sieve and larger than the no .
num sieve .
num aggregate consensus properties for traffic level c through e mixtures meet the following consensus properties at design for the aggregate blend .
aggregate consensus properties do not apply to traffic level a and b mixtures .
num coarse aggregate angularity when tested in accordance with astm d num num meet the percentage of fractured faces requirements specified in aashto m num table num .
num fine aggregate angularity when tested in accordance with aashto t num method a meet the uncompacted void content of fine aggregate specified in aashto m num table num .
num flat and elongated particles when tested in accordance with astm d num with the exception that the material passing the num inch sieve and num return to table of contents retained on the no .
num sieve shall be included meet the requirements specified in aashto m num table num .
measure the aggregate using the ratio of num comparing the length longest dimension to the thickness shortest dimension of the aggregate particles .
num sand equivalent when tested in accordance with aashto t num meet the sand equivalent requirements specified in aashto m num table num .
num gyratory compaction compact the design mixture in accordance with aashto t num with the following exception use the number of gyrations at ndesign as defined in table num .
measure the inside diameter of gyratory molds in accordance with aashto t num .
table num gyratory compaction requirements traffic level ndesign number of gyrations a num b num c num d num e num num design criteria meet the requirements for nominal maximum aggregate size as defined in aashto m num as well as for relative density vma vfa and dusttobinder ratio as specified in aashto m num table num .
ninitial and nmaximum requirements are not applicable .
num moisture susceptibility num .
for traffic level a and b mixtures use a liquid antistrip additive at a rate of num by weight of the asphalt binder .
the antistrip additive must be listed on the apl .
other rates of antistrip additive may be used upon approval of the engineer .
num .
for traffic level c through e mixtures test num inch specimens in accordance with fm numt num .
provide a mixture having a retained tensile strength ratio of at least num and a minimum tensile strength unconditioned of num psi .
if necessary add a liquid antistripping agent andor hydrated lime meeting the requirements of section num in order to meet these criteria .
the antistrip additive must be listed on the apl .
num additional information in addition to the requirements listed above provide the following information with each proposed mix design submitted for verification num .
the design traffic level and the design number of gyrations ndesign .
num .
the source and description of the materials to be used .
num .
the department source number and the department product code of the aggregate components furnished from a department approved source .
num .
the gradation and proportions of the raw materials as intended to be combined in the paving mixture .
the gradation of the component materials shall be representative of the material at the time of use .
compensate for any change in aggregate gradation caused by handling and processing as necessary .
num .
a single percentage of the combined mineral aggregate passing each specified sieve .
degradation of the aggregate due to processing particularly material passing the no .
num sieve should be accounted for and identified .
num return to table of contents num .
the bulk specific gravity gsb value for each individual aggregate and rap component as identified in the departments aggregate control program .
num .
a single percentage of asphalt binder by weight of total mix intended to be incorporated in the completed mixture shown to the nearest num .
num .
a target temperature for the mixture at the plant mixing temperature and a target temperature for the mixture at the roadway compaction temperature in accordance with num .
do not exceed a target temperature of numf for high polymer asphalt binder numf for pg num asphalt binders and numf for unmodified asphalt binders .
num .
provide the physical properties achieved at four different asphalt binder contents .
one of which must be at the optimum asphalt content and must conform to all specified physical requirements .
num .
the name of the construction training qualification program ctqp qualified mix designer .
num .
the ignition oven calibration factor .
num .
the warm mix technology if used .
num mix design revisions during production the contractor may request a target value revision to a mix design subject to meeting the following requirements the target change falls within the limits defined in table num appropriate data exists demonstrating that the mix complies with production air voids specification criteria and the mixture gradation meets the basic gradation requirements defined in num .
table num limits for potential adjustments to mix design target values characteristic limit from original mix design no .
num sieve and coarser num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num asphalt binder content num num each component of aggregate blend num num num reductions to the asphalt binder content will not be permitted if the vma during production is lower than num below the design criteria .
num revisions to fcnum mixtures to be determined by the engineer .
submit all requests for revisions to mix designs along with supporting documentation to the engineer .
in order to expedite the revision process the request for revision or discussions on the possibility of a revision may be made verbally but must be followed up by a written request .
the verified mix design will remain in effect until the engineer authorizes a change .
in no case will the effective date of the revision be established earlier than the date of the first communication between the contractor and the engineer regarding the revision .
a new design mix will be required if aggregate sources change or for any substitution of an aggregate product with a different aggregate code unless approved by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num producer process control pc .
assume full responsibility for controlling all operations and processes such that the requirements of these specifications are met at all times .
perform any tests necessary at the plant and roadway for process control purposes .
enter all pc test data into the departments database .
the engineer will not use these test results in the acceptance payment decision .
address in the producer qc plan how pc failures will be handled .
when a pc failure occurs investigate at a minimum the production process testing equipment andor sampling methods to determine the cause of the failure and make any necessary changes to assure compliance with these specifications .
obtain a follow up sample immediately after corrective actions are taken to assess the adequacy of the corrections .
in the event the followup pc sample also fails to meet specification requirements cease production of the asphalt mixture until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the qc manager .
num acceptance of the mixture .
num general the mixture will be accepted at the plant with respect to gradation pnum and pnum asphalt content pb and volumetrics volumetrics is defined as air voids at ndesign .
the mixture will be accepted on the roadway with respect to density of roadway cores .
acceptance will be on a lot by lot basis for each mix design based on tests of random samples obtained within each sublot taken at a frequency of one set of samples per sublot .
a roadway lot and a plant production lot shall be the same .
acceptance of the mixture will be based on contractor qc test results that have been verified by the department .
num sampling and testing requirements obtain the samples in accordance with fm numt num .
obtain samples at the plant of a sufficient quantity to be split into three smaller samples one for qc one for verification testing and one for resolution testing each sample at approximately num pounds .
the split samples for verification testing and resolution testing shall be reduced in size and stored in three boxes each .
the approximate size of each box must be num inches x num inches x num inches .
provide label and safely store sample boxes in a manner agreed upon by the engineer for future testing .
the asphalt content of the mixture will be determined in accordance with fm num .
the gradation of the recovered aggregate will be determined in accordance with fm numt num .
volumetric testing will be in accordance with aashto t numand fm numt num .
prior to testing volumetric samples condition the testsized sample for one hour plus or minus five minutes at the target roadway compaction temperature in a shallow flat pan such that the mixture temperature at the end of the one hour conditioning period is within plus or minus numf of the roadway compaction temperature .
test for roadway density in accordance with fm numt num .
num acceptance testing exceptions when the total combined quantity of hot mix asphalt for the project as indicated in the plans for type sp and type fc mixtures only is less than num tons the engineer will accept the mix on the basis of visual inspection .
the engineer may require the contractor to run process control tests for informational purposes as defined in num or may run independent verification tests to determine the acceptability of the material .
density testing for acceptance will not be performed on widening strips or shoulders with a width of num feet or less opengraded friction courses variable thickness overbuild courses leveling courses any asphalt layer placed on subgrade regardless of type miscellaneous asphalt pavement shared use paths crossovers gore areas or any course with a specified thickness less than num inch or a specified spread rate that converts to less than num inch as num return to table of contents described in num .
density testing for acceptance will not be performed on asphalt courses placed on bridge decks or approach slabs compact these courses in static mode only per the requirements of num .
in addition density testing for acceptance will not be performed on the following areas when they are less than num feet continuous in length turning lanes acceleration lanes deceleration lanes shoulders parallel parking lanes or ramps .
do not perform density testing for acceptance in situations where the areas requiring density testing is less than num tons within a sublot .
density testing for acceptance will not be performed in intersections .
the limits of the intersection will be from stop bar to stop bar for both the mainline and side streets .
a random core location that occurs within the intersection shall be moved forward or backward from the intersection at the direction of the engineer .
where density testing for acceptance is not required compact these courses with the exception of opengraded friction courses in accordance with the rolling procedure equipment and pattern as approved by the engineer or with standard rolling procedure as specified in num .
in the event that the rolling procedure deviates from the procedure approved by the engineer or the standard rolling procedure placement of the mix shall be stopped .
the density pay factor as defined in num for areas not requiring density testing for acceptance will be paid at the same density pay factor as for the areas requiring density testing within the same lot .
if the entire lot does not require density testing for acceptance the lot will be paid at a density pay factor of num .
num full lots each lot will be defined as selected by the contractor prior to the start of the lot as either num num tons with each lot subdivided into four equal sublots of num tons each or num num tons with each lot subdivided into four equal sublots of num tons each .
as an exception to this the initial lot of all new mix designs shall be defined as num tons subdivided into four equal sublots of num tons each .
before the beginning of a lot the engineer will develop a random sampling plan for each sublot and direct the contractor on sample points based on tonnage for each sublot during construction .
num partial lots a partial lot is defined as a lot size that is less than a full lot .
a partial lot may occur due to the following l. the completion of a given mix type or mix design on a project .
num .
closure of the lot due to time .
lots will be closed num calendar days after the start of the lot .
time periods other than num calendar days may be used if agreed to by both the engineer and the contractor but under no circumstances shall the lot be left open longer than num days .
num .
a lot is terminated per num .
all partial lots will be evaluated based on the number of tests available and will not be redefined .
if a lot is closed before the first plant random sample is obtained then the lot will be visually accepted by the engineer and the lot pay factor will be num .
num qc sampling and testing obtain all samples randomly as directed by the engineer .
should the engineer determine that the qc requirements are not being met or that unsatisfactory results are being obtained or should any instances of falsification of test data occur acceptance of the producers qc plan will be suspended and production will be stopped .
num lost or missing verificationresolution samples in the event that any of the verification andor resolution asphalt mixture samples that are in the custody of the num return to table of contents contractor are lost damaged destroyed or are otherwise unavailable for testing the minimum possible pay factor for each quality characteristic as described in num will be applied to the entire lot in question unless called for otherwise by the engineer .
specifically if the lot in question has more than two sublots the pay factor for each quality characteristic will be num .
if the lot has two or less sublots the pay factor for each quality characteristic will be num .
if only the roadway cores are lost damaged destroyed or are otherwise unavailable for testing then the minimum possible pay factor for density will be applied to the entire lot in question .
in either event the material in question will also be evaluated in accordance with num .
if any of the verification andor resolution samples that are in the custody of the department are lost damaged destroyed or are otherwise unavailable for testing the corresponding qc test result will be considered verified and payment will be based upon the contractors data .
num plant sampling and testing requirements obtain one random sample of mix per sublot in accordance with num as directed by the engineer .
test the qc split sample for gradation asphalt binder content and volumetrics in accordance with num .
complete all qc testing within one working day from the time the samples were obtained .
num roadway sampling and testing requirements obtain five num inch diameter roadway cores within num hours of placement at random locations as directed by the engineer within each sublot .
test these qc samples for density gmb in accordance with num .
obtain a minimum of three cores per sublot at random locations as identified by the engineer in situations where the sublotlot was closed or terminated before the random numbers were reached or where it is impractical to cut five cores per sublot .
do not obtain cores any closer than num inches from an unsupported edge .
the engineer may adjust randomly generated core locations for safety purposes or as the engineer deems necessary .
do not perform density testing for acceptance in a sublot if the plant random sample for that sublot has not been obtained .
maintain traffic during the coring operation core the roadway patch the core holes within three days of coring and trim the cores to the proper thickness prior to density testing .
density for the sublot shall be based on the average value for the cores cut from the sublot with the target density being a percentage of the maximum specific gravity gmm of the sublot as defined in the contract .
once the average density of a sublot has been determined do not retest the samples unless approved by the engineer .
ensure proper handling and storage of all cores until the lot in question has been accepted .
num individual test tolerances for qc testing terminate the lot if any of the following qc failures occur num .
an individual test result of a sublot for air voids does not meet the requirements of table num num .
the average sublot density does not meet the requirements of table num num .
two consecutive test results within the same lot for gradation or asphalt binder content do not meet the requirements of table num when a lot is terminated due to a qc failure stop production of the mixture until the problem is resolved to the satisfaction of the qc manager andor asphalt plant level ii technician responsible for the decision to resume production after a qc failure as identified in section num .
in the event that it can be demonstrated that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved it will not be necessary to stop production .
when a lot is terminated make all necessary changes to correct the problem .
do not resume production num return to table of contents until appropriate corrections have been made .
prior to resuming production inform the engineer of the problem and corrections made to correct the problem .
after resuming production sample and test the material to verify that the changes have corrected the problem .
summarize this information and provide it to the engineer prior to the end of the work shift when production resumes .
in the event that a qc failure is not addressed as defined above the engineers approval will be required prior to resuming production after any future qc failures .
address any material represented by a failing test result as defined above in this subarticle in accordance with num .
any lot terminated under this subarticle will be limited to a maximum pay factor of num as defined in num for all quality characteristics and will include all material placed up to the point when the lot was terminated .
in the event that a gmm test result differs by more than num from the mix design gmm investigate the causes of the discrepancy and report the findings and proposed actions to the engineer .
table num master production range characteristic tolerance num asphalt binder content target num passing no .
num sieve target num air voids num num density minimum gmmnum num num tolerances for sample size of n num from the verified mix design num based on an average of num randomly located cores num verification testing in order to determine the validity of the contractors qc test results prior to their use in the acceptance decision the engineer will run verification tests .
num plant testing at the completion of each lot the engineer will test a minimum of one verification split sample randomly selected from the lot .
results of the testing and analysis for the lot will be made available to the contractor within one working day from the time the lot is completed .
verification samples shall be reheated at the target roadway compaction temperature for num hours plus or minus num minutes reduced to the appropriate testing size and conditioned and tested as described in num .
in lieu of the num hours reheating procedure the mixture may be reheated to within plus or minus numf of the roadway compaction temperature using a microwave oven .
stir the mixture as necessary during the reheating process to maintain temperature uniformity .
subsequently condition and test the mixture as described in num .
the verification test results will be compared with the qc test results based on the betweenlaboratory precision values shown in table num .
table num betweenlaboratory precision values property maximum difference gmm num gmb gyratory compacted samples num gmb roadway cores num num return to table of contents table num betweenlaboratory precision values property maximum difference pb num pnum fm numt num figure num pnum fm numt num figure num if all of the specified mix characteristics compare favorably then the lot will be accepted with payment based on the contractors qc test data for the lot .
if any of the results do not compare favorably then the resolution samples from the lot will be sent to the resolution laboratory for testing as described in num num .
num roadway testing at the completion of each lot the engineer will determine the density gmb of each core previously tested by qc as described in num from the same sublot as the plant samples .
for situations where roadway density is not required for the random sublot chosen then another sublot shall be randomly chosen for roadway density cores only .
results of the testing and analysis for the lot will be made available to the contractor within one working day from the time the lot is completed .
the individual verification test results will be compared with individual qc test results by the engineer based on the betweenlaboratory precision values given in table num .
if each of the core test results compare favorably then the lot will be accepted with respect to density with payment based on the contractors qc test data for the lot .
if any of the results do not compare favorably then the core samples from the lot will be sent to the resolution laboratory for testing as specified in num .
num resolution system num plant samples in the event of an unfavorable comparison between the contractors qc test results and the engineers verification test results on any of the properties identified in table num the resolution laboratory will test all of the split samples from the lot for only the property or properties in question .
resolution samples shall be reheated at the target roadway compaction temperature for num hours plus or minus num minutes reduced to the appropriate testing size and conditioned and tested as described in num .
in lieu of the num num hours reheating procedure the mixture may be reheated to within plus or minus numf of the roadway compaction temperature using a microwave oven .
stir the mixture as necessary during the reheating process to maintain temperature uniformity .
subsequently condition and test the mixture as described in num .
num roadway samples in the event of an unfavorable comparison between the contractors qc test data and the engineers verification test data on the density results the resolution laboratory will test all of the cores from the lot .
testing will be as described in num num .
num resolution determination the resolution test results for the property or properties in question will be compared with the qc test results based on the betweenlaboratory precision values shown in table num .
if the resolution test results compare favorably with all of the qc results then acceptance and payment for the lot will be based on the qc results and the department num return to table of contents will bear the costs associated with resolution testing .
no additional compensation either monetary or time will be made for the impacts of any such testing .
if the resolution test results do not compare favorably with all of the qc results then acceptance and payment for the lot will be based on the resolution test data for the lot and the costs of the resolution testing will be deducted from monthly estimates .
no additional time will be granted for the impacts of any such testing .
in addition the material failure requirements of num apply to the resolution test data .
address any material represented by the failing test results in accordance with num .
for this situation the lot will be limited to a maximum pay factor of num as defined in num for all quality characteristics .
in the event of an unfavorable comparison between the resolution test results and qc test results make the necessary adjustments to assure that future comparisons are favorable .
num independent verification iv testing num plant the contractor shall provide sample boxes and take samples as directed by the engineer for iv testing .
obtain enough material for three complete sets of tests two samples for iv testing by the engineer and one sample for testing by the contractor .
if agreed upon by both the engineer and the contractor only one sample for iv testing by the engineer may be obtained .
iv samples will be reheated at the target roadway compaction temperature for num hours plus or minus num minutes reduced to the appropriate testing size and conditioned and tested as described in num .
the contractors split sample if tested immediately after sampling shall be reduced to the appropriate testing size and conditioned and tested as described in num .
if the contractors sample is not tested immediately after sampling then the sample shall be reheated at the target roadway compaction temperature for num num hours plus or minus num minutes reduced to the appropriate testing size and conditioned and tested as described in num .
for the iv and contractors samples in lieu of the num hours reheating procedure the mixture may be reheated to within plus or minus numf of the roadway compaction temperature using a microwave oven .
stir the mixture as necessary during the reheating process to maintain temperature uniformity .
subsequently condition and test the mixture as described in num .
the contractors test results shall be provided to the engineer within one working day from the time the sample was obtained .
if any of the iv test results do not meet the requirements of table num then a comparison of the iv test results and the contractors test results if available will be made .
if a comparison of the iv test results and the contractors test results meets the precision values of table num for the material properties in question or if the contractors test results are not available then the iv test results are considered verified and the contractor shall cease production of the asphalt mixture until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved .
address any material represented by the failing test results in accordance with num .
if a comparison of the iv test results and the contractors test results does not meet the precision values of table num for the material properties in question then the second iv sample shall be tested by the engineer for the material properties in question .
if a comparison between the first and second iv test results does not meet the precision values of table num for the material properties in question then the first iv test results are considered unverified for the material properties in question and no action shall be taken .
num return to table of contents if a comparison between the first and second iv test results meets the precision values of table num for the material properties in question then the first iv sample is considered verified and the contractor shall cease production of the asphalt mixture until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved .
address any material represented by the failing test results in accordance with num .
the engineer has the option to use the iv sample for comparison testing as specified in num .
num roadway obtain five num inch diameter roadway cores within num hours of placement as directed by the engineer for iv testing .
in situations where it is impractical to cut five cores per sublot obtain a minimum of three cores per sublot at random locations as identified by the engineer .
these independent cores will be obtained from the same lots and sublots as the independent verification plant samples or as directed by the engineer .
the density of these cores will be obtained as described in num .
if the average of the results for the sublot does not meet the requirements of table num for density then a comparison of the iv gmm test results and the contractors gmm test results if available will be made in accordance with the procedure provided in num .
address any material represented by the failing test results in accordance with num .
num surface tolerance the asphalt mixture will be accepted on the roadway with respect to surface tolerance in accordance with the applicable requirements of num .
num minimum acceptable quality levels num pfs below num in the event that an individual pay factor for any quality characteristic of a lot falls below num take steps to correct the situation and report the actions to the engineer .
in the event that the pay factor for the same quality characteristic for two consecutive lots is below num cease production of the asphalt mixture until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved .
actions taken must be approved by the engineer before production resumes .
num cpfs less than num and greater than or equal to num if the composite pay factor for the lot is less than num and greater than or equal to num cease production of the asphalt mixture until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved .
actions taken must be approved by the engineer before production resumes .
num cpfs less than num and greater than or equal to num if the cpf for the lot is less than num and greater than or equal to num address the defective material in accordance with num .
num cpfs less than num if the cpf for the lot is less than num remove and replace the defective lot at no cost to the department or as approved by the engineer .
num defective material assume responsibility for removing and replacing all defective material placed on the project at no cost to the department .
as an exception to the above and upon approval of the engineer obtain an engineering analysis in accordance with section num by an independent laboratory as approved by num return to table of contents the engineer to determine the disposition of the material .
the engineering analysis must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of florida .
the engineer may determine that an engineering analysis is not necessary or may perform an engineering analysis to determine the disposition of the material .
any material that remains in place will be accepted with a cpf as determined by num or as determined by the engineer .
if the defective material is due to a gradation asphalt binder content or density failure upon the approval of the engineer the contractor may perform delineation tests on roadway cores in lieu of an engineering analysis to determine the limits of the defective material that may require removal and replacement .
prior to any delineation testing all sampling locations shall be approved by the engineer .
all delineation sampling and testing shall be monitored and verified by the engineer .
for materials that are defective due to air voids an engineering analysis is required .
when evaluating defective material by engineering analysis or delineation testing at a minimum evaluate all material located between passing qc pc or iv test results .
exceptions to this requirement shall be approved by the engineer .
num comparison testing .
at the start of the project unless waived by the engineer and at other times as determined necessary by the engineer provide split samples for comparison testing with the engineer .
the purpose of these tests is to verify that the testing equipment is functioning properly and that the testing procedures are being performed correctly .
in the event that the engineer determines that there is a problem with the contractors testing equipment andor testing procedures immediately correct the problem to the engineers satisfaction .
in the event that the problem is not immediately corrected cease production of the asphalt mixture until the problem is adequately resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
if so agreed to by both the contractor and the engineer the split sample used for comparison testing may also be used for the qc sample .
the split sample used for comparison testing must also meet the requirements for iv testing described in num .
num method of measurement .
for the work specified under this section including the pertinent provisions of sections num and num the quantity to be paid for will be the weight of the mixture in tons .
for each pay item excluding overbuild the pay quantity will be based on the quantity placed on the project limited to num of the adjusted plan quantity for the pay item .
the adjusted plan quantity will be determined by dividing the pay items original plan quantity including any engineer approved quantity revisions by the design gmm stated in num then multiplying it by the tonnageweighted average gmm of the mixes used for the pay item .
the bid price for the asphalt mix will include the cost of the liquid asphalt and the tack coat application as directed in num .
there will be no separate payment or unit price adjustment for the asphalt binder material in the asphalt mix .
for the calculation of unit price adjustments of bituminous material the average asphalt content will be based on the percentage specified in num num .
the weight will be determined as provided in num including the provisions for the automatic recordation system .
prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num num .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
num general price and payment will be full compensation for all the work specified under this section including the applicable requirements of sections num and num .
for materials accepted in accordance with num based upon the quality of the material a pay adjustment will be applied to the bid price of the material as determined on a lot by lot basis .
the pay adjustment will be assessed by calculating a pay factor for the following individual quality characteristics pavement density air voids asphalt binder content and the percentage passing the no .
num and no .
num sieves .
the pay adjustment will be computed by multiplying a composite pay factor cpf for the lot by the bid price per ton .
num pay factors num partial lots for partial lots where no random sample is obtained due to insufficient tonnage a cpf of num shall be applied .
num two or less sublot test results in the event that two or less sublot test results are available for a lot pay factors will be determined based on table num using the average of the accumulated deviations from the target value .
deviations are absolute values with no plus or minus signs .
use the numtest column when there is only one sublot test result and use the numtests column when there are two sublots .
table num small quantity pay table pay factor num sublot test deviation num sublot test average deviation asphalt binder content num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num sieve num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num sieve num num num num num num num num num num num num air voids num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num density num num num num num return to table of contents table num small quantity pay table pay factor num sublot test deviation num sublot test average deviation num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
each density test result is the average of five cores .
the target density is num percent of gmm num percent when compaction is limited to the static mode or for layers specified to be one inch thick .
when compaction is limited to the static mode no vibratory mode in the vertical direction will be allowed .
other vibratory modes will be allowed if approved by the engineer .
in this case the target density is num percent of gmm .
num three or more sublot test results when three or more sublot test results are available for a lot the variabilityunknown standard deviation method will be used to determine the estimated percentage of the lot that is within the specification limits .
the number of significant figures used in the calculations will be in accordance with requirements of aashto rnum absolute method .
num percent within limits the percent within limits pwl and pay factors for the lot will be calculated as described below .
variables used in the calculations are as follows x individual test value sublot n number of tests sublots s sample standard deviation xnum summation of squares of individual test values xnum summation of individual test values squared qu upper quality index usl upper specification limit target value plus upper specification limit from table num ql lower quality index lsl lower specification limit target value minus lower specification limit from table num pu estimated percentage below the usl pl estimated percentage above the lsl num .
calculate the arithmetic mean x of the test values n x x num .
calculate the sample standard deviation s num num num n n x x n s num return to table of contents num .
calculate the upper quality index qu s usl x u q num .
calculate the lower quality index ql s lsl x ql num .
from table num determine the percentage of work below the usl pu .
num .
from table num determine percentage of work above the lsl pl note if usl or lsl is not specified percentages within usl or lsl will be num .
num .
if qu or ql is a negative number then calculate the percent within limits for qu or ql as follows enter table num with the positive value of qu or ql and obtain the corresponding percent within limits for the proper sample size .
subtract this number from num .
the resulting number is the value to be used in the next step step num for the calculation of quality level .
num .
calculate the percent within limits pwl pu pl num num .
calculate the pay factor pf for each quality characteristic using the equation given in num .
table num specification limits quality characteristic specification limits passing no .
num sieve percent target num passing no .
num sieve percent target num asphalt content percent target num air voids percent num num density vibratory mode percent of gmm num num num density static mode percent of gmm num num num num num no vibratory mode in the vertical direction will be allowed .
other vibratory modes will be allowed if approved by the engineer .
table num percent within limits quality index percent within limits for selected sample size n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents table num percent within limits quality index percent within limits for selected sample size n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents table num percent within limits quality index percent within limits for selected sample size n num n num n num n num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pay factors pf pay factors will be calculated by using the following equation pay factor num num x pwl num the pwl is determined from step num of num .
num composite pay factor cpf a cpf for the lot will be calculated based on the individual pfs with the following weighting applied num density d num air voids va num asphalt binder content pb num passing no .
num pnum and num passing no .
num pnum .
calculate the cpf by using the following formula cpf num x pf d num x pf va num x pf pb num x pf pnum num x pf pnum where the pf for each quality characteristic is determined in either num or num depending on the number of sublot tests .
note that the number after each multiplication will be rounded to the nearest num .
the pay adjustment shall be computed by multiplying the cpf for the lot by the bid price per ton .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num num superpave asphaltic concrete per ton .
num return to table of contents section num asphalt concrete friction courses num description .
construct an asphalt concrete friction course pavement with the type of mixture specified in the contract documents or when offered as alternates as selected .
this section specifies mixes designated as fcnum fcnum and fcnum .
obtain superpave asphalt concrete friction course from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
producers must meet the plant and equipment requirements of section num as modified herein .
meet the general construction requirements of section num as modified herein .
num materials .
num general requirements meet the requirements specified in division iii as modified herein .
the engineer will base continuing approval of material sources on field performance .
warm mix technologies additives foaming techniques etc .
listed on the departments website may be used in the production of the mix .
the url for obtaining this information is httpwww.fdot.govmaterialsmacproductionwarmmixasphalt .
num asphalt binder meet the requirements of section num and any additional requirements or modifications specified herein for the various mixtures .
num coarse aggregate meet the requirements of section num and any additional requirements or modifications specified herein for the various mixtures .
num fine aggregate meet the requirements of section num and any additional requirements or modifications specified herein for the various mixtures .
num hydrated lime meet the requirements of aashto m num num type num .
provide certified test results for each shipment of hydrated lime indicating compliance with the specifications .
num liquid antistrip additive meet the requirements of num and be listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num fiber stabilizing additive required for fcnum only use either a mineral or cellulose fiber stabilizing additive .
meet the following requirements num mineral fibers use mineral fibers made from virgin basalt diabase or slag treated with a cationic sizing agent to enhance the disbursement of the fiber as well as to increase adhesion of the fiber surface to the bitumen .
meet the following requirements for physical properties num .
size analysis average fiber length num inch maximum average fiber thickness num inch maximum num .
shot content astm cnum percent passing no .
num sieve num num percent passing no .
num sieve num num provide certified test results for each batch of fiber material indicating compliance with the above tests .
num cellulose fibers use cellulose fibers meeting the following requirements num return to table of contents num .
fiber length num inch maximum num .
sieve analysis a. alpine sieve method percent passing no .
num sieve num b. rotap sieve method percent passing no .
num sieve num percent passing no .
num sieve num percent passing no .
num sieve num num .
ash content num nonvolatiles plus or minus num num. ph num plus or minus num num .
oil absorption num plus or minus num times fiber weight num .
moisture content num by weight maximum provide certified test results for each batch of fiber material indicating compliance with the above tests .
num general composition of mixes .
num general use a bituminous mixture composed of aggregate coarse fine or a mixture thereof asphalt binder and in some cases fibers andor hydrated lime .
size uniformly grade and combine the aggregate fractions in such proportions that the resulting mix meets the requirements of this section .
num specific component requirements by mix num fcnum num aggregates use an aggregate blend which consists of either num crushed granite andor granitic gneiss or num crushed limestone andor crushed shell rock .
do not blend granite andor granitic gneiss with limestone andor shell rock for fcnum mixtures .
a list of aggregates approved for use in friction course may be available on the departments website .
the url for obtaining this information if available is httpsmac.fdot.gov .
num asphalt binder use an asphalt binder as called for in the contract documents meeting the requirements of section num .
num hydrated lime add the lime at a dosage rate of num by weight of the total dry aggregate to mixes containing granite .
num liquid antistrip additive use a liquid antistrip additive for mixtures containing limestone aggregate .
num fiber stabilizing additive add either mineral fibers at a dosage rate of num by weight of the total mix or cellulose fibers at a dosage rate of num by weight of total mix .
num fcnum and fcnum num aggregates use an aggregate blend of approved friction course aggregates that consists of crushed granite crushed granitic gneiss crushed limestone crushed shell rock or a combination of the above .
as an exception mixes that contain a minimum of num of approved friction course aggregates of crushed granite andor crushed granitic gneiss may either contain up to num fine aggregate from other sources of aggregate not approved for friction courses or a combination of up to num rap and the remaining fine aggregate from other sources of aggregate not approved for friction courses .
mixtures utilizing high polymer hp binder are not allowed to contain rap .
num return to table of contents a list of aggregates approved for use in friction course may be available on the departments website .
the url for obtaining this information if available is httpsmac.fdot.gov .
num asphalt binder use an asphalt binder as called for in the contract documents meeting the requirements of section num .
num grading requirements num fcnum use a mixture having a gradation at design within the ranges shown in table num .
table num fcnum gradation design range num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num fcnum meet the design gradation requirements for a spnum superpave fine mix as defined in num .
num fcnum meet the design gradation requirements for a spnum superpave fine mix as defined in num .
num mix design .
num fcnum the department will design the fcnum mixtures .
furnish the materials and all appropriate information source gradation etc .
as specified in num .
the department will have two weeks to design the mix .
the department will establish the design binder content for fcnum within the following ranges based on aggregate type aggregate type binder content crushed granite andor granitic gneiss num num crushed limestone andor shell rock num num num fcnum and fcnum provide a mix design conforming to the requirements of num unless otherwise designated in the plans .
num revision of mix design for fcnum fcnum and fcnum meet the requirements of num .
for fcnum all revisions must fall within the gradation limits defined in table num .
num contractors process control .
provide the necessary process control of the friction course mix and construction in accordance with the applicable provisions of num num and num .
the engineer will monitor the spread rate periodically to ensure uniform thickness .
perform quality control procedures for daily monitoring and control of spread rate variability .
if the spread rate varies by more than num of the spread rate set by the engineer in accordance with num immediately make all corrections necessary to bring the spread rate into the acceptable range .
num acceptance of the mixture .
num fcnum and fcnum meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num fcnum meet the requirements of num with the following exceptions num .
the mixture will be accepted with respect to gradation pnum pnum and pnum and asphalt binder content pb only .
num .
testing in accordance with aashto t num and fm numt num and conditioning prior to testing will not be required as part of num .
num .
the standard lot size of fcnum will be num tons with each lot subdivided into four equal sublots of num tons each .
num .
the betweenlaboratory precision values described in table num are modified to include pnum pnum and pnum with a maximum difference per fm numt num figure num .
num .
table num master production range is replaced by table num .
num .
the mixture will be accepted on the roadway with respect to surface tolerance in accordance with num .
no density testing will be required for these mixtures .
table num fcnum master production range characteristic tolerance num asphalt binder content target num passing num inch sieve target num passing no .
num sieve target num passing no .
num sieve target num num tolerances for sample size of n num from the verified mix design num individual test tolerances for fcnum production terminate the lot if any of the following quality control qc failures occur num .
an individual test result of a sublot for asphalt binder content does not meet the requirements of table num num .
two consecutive test results within the same lot for gradation on any of the following sieve sizes pnum pnum and pnum do not meet the requirements of table num .
the two consecutive failures must be on the same sieve .
when a lot is terminated due to a qc failure stop production of the mixture until the problem is resolved to the satisfaction of the qc managers andor asphalt plant level ii technicians responsible for the decision to resume production after a qc failure as identified in section num .
in the event that it can be demonstrated that the problem can immediately be or already has been resolved it will not be necessary to stop production .
when a lot is terminated make all necessary changes to correct the problem .
do not resume production until appropriate corrections have been made .
inform the engineer of the problem and corrections made to correct the problem .
after resuming production sample and test the material to verify that the changes have corrected the problem .
summarize this information and provide it to the engineer prior to the end of the work shift when production resumes .
in the event that a qc failure is not addressed as defined above the engineers approval will be required prior to resuming production after any future qc failures .
address any material represented by a failing test result in accordance with num .
any lot terminated under this subarticle will be limited to a maximum pay factor of num as defined in num for each quality characteristic .
num return to table of contents num special construction requirements .
num hot storage of fcnum mixtures when using surge or storage bins in the normal production of fcnum do not leave the mixture in the surge or storage bin for more than one hour .
num longitudinal grade controls for opengraded friction courses on fcnum use either longitudinal grade control skid ski or traveling stringline or a joint matcher .
num temperature requirements for fcnum num air temperature at laydown meet the requirements of table num .
num temperature of the mix heat and combine the asphalt binder and aggregate in a manner to produce a mix having a temperature when discharged from the plant meeting the requirements of num .
meet all requirements of num at the roadway .
the target mixing temperature shall be established by the contractor .
the target mixing temperature may be reduced when using warm mix technology .
num compaction of fcnum provide two static steelwheeled rollers with an effective compactive weight in the range of num to num pounds per linear inch pli determined as follows total width of drums inches total weight of roller pounds pli any variation of this equipment requirement must be approved by the engineer .
establish an appropriate rolling pattern for the pavement in order to effectively seat the mixture without crushing the aggregate .
in the event that the roller begins to crush the aggregate reduce the number of coverages or the pli of the rollers .
if the rollers continue to crush the aggregate use a tandem steelwheel roller weighing not more than num pli of drum width .
num temperature requirements for fcnum and fcnum num air temperature at laydown meet the requirements of table num .
num temperature of the mix heat and combine the asphalt binder and aggregate in a manner to produce a mix having a temperature when discharged from the plant meeting the requirements of num .
meet all requirements of num at the roadway .
num prevention of adhesion to minimize adhesion to the drum during the rolling operations the contractor may add a small amount of liquid detergent to the water in the roller .
at intersections and in other areas where the pavement may be subjected to cross traffic before it has cooled spray the approaches with water to wet the tires of the approaching vehicles before they cross the pavement .
num transportation requirements of friction course mixtures cover all loads of friction course mixtures with a tarpaulin or waterproof cover meeting requirements of num .
num thickness of friction courses .
num fcnum and fcnum the thickness of the friction course layer will be the plan thickness as shown in the contract documents .
for construction purposes the plan thickness will be converted to spread rate as defined in num .
plan quantities are based on a gmm of num corresponding to a spread rate of num lbsydnumin .
pay quantities will be based on the actual maximum specific gravity of the mix being used .
num fcnum the total thickness of the fcnum layer will be the plan thickness as shown in the contract documents .
for construction purposes the plan thickness will be converted to num return to table of contents spread rate based on the combined aggregate bulk specific gravity of the asphalt mix being used as shown in the following equation spread rate lbsydnum t x gsb x num where t thickness in .
plan thickness gsb combined aggregate bulk specific gravity from the verified mix design the weight of the mixture shall be determined as provided in num .
plan quantities are based on a gsb of num corresponding to a spread rate of num pounds per square yard for a num inch layer .
pay quantities will be based on the actual combined aggregate bulk specific gravity gsb of the mix being used .
num special equipment requirements for fcnum .
num fiber supply system use a separate feed system to accurately proportion the required quantity of mineral fibers into the mixture in such a manner that uniform distribution is obtained .
interlock the proportioning device with the aggregate feed or weigh system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes .
control the proportion of fibers to within plus or minus num of the amount of fibers required .
provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the fiber system interlocked with plant controls so that the mixture production will be interrupted if introduction of the fiber fails .
when a batch plant is used add the fiber to the aggregate in the weigh hopper or as approved and directed by the engineer .
increase the batch dry mixing time by num to num seconds or as directed by the engineer from the time the aggregate is completely emptied into the pugmill .
ensure that the fibers are uniformly distributed prior to the addition of asphalt rubber into the pugmill .
when a drummix plant is used add and uniformly disperse the fiber with the aggregate prior to the addition of the asphalt rubber .
add the fiber in such a manner that it will not become entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant .
num hydrated lime supply system for fcnum mixes containing granite use a separate feed system to accurately proportion the required quantity of hydrated lime into the mixture in such a manner that uniform coating of the aggregate is obtained prior to the addition of the asphalt rubber .
add the hydrated lime in such a manner that it will not become entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant .
interlock the proportioning device with the aggregate feed or weigh system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes and to ensure that all mixture produced is properly treated with hydrated lime .
control the proportion of hydrated lime to within plus or minus num of the amount of hydrated lime required .
provide and interlock flow indicators or sensing devices for the hydrated lime system with plant controls so that the mixture production will be interrupted if introduction of the hydrated lime fails .
the addition of the hydrated lime to the aggregate may be accomplished by method a or b as follows num method a dry form add hydrated lime in a dry form to the mixture according to the type of asphalt plant being used .
when a batch plant is used add the hydrated lime to the aggregate in the weigh hopper or as approved and directed by the engineer .
increase the batch dry mixing time by eight to twelve seconds or as directed by the engineer from the time the aggregate is completely emptied into the pugmill .
uniformly distribute the hydrated lime prior to the addition num return to table of contents of asphalt rubber into the pugmill .
when a drummix plant is used add and uniformly disperse the hydrated lime to the aggregate prior to the addition of the asphalt rubber .
add the hydrated lime in such a manner that it will not become entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant .
num method b hydrated limewater slurry add the required quantity of hydrated lime based on dry weight in a hydrated limewater slurry form to the aggregate .
provide a solution consisting of hydrated lime and water in concentrations as directed by the engineer .
use a plant equipped to blend and maintain the hydrated lime in suspension and to mix it with the aggregates uniformly in the proportions specified .
num hydrated lime pretreatment for fcnum mixes containing granite as an alternative to num pretreat the aggregate with hydrated lime prior to incorporating the aggregate into the mixture .
use a feed system to accurately proportion the aggregate and required quantity of hydrated lime and mix them in such a manner that uniform coating of the aggregate is obtained .
control the proportion of hydrated lime to within plus or minus num of the amount required .
aggregate pretreated with hydrated lime in this manner shall be incorporated into the asphalt mixture within num days of pretreatment .
num hydrated lime pretreatment methods pretreat the aggregate using one of the following two methods pretreatment method a dry form add the required quantity of hydrated lime in a dry form to the aggregate .
assure that the aggregate at the time of pretreatment contains a minimum of num moisture over saturated surface dry ssd conditions .
utilize equipment to accurately proportion the aggregate and hydrated lime and mix them in such a manner as to provide a uniform coating .
pretreatment method b hydrated limewater slurry add the required quantity of hydrated lime based on dry weight in a hydrated limewater slurry form to the aggregate .
provide a solution consisting of hydrated lime and water in a concentration to provide effective treatment .
use equipment to blend and maintain the hydrated lime in suspension to accurately proportion the aggregate and hydrated limewater slurry and to mix them to provide a uniform coating .
num blending qc records maintain adequate qc records for the engineers review for all pretreatment activities .
include as a minimum the following information for each batch or days run of pretreatment pretreatment date aggregate certification information certified test results for the hydrated lime aggregate moisture content prior to blending asblended quantities of aggregate and hydrated lime project number customer name and shipping date .
num certification in addition to the aggregate certification provide a certification with each load of material delivered to the hot mix asphalt plant that the material has been pretreated in conformance with these specifications .
include also the date the material was pretreated .
num failing material .
meet the requirements of num .
for fcnum use the master production range defined in table num in lieu of table num .
num method of measurement .
for the work specified under this section including the pertinent provisions of sections num and num the quantity to be paid for will be the weight of the mixture in tons .
for num return to table of contents each pay item the pay quantity will be based on the quantity placed on the project limited to num of the adjusted plan quantity for the pay item .
for densegraded mixes the adjusted plan quantity will be determined by dividing the pay items original plan quantity including any engineer approved quantity revisions by the design gmm stated in num then multiplying it by the tonnageweighted average gmm of the mixes used for the pay item .
for open graded mixes the adjusted plan quantity will be determined by dividing the pay items original plan quantity including any engineer approved quantity revisions by the design gsb stated in num num then multiplying it by the tonnageweighted average gsb of the mixes used for the pay item .
the bid price for the asphalt mix will include the cost of the asphalt binder asphalt rubber or polymer asphalt cement ground tire rubber antistripping agent blending and handling and the tack coat application as directed in num as well as fiber stabilizing additive and hydrated lime if required .
there will be no separate payment or unit price adjustment for the asphalt binder material in the asphalt mix .
the weight will be determined as provided in num num including the provisions for the automatic recordation system .
prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num num .
num basis of payment .
num general price and payment will be full compensation for all the work specified under this section including the applicable requirements of sections num and num .
based upon the quality of the material a pay adjustment will be applied to the bid price of the material as determined on a lot by lot basis .
the pay adjustment will be assessed by calculating a pay factor for individual quality characteristics .
the pay adjustment will be computed by multiplying a composite pay factor for the lot by the bid price per ton .
num fcnum and fcnum meet the requirements of num .
num fcnum meet the requirements of num with the following exceptions num .
pay factors will be calculated for asphalt binder content and the percentages passing the num inch the no .
num and the no .
num sieves only .
num .
table num replaces table num .
num .
table num replaces table num .
num .
the composite pay factor equation in num is replaced with the following cpf num x pf num inch num x pf no .
num num x pf no .
num num x pf ac table num small quantity pay table for fcnum pay factor numtest deviation numtest average deviation asphalt binder content num num num num num num num num num num inch sieve num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents table num small quantity pay table for fcnum pay factor numtest deviation numtest average deviation no .
num sieve num num num num num num num num num no .
num sieve num num num num num num num num num table num specification limits for fcnum quality characteristic specification limits asphalt binder content target num passing num inch sieve target num passing no .
num sieve target num passing no .
num sieve target num num payment payment will be made under item no .
num num asphaltic concrete friction course per ton .
num return to table of contents section num value added asphalt pavement num description .
construct value added asphalt pavement consisting of asphalt concrete structural course and asphalt concrete friction course subject to a three year warranty period after final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num .
for purposes of this specification the responsible party as designated herein is responsible for performance of the value added asphalt pavement including continued responsibility for performing all remedial work associated with pavement distresses exceeding threshold values determined in accordance with this section and as to which notice was provided to the responsible party .
the work specified in this section will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental to other contract items .
num materials and construction requirements .
meet the following requirements hot bituminous mixtures plant methods and equipment section num hot bituminous mixtures general construction requirements section num superpave asphalt concrete section num asphalt concrete friction courses section num num responsible party .
prior to any value added asphalt pavement being placed on the project the contractor shall designate a responsible party to accept responsibility for maintaining the value added asphalt pavement when remedial work is required .
when the scope of the asphalt work is only milling and resurfacing and there is no construction of the embankment subgrade or base below the pavement included in the contract the responsible party may be either the contractor or the department approved subcontractor performing the value added asphalt pavement work .
when the construction of the embankment subgrade or base below the pavement is included in the contract in addition to the construction of the asphalt concrete structural course and asphalt concrete friction course the contractor shall be considered as the responsible party .
when the responsible party is a subcontractor the subcontractor must be prequalified with the department in the category of asphalt and such designation must be made to the department by the contractor .
the proposed subcontractor must execute and submit to the department a form provided by the department prior to or concurrent with the contractors request to sublet any value added asphalt pavement work stipulating that the subcontractor assumes all responsibility as the responsible party for the value added asphalt pavement within the threeyear warranty period .
failure to timely designate the responsible party will result in the contractor being the responsible party unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the department .
upon final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num the contractors responsibility for maintenance of all the work or facilities within the project limits of the contract will terminate in accordance with num with the sole exception that the obligations set num return to table of contents forth in this section for value added asphalt pavement will continue thereafter to be the responsibility of the responsible party as otherwise provided in this section .
num statewide disputes review board .
the statewide disputes review board in effect for this contract will resolve any and all disputes that may arise involving administration and enforcement of this specification .
the responsible party and the department acknowledge that use of the statewide disputes review board is required and the determinations of the statewide disputes review board for disputes arising out of this specification will be binding on both the responsible party and the department with no right of appeal by either party .
meet the requirements of num .
num pavement evaluation and remedial work .
num general the departments pavement condition survey program along with observations by the engineer will be used as the basis for determining the extent and the magnitude of the pavement distresses occurring on the project .
in the event the level of distress exceeds any of the threshold values defined below remedial work as described in num by the responsible party will be required .
the department will monitor the pavement for distresses and may require remedial action at any time .
for evaluation purposes the project will be subdivided into lots of num mile per lane .
when the segment is less than num mile the segment will be called a partial lot .
for purposes of threshold values and remedial work partial lots and lots will be treated as lots .
the department may conduct a pavement condition survey of the value added pavement following the final acceptance of the project and at intermediate times throughout the warranty period with findings provided when considered by the department to be the obligation of the responsible party .
the final survey if determined by the engineer to be necessary will be conducted before the end of the warranty period with results provided to the responsible party for those conditions exceeding contract threshold values requiring remedial action that the department believes to be an obligation of the responsible party .
the department will be responsible for all costs associated with the surveys .
if the survey findings intermediate or final are to be disputed by the responsible party written notification must be submitted to the engineer within num calendar days of the date of receipt of the information from the department .
during the warranty period the responsible party may monitor the project using nondestructive methods and may participate with the department in the pavement condition surveys upon request .
the responsible party shall not conduct any coring milling or other destructive methods without prior approval by the engineer .
num category num pavement for purposes of this specification category num pavement is defined as mainline roadways access roads and frontage roads with a design speed of num mph and greater .
threshold values and associated remedial work for category num value added asphalt pavement are specified in table num .
num return to table of contents table num category num pavements type of distress threshold values remedial work rutting num depth num inch remove and replace the distressed lots to the full depth of all layers and to the full lane width num ride num rn num remove and replace the friction course layer for the full length and the full lane width of the distressed lotsnum settlementdepressionnum depth num inch propose the method of correction to the engineer for approval prior to beginning remedial work cracking num cumulative length of cracking num feet for cracks num inch remove and replace the distressed lots to the full depth of all layers and to the full lane width num raveling andor delamination affecting the friction course num any length remove and replace the distressed areas to the full distressed depth and the full lane width for the full distressed length plus num on each end pot holes and slippage areas num observation by engineer remove and replace the distressed areas to the full distressed depth and the full lane width for the full distressed length plus num on each end bleeding num loss of surface texture due to excess asphalt individual area num sf .
remove and replace the distressed areas to the full distressed depth and the full lane width for the full distressed length plus num on each end num rutting rut depth to be determined by laser profiler in accordance with the flexible pavement condition survey handbook .
for any lot that can not be surveyed by laser profiler the rut depth will be determined manually in accordance with the flexible pavement condition survey handbook with the exception that the number of readings per lot will be one every num feet .
for a partial lot a minimum of three measurements not exceeding num feet apart will be made .
when the average of the measurements obtained manually exceeds num inch or if any individual measurement exceeds num inch remedial work will be required .
num remedial work for rutting the contractor may propose removal and replacement of less than the full depth of all layers by preparation and submittal of a signed and sealed engineering analysis report demonstrating the actual extent of the distressed areas .
remedial work must be performed in accordance with table num unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
num ride ride number rn to be established by laser profiler in accordance with fm num .
numif the deficient ride is due to underlying asphalt layers base subgrade or embankment which were constructed by the responsible party propose the method of correction to the engineer for approval prior to beginning the remedial work .
numsettlementdepression depth of the settlementdepression to be determined by a num foot manual straightedge .
num cracking beginning and ending of num inch cracking will be determined as the average of three measurements taken at one foot intervals .
the longitudinal construction joint at the lane line will not be considered as a crack .
num remedial work for cracking the contractor may propose removal and replacement of less than the full depth of all layers by preparation and submittal of a signed and sealed engineering analysis report demonstrating the actual extent of the distressed areas .
remedial work must be performed in accordance with table num unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
num raveling delamination pot holes slippage as defined and determined by the engineer in accordance with the examples displayed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecspavement.shtm num bleeding bleeding to be defined and determined by the engineer in accordance with the examples displayed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecspavement.shtm num return to table of contents num category num pavement for purposes of this specification category num pavement is defined as mainline roadways access roads and frontage roads with a design speed less than num mph approach transition and merge areas at toll booths ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes including tapers turn lanes parking areas rest areas weigh stations and agricultural inspection stations .
threshold values and associated remedial work for category num value added asphalt pavement are specified in table num .
table num category num pavements type of distress threshold values remedial work ruttingnum measured by laser profiler see table num see table num manual measurement avg .
depth num inch remove and replace num inchnuma the full lane width for the area plus num feet cracking cumulative length of cracking num feet for cracks num inch see table num surface deterioration num see table num see table num settlementdepressionnum depth num inch see table num num rutting rut depth to be determined by laser profiler in accordance with the flexible pavement condition survey handbook .
for any lot that can not be surveyed by the laser profiler the rut depth will be determined manually in accordance with the flexible pavement condition survey handbook with the exception that the number of readings per lot will be one every num feet .
for partial lot minimum of three measurements not exceeding num feet apart will be checked .
when the average of the measurements obtained manually exceeds num inch or if any individual measurement exceeds num inch remedial work will be required .. numa if pavement has an open graded friction course remove and replace num inches .
num surface deterioration as used in table num surface deterioration includes raveling andor delamination affecting the friction course pot holes slippage areas and bleeding all as defined and footnoted in table num .
numsettlementdepression depth of the settlementdepression to be determined by a num foot manual straightedge .
num category num pavement for purposes of this specification category num pavement is defined as bicycle paths walking paths median crossovers shoulders and other areas as determined by the engineer .
threshold values and associated remedial work for category num value added asphalt pavement are specified in table num .
table num category num pavements type of distress threshold values remedial work rutting na na cracking cumulative length of cracking num feet for cracks num inch see table num num return to table of contents table num category num pavements type of distress threshold values remedial work surface deterioration num see table num see table num settlementdepressionnum depth num inch see table num num surface deterioration as used in table num surface deterioration includes raveling andor delamination affecting the friction course pot holes slippage areas and bleeding all as defined and footnoted in table num .
raveling of fcnum for category num pavements is excluded from this requirement .
num settlementdepression depth of the settlementdepression to be determined by a num foot manual straightedge .
num remedial work the responsible party will perform all necessary remedial work described within this section at no cost to the department .
if the pavement distresses exceed threshold values and it is determined that the cause of the distress is due to the embankment subgrade base or other activities performed by the contractor the responsible party will be responsible for performing all remedial work associated with the pavement distress .
should an impasse develop in any regard as to the need for remedial work or the extent required the statewide disputes review board will render a final decision by majority vote .
remedial work will not be required if any one of the following conditions is found to apply a .
determination that the pavement thickness design as provided by the department is deficient .
the department will make available a copy of the original pavement thickness design package and design traffic report to the responsible party upon request .
the responsible party is responsible for performing all remedial work associated with the pavement distress if the pavement design is provided by the contractor .
b .
determination that the accumulated esals number of num kip equivalent single axle loads in the design lane has increased by num or more than the accumulated esals used by the department for design purposes for the warranty period for the pavement design life .
in calculating esals the average annual daily traffic aadt will be obtained from the departments traffic count data and the tnum percent heavy trucks during a num hour period will be obtained from the departments traffic classification survey data .
c. determination that the deficiency was due to the failure of the existing underlying layers that were not part of the contract work .
d. determination that the deficiency was the responsibility of a third party or its actions unless the third party was performing work included in the contract .
if a measured distress value indicates remedial action is required per table num table num andor table num the responsible party must begin remedial work within num calendar days of notification by the department or a ruling of the statewide disputes review board .
the disputes review board will determine the allowable duration for the completion of the remedial work but not to exceed num months .
in the event remedial action is necessary and forensic information is required to determine the source of the distress the department may core andor trench the pavement .
the responsible party will not be responsible for damages to the pavement as a result of any forensic activities conducted by the department .
as applicable to distress criteria for rutting ride and cracking for category num and category num pavements when two lots requiring remedial action are not separated by three or num return to table of contents more lots not requiring remedial action the remedial work shall be required for the total length of all such contiguous lots including the intermediate lots not requiring remedial action .
additionally for category num and category num pavements where such areas of remedial action are required due to raveling slippage or bleeding are separated by less than num feet the remedial work will be required for the entire area contiguous to the distressed areas including intermediate areas otherwise requiring no remedial action .
the responsible party has the first option to perform all remedial work that is determined by the department to be their responsibility .
if in the opinion of the engineer the problem poses an immediate danger to the traveling public and the responsible party can not provide temporary mitigation for the defect within num hours of written notification and restore the pavement to its original design condition within num hours of written notification the engineer has the authority to have the remedial work performed by other forces .
temporary mitigation includes the use of traffic control systems such as barricades drums or other approved devices to secure the area including lane closures if necessary and constructing temporary repairs making it safe for the roadway user until the defect can be restored to its original design condition .
the responsible party is responsible for all incurred costs of the work performed by other forces should the problem remedial work be determined to be the responsibility of the responsible party .
remedial work performed by other forces does not alter any of the requirements responsibilities or obligations of the responsible party .
the responsible party must complete all remedial work to the satisfaction of the engineer .
any disputes regarding the adequacy of the remedial work will be resolved by the statewide disputes review board .
approval of remedial work does not relieve the responsible party from continuing responsibility under the provisions of this specification .
notify the engineer in writing prior to beginning any remedial work .
meet the requirements of the specifications when performing any remedial work .
perform all signing and traffic control in accordance with the current edition of the departments standard plans .
provide maintenance of traffic during remedial work at no additional cost to the department .
lane closure restrictions listed in the original contract will apply to remedial work .
written requests to obtain permission for lane closures for either forensic investigation or remedial work must be made to the engineer num hours in advance of any lane closures .
do not perform any lane closures until written permission is given by the engineer .
if remedial work necessitates a corrective action to overlying asphalt layers pavement markings signal loops adjacent lanes roadway shoulders or other affected contract work perform these corrective actions using similar products at no additional cost to the department .
num responsible partys failure to perform .
should the responsible party fail to timely submit any dispute to the statewide disputes review board fail to satisfactorily perform any remedial work or fail to compensate the department for any remedial work performed by the department and determined to be the responsible partys responsibility in accordance with this specification the department will suspend revoke or deny the responsible partys certificate of qualification under the terms of section numdnum florida statutes for a minimum of num months or until the remedial work has been satisfactorily performed or full and complete payment for remedial work performed by others made to the department whichever is longer .
should the responsible party choose to challenge the departments notification of intent for suspension revocation or denial of num return to table of contents qualification and the departments action is upheld the responsible party will have its qualification suspended for an additional minimum of num months .
the remedial work is not an obligation of the contractors bond required by section num florida statutes .
num return to table of contents section num miscellaneous asphalt pavement num description .
construct asphalt pavement in areas where vehicular traffic does not travel such as pavement under guardrail bicycle paths median pavement sidewalks etc .
also chemically treat the underlying soil to prevent plant growth .
num materials .
for the pavement use any plantmixed hot bituminous mixture meeting the requirements of a mix design verified by the engineer except do not use opengraded friction course fcnum .
for bicycle paths use a mixture that produces a finished pavement which will not distort or mar under bicycle or mower wheel loads .
in general the engineer will accept the mixture on the basis of visual inspection with no further testing required .
num foundation and soil treatment .
shape the soil in areas where pavement is to be constructed to a surface true to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown in the plans .
compact the soil to a firm state .
immediately before placing the pavement uniformly apply a preemergent herbicide in accordance with the requirements of num to the foundation soil .
ensure that the herbicide carries an approved label for use under paved surfaces and that herbicide is applied in accordance with directions on the label .
prevent damage to any adjacent vegetation during herbicide application .
replace at no expense to the department any plants damaged as the result of soil treatment outside designated areas .
num placing mixture .
uniformly place the hot bituminous mixture by machine or hand methods at the rate of spread or dimensions indicated in the plans or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
if posts are to be constructed within the pavement area the contractor may cut holes for installation through the completed pavement .
after completing installation of posts and compaction of the backfill material patch the area around each post with fresh hot bituminous mixture .
if directed by the engineer place miscellaneous asphalt pavement prior to placement of the final surface course .
num compacting mixture .
uniformly compact the hot bituminous mixture with lightweight rollers or vibratory compactors as directed by the engineer .
the contractor may use hand tamps for compaction in areas which are inaccessible to other compaction equipment .
the engineer will not require a specific density .
num surface requirements .
provide a finished surface that is reasonably smooth of uniform texture and shaped so as to drain without ponding of water .
num return to table of contents upon completion of the pavement shape the surface of the adjacent earth to match the pavement edges .
num method of measurement .
for the work specified under this section including the pertinent provisions of sections num and num the quantity to be paid for will be the weight of the mixture in tons .
for each pay item the pay quantity will be based on the quantity placed on the project limited to num of the adjusted plan quantity for the pay item .
the adjusted plan quantity will be determined by dividing the original plan quantity including any engineer approved quantity revisions by the design gmm stated in num then multiplying it by the tonnageweighted average gmm of the mixes used on the project for the pay item .
the plan quantity will be determined based on a spread rate of num pounds per square yard per inch of design thickness of asphalt placed over the area shown in the plans .
prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including shaping and compacting the foundation soil sterilization treatment furnishing of the bituminous material used in the mixture and shaping of adjacent earth surfaces .
payment will be made under item no .
num num miscellaneous asphalt pavement per ton .
num return to table of contents section num asphalt membrane interlayer num description .
construct an asphalt membrane interlayer composed of a separate application of asphalt binder covered with a single application of aggregate .
obtain asphalt binder from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
num asphalt binder use a pg num meeting the requirements of section num and listed on the departments approved products list apl .
num cover material use size no .
num stone slag or gravel meeting the requirements of section num .
num equipment .
num power broom provide a power broom for cleaning the existing pavement capable of removing all loose material from the surface .
num spreading equipment provide a selfpropelled aggregate spreader that can be adjusted to accurately apply the cover material at the specified rate and that spreads the material uniformly .
num rollers provide selfpropelled pneumatictired traffic type rollers equipped with at least num smoothtread lowpressure tires and capable of carrying a gross load of at least num tons .
maintain a minimum tire inflation pressure of num psi or as specified by the manufacturer such that in no two tires the air pressure varies more than num psi .
load the traffic roller as directed by the engineer .
num mixing equipment use mixing equipment for asphalt binder designed for that purpose and capable of producing and maintaining a homogeneous mixture of asphalt cement at the specified temperature .
num pressure distributor use a pressure type distributor to apply asphalt binder capable of maintaining a homogeneous mixture of asphalt cement at the specified temperature and consistently apply the material in a uniform manner .
num contractors quality control .
provide the necessary quality control of the asphalt binder and interlayer construction in accordance with the contract requirements .
if the rate of application varies by more than num from the rate set by the engineer in accordance with num immediately make all corrections necessary to bring the spread rate into the acceptable range .
the engineer may take additional measurements at any time .
the engineer will randomly check the contractors measurement to verify the spread rate .
num construction procedure .
num preparation of surface prior to application of the asphalt binder clean the existing pavement as specified in num .
num return to table of contents num application of asphalt binder apply the asphalt binder only under the following conditions num .
the air temperature is above numf and rising .
num .
the pavement is absolutely dry .
num .
the wind conditions are such that cooling of the asphalt binder will not be so rapid as to prevent good bonding of the aggregate .
uniformly apply the asphalt binder at the rate of num to num galydnum as directed by the engineer .
use an application rate corrected to numf in accordance with num .
determine the rate of application after each application operation .
num application of cover material immediately after application of the asphalt binder uniformly spread the cover material at a rate of num and num ftnumydnum .
the engineer will set the exact rate .
determine the application rate at the beginning of each days production and as needed to control the operation a minimum of twice per day .
maintain an application rate such that the pavement is covered uniformly with aggregate and is one aggregate layer thick .
for the cover material use aggregate that is reasonably free of any adherent coatings and that does not contain excessive moisture .
immediately after the application of cover material check the surface to ensure a uniform distribution of cover material and a smooth surface .
do not separate the application of the asphalt binder and the application of the cover material by more than num feet unless approved by the engineer .
num rolling in order to ensure maximum embedment of the aggregate cover the entire width of the mat immediately by traffic rollers .
for the first coverage provide a minimum of three traffic rollers in order to accomplish simultaneous rolling in echelon of the entire width of the spread .
after initial rolling immediately correct all portions of the completed surface that the engineer deems defective not properly covered by aggregates fat spots excessive free aggregate etc ..
following the first coverage make additional coverages with traffic rollers as directed by the engineer .
num traffic control for the normal sequence of construction operations place the first course of asphalt concrete overlay over the membrane prior to opening to traffic .
num unacceptable asphalt membrane interlayer .
if the asphalt membrane interlayer is unacceptable due to incorrect blending application rate or not meeting the requirements of this section or damaged prior to placement of the asphalt concrete layer remove and replace it as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
do not apply excessive amounts of asphalt binder .
num placement of asphalt concrete overlay .
ensure that the thickness and temperature of the initial layer of asphalt concrete placed on top of the asphalt membrane interlayer are such that the overlay bonds to the interlayer and the underlying layer without voids or excessive binder .
core the asphalt overlay as directed by the engineer to evaluate the binder and aggregate spread rates as well as the effectiveness of the asphalt concrete overlay in producing a wellbonded interlayer .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
num asphalt membrane interlayer the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
num bituminous material asphalt binderinterlayer the quantity will be the volume in gallons determined as provided in num .
num submittal of certification of quantities for bituminous material prepare and submit a certification of quantities to the engineer in accordance with num .
num basis of payment .
num asphalt membrane interlayer price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing cover materials handling spreading rolling bituminous material and other incidental work necessary to complete this item .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num asphalt membrane interlayer per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num portland cement concrete num description .
use concrete composed of a mixture of portland cement aggregate water and where specified admixtures pozzolan and ground granulated blast furnace slag .
deliver the portland cement concrete to the site of placement in a freshly mixed unhardened state .
obtain concrete from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
if the concrete production facilitys quality control qc plan is suspended the contractor is solely responsible to obtain the services of another concrete production facility with an accepted qc plan or await the reacceptance of the affected concrete production facilitys qc plan prior to the placement of any further concrete on the project .
there will be no changes in the contract time or completion dates .
bear all delay costs and other costs associated with the concrete production facilitys qc plan acceptance or reacceptance .
num materials .
num general meet the following requirements coarse aggregate section num fine aggregate section num portland cementsection num water section num admixtures section num pozzolans and slag section num use only silica sand except as provided in num .
use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
do not use materials containing hard lumps crusts or frozen matter or that is contaminated with dissimilar material in excess of that specified in the above listed sections .
num types of cement unless a specific type of cement is designated elsewhere use type i type il type ip type is type ii type ii mh or type iii cement in all classes of concrete .
use type il or type ii mh for all mass concrete elements .
do not use high alkali cement in extremely aggressive environments or in mass concrete .
use only the types of cements designated for each environmental condition in structural concrete .
a mix design for a more aggressive environment may be substituted for a lower aggressive environmental condition .
table num bridge superstructures component slightly aggressive environment moderately aggressive environment extremely aggressive environment precast superstructure and prestressed elements type i or type iii type i type il type ii type iii type ip or type is type ii mh type il or ternary blend cast in place type i type i type il type ii type ii mh type il num return to table of contents table num type ip or type is or ternary blend bridge substructure drainage structures and other structures all elements type i or type iii type i type il type ii type ip or type is type ii mh type il or ternary blend notes num .
cements used in a more aggressive environment may also be used in a less aggressive environment .
num .
type iii cement may be used in an extremely aggressive environment for precast superstructure and prestressed elements when the ambient temperature is numf and below .
num pozzolans and slag fly ash or slag materials are required in all classes of concrete except for the following when used in slightly aggressive environments class ii num class i num and concrete requiring a coloring agent .
when a concrete requiring a coloring agent is used in a moderately or extremely aggressive environment slag must be used .
use fly ash or slag materials as a cement replacement on an equal weight replacement basis with the following limitations num .
mass concrete a .
fly ash ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with fly ash is num to num by weight except where the core temperature is expected to rise above numf .
in that case ensure that the percentage of fly ash is num to num by weight .
b. slag ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with slag is num to num by weight .
ensure that slag is num to num of total cementitious content by weight when used in combination with silica fume ultrafine fly ash andor metakaolin .
c. fly ash and slag ensure that there is num to num fly ash by weight num to num slag by weight and minimum num portland cement by weight for mixes containing portland cement fly ash and slag .
num .
drilled shaft a .
fly ash ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with fly ash is num to num by weight .
b. slag ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with slag is num to num by weight .
c. fly ash and slag ensure that there is num to num fly ash by weight num to num slag by weight and minimum num portland cement by weight for mixes containing portland cement fly ash and slag .
num .
precast concrete ensure that the precast concrete has a maximum of num fly ash or a maximum of num slag .
in extremely aggressive environments ensure that the precast concrete has a minimum of num fly ash or a minimum of num slag .
a .
fly ash and slag ensure that there is num to num fly ash by weight num to num slag by weight and minimum num portland cement by weight for mixes containing portland cement fly ash and slag .
num .
for all other concrete uses not covered in num num and num above a .
fly ash ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with fly ash is num to num by weight .
b. slag ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with slag is num to num for slightly and moderately aggressive environments and num to num by weight when used in extremely aggressive environments .
ensure that slag is num to num of total cementitious num return to table of contents content by weight when used in combination with silica fume ultra fine fly ash andor metakaolin .
c. fly ash and slag ensure that there is num to num fly ash by weight num to num slag by weight and minimum num portland cement by weight for mixes containing portland cement fly ash and slag .
num .
highly reactive pozzolans highly reactive pozzolans are considered to be silica fume metakaolin and ultrafine fly ash .
when silica fume metakaolin or ultrafine fly ash is used it must be cured in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and approved by the engineer .
a. silica fume ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with silica fume is num to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
b. metakaolin ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with metakaolin is num to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
c. ultrafine fly ash ensure that the quantity of cement replaced with ultrafine fly ash is num to num by weight of the total cementitious material .
num coarse aggregate gradation produce all concrete using size no .
num num or num coarse aggregate .
with the engineers approval and input from the district materials office with producer qc plan acceptance authority size no .
num size no .
num or other gradations may be used either alone or blended with size no .
num num or num coarse aggregate .
submit sufficient statistical data to establish production quality and uniformity of the subject aggregates and establish the quality and uniformity of the resultant concrete .
furnish aggregate gradations sized larger than nominal maximum size of num inch as two components .
for class i and class ii excluding class ii bridge deck the coarse and fine aggregate gradation requirements set forth in sections num and num are not applicable and the aggregates may be blended however the aggregate sources must be approved by the department .
do not blend the aggregate if the size is smaller than size no .
num .
num admixtures use admixtures in accordance with the requirements of this subarticle .
chemical admixtures not covered in this subarticle may be approved by the department .
submit statistical evidence supporting successful laboratory and field trial mixes which demonstrate improved concrete quality or handling characteristics .
use admixtures in accordance with the manufacturers recommended dosage rate .
dosage rates outside of this range may be used with written recommendation from the admixture producers technical representative .
do not use admixtures or additives containing calcium chloride either in the raw materials or introduced during the manufacturing process in reinforced concrete .
num waterreducerwaterreducer retardant admixtures when a waterreducing admixture is used meet the requirements of a type a .
when a waterreducing and retarding admixture is used meet the requirements of a type d. num air entrainment admixtures use an air entraining admixture in all concrete mixes except counterweight and dry cast concrete .
for precast concrete products the use of air entraining admixture is optional for class i and class ii concrete .
num high range waterreducing admixtures num general when a high range waterreducing admixture is used meet the requirements of a type f or type i .
when a high range waterreducing and retarding admixture is used meet the requirements of a type g or type ii .
when silica fume or num return to table of contents metakaolin is incorporated into a concrete mix design use a high range waterreducing admixture type i ii f or g. num flowing concrete admixtures for precastprestressed concrete use a type i ii f or g admixture for producing flowing concrete .
if type f or g admixture is used verify the distribution of aggregates in accordance with astm cnum except allow for minimal vibration for consolidating the concrete .
the maximum allowable difference between the static segregation is less than or equal to num percent .
add the flowing concrete admixtures at the concrete production facility .
num corrosion inhibitor admixture use only with concrete containing type ii cement or type ii mh cement and a waterreducing retardant admixture type d or high range waterreducer retarder admixture type g to normalize the setting time of concrete .
num accelerating admixture for precast drainage and incidental concrete products the use of nonchloride admixtures type c or type e is allowed in the manufacturing of precast drainage and incidental concrete products .
num type s admixtures when a workability retention shrinkage reducing or a rheology modifying admixture is used meet the requirements of a type s admixture .
num classification strength slump and air content .
num general the separate classifications of concrete covered by this section are designated as class i class ii class iii class iv class v and class vi .
strength and slump are specified in table num .
the air content for all classes of concrete is less than or equal to num .
substitution of a higher class concrete in lieu of a lower class concrete may be allowed when the substituted concrete mixes are included as part of the qc plan or for precast concrete the precast concrete producer qc plan .
the substituted higher class concrete must meet or exceed the requirements of the lower class concrete and both classes must contain the same types of mix ingredients .
when the compressive strength acceptance data is less than the minimum compressive strength of the higher design mix notify the engineer .
acceptance is based on the requirements in table num for the lower class concrete .
table num class of concrete specified minimum strength numday psi target slump value inches c structural concrete i a num num b i pavement num num ii a num num b ii bridge deck num num b iii e num num b iii seal num num iv df num num b iv drilled shaft num num v special df num num b v df num num b vi df num num b num return to table of contents a for precast threesided culverts box culverts endwalls inlets manholes and junction boxes the target slump value and air content will not apply .
the maximum allowable slump is num inches except as noted in b .
the contractor is permitted to use concrete meeting the requirements of astm cnum num psi in lieu of class i or class ii concrete for precast endwalls inlets manholes and junction boxes .
b the engineer may allow a higher target slump when a type f g i or ii admixture is used except when flowing concrete is used .
the maximum target slump shall be num inches .
c for a reduction in the target slump for slipform operations submit a revision to the mix design to the engineer .
d when silica fume ultrafine fly ash metakaolin or a ternary blend cement is used in class iv class v class v special or class vi concrete ensure that the concrete meets or exceeds a resistivity of num kohmcm at num days when tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
submit three num x num inch cylindrical test specimens to the engineer for resistivity testing before mix design approval .
take the resistivity test specimens from the concrete of the laboratory trial batch or from the field trial batch of at least num cubic yards .
verify the mix proportioning of the design mix and take representative samples of trial batch concrete for the required plastic and hardened property tests .
cure the field trial batch specimens similar to the standard laboratory curing methods .
submit the resistivity test specimens at least num calendar days prior to the scheduled num day test .
the average resistivity of the three cylinders eight readings per cylinder is an indicator of the permeability of the concrete mix .
e when precast threesided culverts box culverts endwalls inlets manholes or junction boxes require a class iii concrete the minimum cementitious materials is num pounds per cubic yard .
do not apply the air content range and the maximum target slump shall be num inches except as allowed in b. f highly reactive pozzolans may be used outside the lower specified ranges to enhance strength and workability .
testing in accordance with aashto tnum is not required .
num drilled shaft concrete notify the engineer at least num hours before placing drilled shaft concrete .
obtain slump loss tests results demonstrating that the drilled shaft concrete maintains a slump of at least num inches throughout the concrete elapsed time before drilled shaft concrete operations begin .
ambient temperature conditions for placement of drilled shaft concrete for summer condition is numf or higher and below numf for normal condition .
perform the slump loss test at the anticipated ambient temperature for drilled shaft placements greater than num cubic yards and an elapsed time of greater than five hours .
obtain slump loss test results from an approved laboratory or from a field demonstration .
slump loss test results for drilled shafts requiring num cubic yards of concrete or less and a maximum elapsed time of five hours or less may be done in a laboratory .
obtain all other slump loss test results in the field .
technicians performing the slump test must be aci field grade i qualified .
the concrete elapsed time is defined in section num .
obtain the engineers approval for use of slump loss test results including elapsed time before concrete placement begins .
test each load of concrete for slump to ensure the slump is within the limits of num .
initially cure acceptance cylinders for num hours before transporting to the laboratory .
if the elapsed time during placement exceeds the slump loss test data submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num by a specialty engineer knowledgeable in the area of foundations to determine if the shaft is structurally sound and free from voids .
at the direction of the engineer excavate the drilled shaft for inspection .
obtain approval from the engineer before placing any additional shafts .
num mass concrete when mass concrete is designated in the contract documents use a specialty engineer to develop and administer a mass concrete control plan mccp .
develop the mccp in accordance with section num of the aci manual of concrete practice to ensure concrete core temperatures for any mass concrete element do not exceed the maximum allowable core temperature of numf and that the temperature differential between the element core and surface do not exceed the maximum allowable temperature differential of numf .
submit the mccp to the engineer for approval at least num days prior to the first anticipated mass concrete placement .
ensure the mccp includes and fully describes the following num return to table of contents num .
concrete mix design proportions num .
casting procedures num .
insulating systems num .
type and placement of temperature measuring and recording devices num .
analysis of anticipated thermal developments for the various mass concrete elements for all anticipated ambient temperature ranges num .
names and qualifications of all designees who will inspect the installation of and record the output of temperature measuring devices and who will implement temperature control measures directed by the specialty engineer num .
measures to prevent thermal shock and num .
active cooling measures if used .
fully comply with the approved mccp .
the specialty engineer or approved designee shall personally inspect and approve the installation of temperature measuring devices and verify that the process for recording temperature readings is effective for the first placement of each size and type mass component .
the specialty engineer shall be available for immediate consultation during the monitoring period of any mass concrete element .
record temperature measuring device readings at intervals no greater than six hours beginning at the completion of concrete placement and continuing until decreasing core temperatures and temperature differentials are confirmed in accordance with the approved mccp .
leave temperature control mechanisms in place until the concrete core temperature is within numf of the ambient temperature .
within three days of the completion of temperature monitoring submit a report to the engineer which includes all temperature readings temperature differentials data logger summary sheets and the maximum core temperature and temperature differentials for each mass concrete element .
upon successful performance of the mccp reduced monitoring of similar elements may be requested .
submit any such requests to the engineer for approval at least num days prior to the requested date of reduced monitoring .
if approved the specialty engineer may monitor only the initial element of concrete elements meeting all of the following requirements num .
all elements have the same least cross sectional dimension num .
all elements have the same concrete mix design num .
all elements have the same insulation r value and active cooling measures if used and num .
ambient temperatures during concrete placement for all elements is within minus numf or plus numf of the ambient temperature during placement of the initial element .
install temperature measuring devices for all mass concrete elements .
resume the recording of temperature monitoring device output for all elements if directed by the engineer .
the department will make no compensation either monetary or time for any impacts associated with reduced monitoring of mass concrete elements .
mass concrete control provisions are not required for drilled shafts supporting sign signal lighting or intelligent transportation its structures .
at the contractors option instrumentation and temperature measuring may be omitted for any mass concrete substructure element meeting all of the following requirements num .
least cross sectional dimension of six feet or less num return to table of contents num .
insulation r value of at least num provided for at least num hours following the completion of concrete placement num .
the environmental classification of the concrete element is slightly aggressive or moderately aggressive num .
the concrete mix design meets the mass concrete proportioning requirements of num and num .
the total cementitious content of the concrete mix design is num lbcy or less .
num .
temperature of the concrete is numf or less at placement .
if either the maximum allowable core temperature or temperature differential of any mass concrete element is exceeded implement immediate corrective action as directed by the specialty engineer to remediate .
the approval of the mccp shall be revoked .
do not place any mass concrete elements until a revised mccp has been approved by the engineer .
submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num for approval which addresses the structural integrity and durability of any mass concrete element which is not cast in compliance with the approved mccp or which exceeds the allowable core temperature or temperature differential .
submit all analyses and test results requested by the engineer for any noncompliant mass concrete element to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the department will make no compensation either monetary or time for the analyses and tests or any impacts upon the project .
num flowing concrete for precastprestressed concrete produce flowing concrete mix with target slump of num inches .
subsequent to the laboratory trial batch perform a field demonstration of the proposed mix design by production and placement of at least three batches num cubic yard minimum size each of concrete containing flowing concrete hrwr admixture .
take representative samples from each batch and perform slump air content density unit weight and temperature tests on these samples .
cast specimens from each sample for compressive strength tests to verify the design mix trial .
record the ambient air temperature during the test .
ensure that the concrete properties are within the required specification limits .
the plants that are producing concrete with batch sizes of less than num cubic yards are required to produce and place at least a total amount of num cubic yards and perform the aforementioned tests on at least three randomly selected batches .
determine the workability of the demonstration concrete batches by performing the slump tests on the samples taken at num minute intervals from each batch .
continue sampling and testing until the slump measures num inches or less .
from the plot of slump versus time determine the time for each batch when the slump is at num inches .
the shortest time period determined from three consecutive batches at num inches slump is considered the cutoff time of the proposed concrete mix .
for production concrete ensure that the time between the batching and depositing of each load of concrete is less than the cutoff time of the mix and also does not exceed the allowable time limit specified in this section .
ensure that the demonstration concrete is mixed delivered placed consolidated and cured in accordance with the proposed method and sequence .
produce the flowing concrete batches at slumps between num inches to num inches .
perform inspection of the demonstration concrete during batching delivery placement and post placement .
during placement ensure that the concrete batches meet all num return to table of contents plastic property requirements of the specifications and maintain their cohesive nature without excessive bleeding segregation or abnormal retardation .
dispose of concrete produced for demonstration purposes at no expense to the department .
subject to the engineers approval the contractor may incorporate this concrete into nonreinforced concrete items and may be included for payment provided it meets contract requirements for slump entrained air and strength .
after removal of the forms perform the postplacement inspection of the inplace concrete .
observe for any signs of honeycombs cracks aggregate segregation or any other surface defects and ensure that the hardened concrete is free from these deficiencies .
the engineer may require saw cutting of the mockup products to verify the uniform distribution of the aggregates within the saw cut surfaces and around the reinforcing steel and prestressing strands .
the engineer will require saw cutting of the demonstration mockup products for plants that are demonstrating the use of the flowing concrete for the first time .
obtain core samples in accordance with fm num section num to inspect the aggregate distribution .
submit the results of the laboratory trial batch tests and field demonstration of verified test data and inspection reports to the engineer along with certification stating that the results of the laboratory trial batch tests and field demonstration tests indicate that the proposed concrete mix design meets the requirements of the specifications .
for the proposed mix design state the anticipated maximum time limit between the batching and when the concrete of each batch is deposited during the production .
upon the review and verification of the laboratory trial batch field demonstration test data inspection reports and contractors certification statement the department will approve the proposed mix design .
the department may approve proposed flowing concrete mixes centrally mixed at the placement site without the production of demonstration batches provided that the proposed mix meets the following two criteria num .
a previously approved flowing concrete mix of the same class has demonstrated satisfactory performance under the proposed job placing conditions with a minimum of fifteen consecutive department acceptance tests which met all plastic and hardened concrete test requirements .
num .
the cementitious materials and chemical admixtures including the flowing concrete hrwr admixture used in the proposed mix are the same materials from the same source used in the previously approved mix num above .
do not produce or place concrete until the design mixes have been approved .
num composition of concrete .
num master proportion table proportion the materials used to produce the various classes of concrete in accordance with table num table num class of concrete minimum total cementitious materials content pounds per cubic yard maximum water to cementitious materials ratio pounds per pounds i num num i pavement num num ii num num num return to table of contents table num class of concrete minimum total cementitious materials content pounds per cubic yard maximum water to cementitious materials ratio pounds per pounds ii bridge deck num num iii num num iii seal num num iv num num iv drilled shaft num num v special num num v num num vi num num the calculation of the water to cementitious materials ratio wcm is based on the total cementitious material including cement and any supplemental cementitious materials that are used in the mix .
when silica fume or metakaolin is used the maximum water to cementitious material ratio will be num .
when the use of ultrafine fly ash is required the maximum water to cementitious material ratio will be num .
num chloride content limits for concrete construction num general use the following maximum chloride content limits for the concrete application andor exposure environment shown table num applicationexposure environment maximum allowable chloride content pounds per cubic yard non reinforced concrete no test needed reinforced concrete slightly aggressive environment num moderately or extremely aggressive environment num prestressed concrete num num control level for corrective action if chloride test results exceed the limits of table num suspend concrete placement immediately for every mix design represented by the failing test results until corrective measures are made .
submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num by a specialty engineer knowledgeable in the areas of corrosion and corrosion control to determine if the material meets the intended service life of the structure on all concrete produced from the mix design failing chloride test results to the previous passing test results .. num sampling and testing methods .
perform concrete sampling and testing in accordance with the following methods table num description method slump of hydraulic cement concrete astm cnum num return to table of contents table num description method air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method astm cnum air content of freshly mixed concrete by the volumetric method astm cnum making and curing test specimens in the field astm cnum compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens astm cnum obtaining and testing drilled core and sawed beams of concrete astm cnum initial sampling of concrete from revolving drum truck mixers or agitators fm num low levels of chloride in concrete and raw materials fm num density unit weight yield and air content gravimetric of concrete astm cnum temperature of freshly mixed portland cement concrete astm cnum sampling freshly mixed concrete astm cnum static segregation of selfconsolidating concrete using column techniques astm cnum slump flow of selfconsolidating concrete astm cnum relative viscosity of selfconsolidating concrete astm cnum visual stability index of selfconsolidating concrete astm cnum passing ability of selfconsolidating concrete by jring astm cnum rapid assessment of static segregation resistance of selfconsolidating concrete using penetration test astm cnum aggregate distribution of hardened selfconsolidating concrete fm num hardened visual stability index of selfconsolidating concrete fm num fabricating test specimens with selfconsolidating concrete astm cnum concrete resistivity as an electrical indicator of its permeability aashto tnum the department will use the same type of meter for verification testing as used for qc testing .
when using pressure type meters use an aggregate correction factor determined by the concrete producer for each mix design to be tested .
record and certify test results for correction factors for each type of aggregate at the concrete production facility .
provide curing facilities that have the capacity to store all qc verification hold and independent verification cylinders simultaneously for the initial curing .
cylinders will be delivered to the testing laboratory in their molds .
the laboratory will remove the specimens from the molds and begin final curing .
the verification technician will use the same size cylinders as the quality control technician .
take the test sample from the middle portion of the batch in lieu of collecting and compositing samples from two or more portions as described in astm cnum .
num quality control .
num general perform qc activities to ensure materials methods techniques personnel procedures and processes utilized during production meet the specified requirements .
for precastprestressed operations ensure that the qc testing is performed by the producer .
accept the responsibility for qc inspections on all phases of work .
ensure all materials and workmanship incorporated into the project meet the requirements of the contract documents .
num concrete design mix provide concrete that has been produced in accordance with a department approved design mix in a uniform mass free from balls and lumps .
for slump target values in excess of num inches or self consolidating concrete utilize a grate over the conveyance equipment to capture any lumps or balls that may be present in the mix .
the grate must cover the entire opening of the conveyance equipment and have an opening that is a maximum of num num inches in any one direction .
remove the lumps or balls from the grate num return to table of contents and discard them .
discharge the concrete in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
perform demonstration batches to ensure complete and thorough placements in complex elements when requested by the engineer .
do not place concretes of different compositions such that the plastic concretes may combine except where the plans require concrete with a surface resistivity value of num kohmcm or below and one with higher than num kohmcm values in a continuous placement .
produce these concretes using separate design mixes .
for example designate the mix with calcium nitrite as the original mix and the mix without calcium nitrite as the redesigned mix .
ensure that both mixes contain the same cement fly ash or slag coarse and fine aggregates and admixtures .
submit both mixes for approval as separate mix designs both meeting all requirements of this section .
ensure that the redesigned mix exhibits plastic and hardened qualities which are additionally approved by the engineer as suitable for placement with the original mix .
the engineer will approve the redesigned mix for commingling with the original mix and for a specific project application only .
alternately place a construction joint at the location of the change in concretes .
num delivery certification ensure that an electronic delivery ticket is furnished with each batch of concrete before unloading at the placement site .
the delivery ticket may be proprietary software or in the form of an electronic spreadsheet but shall be printed .
ensure that the materials and quantities incorporated into the batch of concrete are printed on the delivery ticket .
include the following information on the delivery ticket num .
arrival time at jobsite num .
time that concrete mix has been completely discharged num .
number of revolutions upon arrival at the jobsite num .
total gallons of water added at the jobsite num .
additional mixing revolutions when water is added num .
total number of revolutions .
items num through num do not apply to nonagitating concrete transporting vehicles .
ensure the batcher responsible for production of the batch of concrete signs the delivery ticket certifying the batch of concrete was produced in accordance with the contract documents .
sign the delivery ticket certifying that the design mix maximum specified water to cementitious materials ratio was not exceeded due to any jobsite adjustments to the batch of concrete and that the batch of concrete was delivered and placed in accordance with the contract documents .
num plastic property tolerances do not place concrete with a slump more than plus or minus num inches from the target slump value specified in table num .
reject concrete with slump or air content that does not fall within the specified tolerances and immediately notify the concrete production facility that an adjustment of the concrete mixture is required .
if a load does not fall within the tolerances test each subsequent load and the first adjusted load .
if failing concrete is not rejected or adjustments are not implemented the engineer may reject the concrete and terminate further production until the corrections are implemented .
do not allow concrete to remain in a transporting vehicle to reduce slump .
water may be added only upon arrival of the concrete to the jobsite and not thereafter .
num return to table of contents num mixing and delivering concrete .
num general requirements operate all concrete mixers at speeds and volumes per the manufacturers design or recommendation as stipulated on the mixer rating plate .
num transit truck mixing when water is added at the jobsite mix the concrete num additional drum mixing revolutions .
do not add water after the total number of drum mixing revolutions exceeds num do not make additional mix adjustments .
discharge all concrete from truck mixers before total drum revolutions exceed num .
seek approval from the engineer prior to using a central mixer and depositing the batch into a truck mixer .
num transit time ensure compliance with table num between the initial introduction of water into the mix and completely discharging all of the concrete from the truck .
reject concrete exceeding the maximum transit time .
for critical placements the engineer may authorize the placement of the concrete .
table num maximum allowable time nonagitator trucks agitator trucks num minutes num minutes num minutes num minutes when a waterreducing and retarding admixture type d type g or type ii is used .
num placement time all the concrete in a load must be in its final placement position a maximum of num minutes after the transit time has expired unless a time extension is approved by the engineer num onsite batching and mixing use a mixer of sufficient capacity to prevent delays that may be detrimental to the quality of the work .
ensure that the accuracy of batching equipment is in accordance with requirements of this section .
num concreting in cold weather do not mix or place concrete when the air temperature is below numf .
protect the fresh concrete from freezing in accordance with section num .
the requirements of concreting in cold weather are not applicable to precast concrete mixing and placement operations occurring in a temperature controlled environment .
num concreting in hot weather hot weather concreting is defined as the production placing and curing of concrete when the concrete temperature at placing exceeds numf but is numf or less .
unless the specified hot weather concreting measures are in effect reject concrete exceeding numf at the time of placement .
regardless of special measures taken reject concrete exceeding numf .
predict the concrete temperatures at placement time and implement hot weather measures to avoid production shutdown .
num adding water to concrete at the placement site water may be added at the placement site provided the addition of water does not exceed the water to cementitious materials ratio as defined by the mix design .
after adding water perform a slump test to confirm the concrete is within the slump tolerance range if the slump is outside the tolerance range reject the load .
if an adjustment is made at the concrete production facility perform a slump test on the next load to ensure the concrete is within the slump tolerance range .
do not place concrete represented by slump test results outside of the tolerance range .
include water missing from the water storage tanks upon arrival at the project site in the jobsite water added .
num return to table of contents num sample location obtain acceptance samples from the point of final placement .
where concrete buckets are used to discharge concrete directly to the point of final placement or into the hopper of a tremie pipe samples will be obtained from the discharge of the bucket .
when the concrete is discharged directly from the mixer into the bucket and the bucket is discharged within num minutes samples may be obtained from the discharge of the mixer .
where conveyor belts troughs pumps or chutes are used to transport concrete directly to the point of final placement or into the hopper of a tremie pipe samples will be obtained from the discharge end of the entire conveyor belt trough pump or chute system .
where concrete is placed in a drilled shaft or other element using a tremie pipe and a concrete pump samples will be obtained from the discharge of the pump line at the location of the tremie hopper .
for all other placement methods prior to each placement obtain department approval for sampling at the discharge of the mixer in lieu of sampling at the point of final placement .
submit the sampling correlation procedure to the engineer for approval prior to the placement of the concrete .
once the comparative sampling correlation is approved by the engineer apply this correlation to the plastic properties tolerances for samples obtained from the discharge of mixer .
where a concrete pump is used to deposit concrete directly into a drilled shaft which is a wet excavation without the use of a tremie or other applications as approved by the engineer ensure the discharge end of the pump line remains immersed in the concrete at all times after starting concrete placement .
num plastic concrete sampling and testing .
qc tests include air content temperature slump and preparing compressive strength cylinders for testing at later dates .
in addition calculate the water to cementitious materials ratio in accordance with fm num for compliance to the approved mix design .
ensure that each truck has a rating plate and a valid mixer identification card issued by the department .
ensure that the revolution counter on the mixer is working properly and calibration of the water dispenser has been performed within the last twelve months .
reject any concrete batches that are delivered in trucks that do not have mixer identification cards .
remove the mixer identification card when a truck mixer is discovered to be in noncompliance and the mixer deficiencies can not be repaired immediately .
when the mixer identification card is removed for noncompliance make note of the deficiency or deficiencies found and forward the card to the district materials and research engineer who has producer qc plan acceptance authority .
perform plastic concrete tests on the initial delivery from each plant of each concrete design mix each day .
ensure qc technicians meeting the requirements of section num are present and performing tests throughout the placement operation .
ensure one technician is present and performing tests throughout the placement operation at each placement site .
if a project has multiple concrete placements at the same time identify the technicians in the q c plan to ensure minimum sampling and testing frequencies are met .
ensure that the equipment used for delivery placement and finishing meets the requirements of this specification .
when a truck designated for qc testing arrives at the discharge site a subsequent truck may also discharge once a representative sample has been collected from the qc truck and while awaiting the results of qc testing .
reject noncomplying loads at the jobsite .
ensure that corrections are made on subsequent loads .
immediately cease concrete discharge of all trucks if num return to table of contents the qc truck has failing test .
perform plastic properties tests on all trucks prior to the first corrected truck and the corrected truck .
when more than one truck is discharging into a pump simultaneously only the truck designated for qc testing may discharge into the pump to obtain a representative sample of concrete from the qc truck only .
furnish sufficient concrete of each design mix as required by the engineer for verification testing .
when the engineers verification test results do not compare with the qc plastic properties test results within the limits defined by the independent assurance ia checklist comparison criteria located in materials manual chapter num disposition of the concrete will be at the option of the contractor .
on concrete placements consisting of only one load of concrete perform initial sampling and testing in accordance with this section .
the acceptance sample and plastic properties tests may be taken from the initial portion of the load .
if any of the qc plastic properties tests fail reject the remainder of that load and any other loads that have begun discharging terminate the lot and notify the engineer .
make cylinders representing that lot from the same sample of concrete .
following termination of a lot obtain samples from a new load and perform plastic properties tests until such time as the water to cementitious materials ratio air content temperature and slump comply with the specification requirements .
initiate a new lot once the testing indicates compliance with specification requirements .
suspend production when any five loads in two days of production of the same design mix are outside the specified tolerances .
increase the frequency of qc testing to one per load to bring the concrete within allowable tolerances .
after production resumes obtain the engineers approval before returning to the normal frequency of qc testing .
if concrete placement stops for more than num minutes perform initial plastic properties testing on the next batch and continue the lot .
cylinders cast for that lot will represent the entire lot .
when the department performs independent verification the contractor may perform the same tests on the concrete at the same time .
the department will compare results based on the independent assurance checklist tolerances .
num acceptance sampling and testing .
num general perform plastic properties tests in accordance with num and cast a set of three qc cylinders for all structural concrete incorporated into the project .
take these acceptance samples randomly as determined by a random number generator acceptable to the department .
the department will independently perform verification plastic properties tests and cast a set of verification cylinders .
the verification cylinders will be the same size cylinder selected by the contractor from a separate sample from the same load of concrete as the contractors qc sample .
for each set of qc cylinders verified by the department cast one additional cylinder from the same sample and identify it as the qc hold cylinder .
the department will also cast one additional hold cylinder from each verification sample .
all cylinders will be clearly identified as outlined in the samplelot numbering system instructions located on the state materials office website .
deliver the qc samples including the qc hold cylinder to the final curing facility in accordance with astm cnum .
at this same time the department will deliver the verification samples including the verification hold cylinder to their final curing facility .
num return to table of contents test the qc laboratory cured samples for compressive strength at the age of num days in a laboratory meeting and maintaining at all times the qualification requirements listed in section num .
the qc testing laboratory will input the compressive strength test results into the departments sample tracking database within num hours .
when the qc testing laboratory can not input the compressive strength test results into the departments sample tracking database within num hours the qc testing laboratory will notify the verification testing laboratory within num hours of testing the cylinder and provide the verification testing laboratory the compressive strength test results .
ensure the compressive strength results are input into the departments sample tracking database within num hours of determining the compressive strength of the cylinders .
the department will compare the verification sample results with the corresponding qc sample results .
in the event that one set of compressive strength data for a set of cylinders falls outside the range of the other set of cylinders use the lower range of average compressive strength to determine the comparison criteria .
based on this comparison the department will determine if the comparison criteria as shown in table num has been met .
when the difference between qc and verification is less than or equal to the comparison criteria the qc data is verified .
when the difference between qc and verification data exceeds the comparison criteria the data is not verified and the engineer will initiate the resolution procedure .
table num range of average compressive strength comparison criteria less than num psi num psi num num psi num psi num num psi num psi num num psi num psi greater than num psi num psi num sampling frequency as a minimum sample and test concrete of each design mix for water to cementitious materials ratio air content temperature slump and compressive strength once per lot as defined by table num .
the engineer will randomly verify one of every four consecutive lots of each design mix based on a random number generator .
the department may perform independent verification testing to verify compliance with specification requirements .
all qc activities calculations and inspections will be randomly confirmed by the department .
table num class concrete lot size i one days production i pavement num square yards or one days production whichever is less ii ii bridge deck iii iv v special v vi num cubic yards or one days production whichever is less num return to table of contents table num class concrete lot size iv drilled shaft num cubic yards or two hours between the end of one placement and the start of the next placement whichever is less iii seal each seal placement for any class of concrete used for roadway concrete barrier the lot size is defined as num cubic yards or one days production whichever is less .
num reduced frequency for acceptance tests the lot size may represent num cubic yards when produced with the same mix design at the same concrete production facility for the same prime contractor and subcontractor on a given contract .
as an exception the requirements for the precastprestressed production facility will only include the same mix design at the same concrete production facility .
submit test results indicating the average compressive strength is greater than two standard deviations above the specified minimum strength for that class of concrete .
base calculations on a minimum of ten consecutive strength test results for a class iv or higher or a minimum of five consecutive strength results for a class iii or lower .
the average of the consecutive compressive strength test results based on the class of concrete can be established using historical data from a previous department project .
the tests from the previous department project must be within the last num calendar days or may also be established by a succession of samples on the current project .
only one sample can be taken from each lot .
test data must be from a laboratory meeting the requirements of section num .
obtain department approval before beginning reduced frequency lots .
if at any time a strength test is not verified or the average strength of the previous ten or five consecutive samples based on the class of concrete from the same mix design and the same production facility is less than the specified minimum plus two standard deviations return to the maximum production quantity represented by the lot as defined in table num .
notify the engineer that the maximum production rate is reinstated .
in order to reinitiate reduced frequency submit a new set of strength test results .
num strength test definition the strength test of a lot is defined as the average of the compressive strengths tests of three cylinders cast from the same sample of concrete from the lot .
num acceptance of concrete ensure that the hardened concrete strength test results are obtained in accordance with num .
do not discard a cylinder strength test result based on low strength strength below the specified minimum strength as per the provisions of this section .
when one of the three qc cylinders from a lot is lost missing damaged or destroyed determination of compressive strength will be made by averaging the remaining two cylinders .
if more than one qc cylinder from a lot is lost missing damaged or destroyed the contractor will core the structure at no additional expense to the department to determine the compressive strength .
acceptance of lot may be based on verification data at the discretion of the engineer .
obtain the approval of the engineer to core and of the core location prior to coring .
for each qc and each qc hold cylinder that is lost missing damaged or destroyed payment for that lot will be reduced by num per num psi of the specified num return to table of contents design strength example loss of two class iv drill shaft qc cylinders that has no verification data will require the element to be cored and a pay reduction will be assessed num psi num psi x num x num num .
this reduction will be in addition to any pay adjustment for low strength .
when qc compressive strength test results are not verified the resolution procedure will be used to accept or reject the concrete .
maintain the hold cylinders until the verification of the compressive strength test results .
when qc test results are verified the engineer will accept the concrete based on qc test results .
the engineer will accept at full pay only lots of concrete represented by plastic property results which meet the requirements of the approved mix design and strength test results which equal or exceed the respective specified minimum strength .
num resolution procedure the department may initiate an ia review of sampling and testing methods .
the resolution procedure may consist of but need not be limited to a review of sampling and testing of fresh concrete calculation of water to cementitious materials ratio handling of cylinders curing procedures and compressive strength testing .
compare the verification sample results with the verification hold cylinders results .
compare the qc sample results with the qc hold cylinders results .
comparison results must not be greater than the comparison requirements in table num .
core samples of the hardened concrete may be required .
the engineer will determine through the resolution procedure whether the qc strength test results or the verification strength test are deemed to be the most accurate lots will then be considered to be verified .
when the engineer can not determine which strength test results are the most accurate the concrete represented by the four consecutive lots will be evaluated based on the qc data .
the engineer will inform the qc and the verification lab within three calendar days of the acceptance compressive strength test to transport their hold cylinders to the resolution lab .
the qc and verification laboratories will transport their own hold cylinder to the resolution testing laboratory within num hours after the engineer notifies the contractor that a resolution is required .
in addition the engineer will ensure that the qc and verification hold cylinders are tested within num calendar days of the acceptance strength tests .
the resolution investigation will determine the strength test results for each of the four or less lots .
when the qc strength test results are deemed to be the most accurate the qc strength test results will represent the four or less consecutive lots and the department will pay for the resolution testing and investigation .
when the verification strength test results are deemed to be the most accurate the department will assess a num pay reduction for the cost of the resolution investigation .
the results of the resolution procedure will be forwarded to the contractor within five working days after completion of the investigation .
num small quantities of concrete when a project has a total plan quantity of less than num cubic yards that concrete will be accepted based on the satisfactory compressive strength of the qc cylinders .
submit certification to the engineer that the concrete was batched and placed in accordance with the contract documents .
submit a qc plan for the concrete placement operation in accordance with section num .
in addition the engineer may conduct independent verification iv testing as identified in num .
evaluate the concrete in accordance with num at the discretion of the engineer .
num return to table of contents num investigation of low strength concrete and structural adequacy .
num general when a concrete acceptance strength test result falls num psi or less below the specified minimum strength coring will not be allowed and the concrete will be considered structurally adequate .
when a concrete acceptance strength test result falls more than num psi below the specified minimum strength submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num to establish strength adequacy or at the engineers discretion obtain drilled core samples as specified in num to determine the inplace strength of the lot of concrete in question at no additional expense to the department .
the engineer will determine whether to allow coring or require an engineering analysis .
when the concrete is deemed to have low strength obtain and test the cores and report the data to the engineer within num calendar days of the num day compressive strength tests .
core strength test results obtained from the structure will be accepted by both the contractor and the department as the inplace strength of the lot of concrete in question .
the core strength test results will be final and used in lieu of the cylinder strength test results for determination of structural adequacy and any pay adjustment .
the department will calculate the strength value to be the average of the compressive strengths of the three individual cores .
this will be accepted as the actual measured value .
obtain the engineers approval before taking any core samples .
num investigation and determination of structural adequacy when the department determines that an investigation is necessary make an investigation into the structural adequacy of the lot of concrete represented by that acceptance strength test result at no additional expense to the department .
the engineer may also require the contractor to perform additional testing as necessary to determine structural adequacy of the concrete .
if core strength test results are num psi or less below the specified minimum strength consider the concrete represented by the cores structurally adequate .
if the core strength test results are more than num psi below the specified minimum strength submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num that includes a full structural analysis .
if the results of the structural analysis indicate adequate strength to serve its intended purpose with adequate durability and is approved by the engineer the contractor may leave the concrete in place subject to the requirements of num otherwise remove and replace the lot of concrete in question at no additional expense to the department .
num coring for determination of structural adequacy notify the engineer num hours prior to taking core samples .
the engineer will select the size and location of the drilled cores so that the structure is not impaired and does not sustain permanent damage after repairing the core holes .
sample three undamaged cores taken from the same approximate location where the questionable concrete is represented by the low strength concrete test cylinders .
repair core holes after samples are taken with a product in compliance with section num or num and meeting the approval of the engineer .
num core conditioning and testing test the cores in accordance with astm cnum .
test the cores after obtaining the samples within seven calendar days .
num pay adjustments for low strength concrete .
num general any lot of concrete failing to meet the specified minimum strength as defined in num num num and satisfactorily meeting all other requirements of the contract documents including structural adequacy the engineer will individually reduce the price of each low strength lot in accordance with this section .
num return to table of contents num basis for pay adjustments when an acceptance strength test result falls more than num psi below the specified minimum strength core samples may be obtained in accordance with astm cnum from the respective lot of concrete represented by the low acceptance strength test result for determining pay adjustments .
a price adjustment will be applied to the certified invoice price the contractor paid for the concrete or the precast product .
do not core hardened concrete for determining pay adjustments when the num day acceptance cylinder strength test results are less than num psi below the specified minimum strength .
the results of strength tests of the drilled cores subject to num and num will be used as the acceptance results and will be used in lieu of the cylinder strength test results for determining pay adjustments .
in precast operations excluding prestressed ensure that the producer submits acceptable core sample test results to the engineer .
the producer may elect to use the products in accordance with num .
otherwise replace the concrete in question at no additional cost to the department .
for prestressed concrete core sample testing is not allowed for pay adjustment .
the results of the cylinder strength tests will be used to determine material acceptance and pay adjustment .
num coring for determination of pay adjustments obtain the cores in accordance with num .
num core conditioning and testing test the cores in accordance with num .
num core strength representing equivalent num day strength for cores tested no later than num calendar days after the concrete was cast the engineer will accept the core strengths obtained as representing the equivalent num day strength of the lot of concrete in question .
the engineer will calculate the strength value to be the average of the compressive strengths of the three individual cores .
the engineer will accept this strength at its actual measured value .
num core strength adjustments for cores tested later than num calendar days after the concrete was cast the engineer will establish the equivalency between num day strength and strength at ages after num calendar days .
the engineer will relate the strength at the actual test age to num day strength for the design mix represented by the cores using the following relationship num portland cement concrete without pozzolan or slag equivalent num day strength fc num numf average core strength x num where f num num ln x num ln x num type i cement f num num ln x num ln x num type ii cement f num num ln x num ln x num type iii cement x number of days since the concrete was placed ln natural log num pozzolaniccement concrete equivalent num day compressive strength fc num where num return to table of contents num num num num t c c t e f f type i cement num num num num t c c t e f f type ii cement num num num num t c c t e f f type iii cement fc t average core strength at time t psi t time compressive strength was measured days num slagcement concrete equivalent num day compressive strength fc num where num num num num t c c t e f f type i cement num num num num t c c t e f f type ii cement num num num num t c c t e f f type iii cement fct average core strength at time t psi t time compressive strength was measured days num flyashslagcement concrete wcmnum equivalent num day compressive strength fc num where num num num num t c c t e f f type iii cement fct average core strength at time t psi t time compressive strength was measured days num flyashslagcement concrete wcmnum equivalent num day compressive strength fc num where num num num num t c c t e f f type iii cement fct average core strength at time t psi t time compressive strength was measured days num flyashsilica fumecement concrete wcmnum equivalent num day compressive strength fc num where num num num num t c c t e f f type iii cement num return to table of contents fct average core strength at time t psi t time compressive strength was measured days num flyashsilica fumecement concrete wcmnum equivalent num day compressive strength fc num where num num num num t c c t e f f type iii cement fct average core strength at time t psi t time compressive strength was measured days num calculating pay adjustments the engineer will determine payment reductions for low strength concrete accepted by the department and represented by either cylinder or core strength test results below the specified minimum strength in accordance with the following reduction in pay is equal to the reduction in percentage of concrete cylinder strength specified minimum strength minus actual strength divided by specified minimum strength .
for the elements that payments are based on the per foot basis the engineer will adjust the price reduction from cubic yards basis to per foot basis determine the total linear feet of the elements that are affected by low strength concrete samples and apply the adjusted price reduction accordingly .
num pay reduction for plastic properties a rejected load in accordance with num is defined as the entire quantity of concrete contained within a single ready mix truck or other single delivery vehicle regardless of what percentage of the load was placed .
if concrete fails a plastic properties test and is thereby a rejected load but its placement continues after completion of a plastic properties test having a failing result payment for the concrete will be reduced .
the pay reduction for castinplace concrete will be twice the certified invoice price per cubic yard of the quantity of concrete in the rejected load .
the pay reduction for placing a rejected load of concrete into a precast product will be applied to that percentage of the precast product that is composed of the concrete in the rejected load .
the percentage will be converted to a reduction factor which is a numerical value greater than zero but not greater than one .
the precast product payment reduction will be twice the contractors billed price from the producer for the precast product multiplied by the reduction factor .
if the engineer authorizes placement of the concrete even though plastic properties require rejection there will be no pay reduction based on plastic properties failures however any other pay reductions will apply .
num return to table of contents section num portland cement concrete class ns num description .
the requirements of this section are applicable to concrete designated as class ns hereinafter referred to as concrete .
use concrete composed of a mixture of portland cement aggregates and water with or without chemical admixtures slag or pozzolan materials .
deliver concrete to placement site in a freshly mixed unhardened state .
ensure the concrete is placed and cured in a manner to ensure that the strength and durability of the concrete is maintained .
num materials .
num general certify that all materials used in concrete are from department approved sources and free from frozen or other detrimental matter .
meet the following requirements portland cementsection num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregate section num water section num chemical admixtures section num pozzolans and slag section num recycled asphalt pavement rap may replace up to num of the total aggregate in the design mix .
use rap from a department approved stockpile .
num production mixing and delivery .
num concrete production requirements deliver concrete from a production facility that is certified by the national readymixed concrete association nrmcaapproved by the district materials research office dmro or that meets the requirements of section num .
when volumetric mixers are used deliver concrete in accordance with the requirements of volumetric mixer manufactures bureau vmmb and ensure that the vehicle has a vmmb registered rating plate .
substitution of structural concrete in lieu of nonstructural concrete may be used if approved by the engineer .
if structural concrete is used in lieu of nonstructural concrete obtain the concrete from a production facility meeting the requirements of section num .
acceptance is based on the requirements of section num .
the engineer may disqualify any concrete production facility for noncompliance with specification requirements .
num delivery the maximum allowable mixing agitation and placement time of concrete is num minutes .
num small quantities of concrete with approval of the district materials research engineer small quantities of concrete less than num cubic yards placed in one day and less than num cubic yards placed in a single placement may be accepted using a prebagged mixture .
the engineer may verify that the prebagged mixture is prepared in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and will meet the requirements of this specification .
num return to table of contents num sampling and testing .
the engineer may sample and test the concrete at their discretion to verify its quality .
the minimum numday compressive strength requirement for this concrete is num psi .
num certification and acceptance .
num general furnish a delivery ticket with each batch of concrete before discharging concrete at the placement site .
record material quantities incorporated into the mix sources of material batch adjustments or substituted material on the delivery ticket .
ensure that the batcher responsible for producing the concrete certifies that the batch was produced in accordance with the contract documents signs the delivery ticket .
the contractor will also sign the delivery ticket certifying that the concrete was placed in accordance with the contract documents .
acceptance by the department will be by certification on the delivery ticket signed by the batcher and the contractor .
delineate and replace at no cost to the department all concrete that does not meet the numday compressive strength requirements or has any cracking greater than num inch in vertical displacement .
any spalling or flaking off of the surface layer that exposes the rough pitted aggregate surface in excess of num square inches is to be removed and replaced in accordance with num .
sidewalk ditch pavement slope pavement traffic separator or curb and gutter having any intersecting cracks visible in the dry concrete regardless of size will be removed and replaced in accordance with num .
if any uncontrolled cracks appear during the life of the contract unacceptable to the engineer remove and replace the concrete in accordance with num at no expense to the department .
num remedial action remedial action will be the removal and replacement of all concrete to the full depth and width .
num return to table of contents section num cement concrete pavement num description .
construct portland cement concrete pavement in one course on a prepared subgrade .
use either the fixedform or the slipform method of construction .
when reinforced cement concrete pavement is specified or required use concrete reinforced with steel bars or welded wire reinforcement in accordance with details shown in the plans .
the engineer may require a demonstration of equipment and paving operations .
if any uncontrolled cracks appear during the life of the contract remove and replace the cracked concrete at no expense to the department .
investigate and implement immediate effective solutions to eliminate further cracks in consultation with and subject to the approval of the engineer .
num materials .
meet the following requirements concrete class i or class i pavement section num grinding concrete pavement section num curing materials section num embedded itemssection num joint seal section num for concrete pavement placed using the slipform method of construction utilize concrete class i pavement .
for concrete pavement placed by hand in constructed forms utilize concrete class i or concrete class i pavement .
lot size for the use of either material shall be as stated in section num for concrete class i pavement .
num equipment .
num general ensure the equipment and tools that are to be used meet the following the capability of handling materials and performing all parts of the work .
to be of such capacity that the paver operates continuously and at a constant rate of production with starting and stopping held to a minimum .
when equipment operates on the side forms use scraping devices to clean accumulations from the top of the forms and wheels .
the forms will be a rigid material and mortar tight .
ensure that the alignment and grade of all forms are in accordance with the contract documents prior to the placing of concrete .
num slipform paver provide a slipform paver that is selfpropelled and equipped to spread strikeoff consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass of the equipment in such a manner that a minimum amount of handfinishing will be necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous pavement .
ensure that the equipment is of such dimensions and arrangement as to cover the full width of the pavement strip being placed .
use equipment that is adjustable as to crown and superelevation and that can shape and compact the concrete into a dense and stable mass to the required crosssection .
ensure that the crown adjustment is readily controllable for accuracy in crown transitions .
num return to table of contents operate the paver on tracks having sufficient contact area to prevent track slippage under load .
ensure that the length of ground contact per track and the arrangement of tracks are adequate to meet the straightedge and other ridingquality requirements specified .
accomplish screeding by oscillating screeds an extrusion device or a combination of both .
if necessary in order to produce a pavement of the required crosssection and meeting the surface requirements equip the slipform paver with traveling side forms of sufficient dimension and strength and of proper shape to support the concrete laterally for a sufficient length of time during placing and finishing .
if using trailing forms provide forms that are rigidly supported laterally .
equip the slipform paver with automatic guidance and grade controls which operate by sensing from a taut line set true to line and grade .
erect and maintain the taut line .
automatic grade controls are not required on the paver when the tracks of the slipform paver are operating on previously placed concrete pavement .
the engineer may waive the use of automatic grade controls on the paver when the entire width of the tracks of the slip form paver are operating on a subgrade which has been consistently trimmed to a tolerance of num inch above or below true grade as established by the taut line set for that purpose .
num vibratory units consolidate the concrete for the full width of the strip being placed with either surface pan type or internal type vibrators .
use a vibration method with sufficient intensity and duration to ensure complete consolidation of the concrete without causing segregation of the materials .
for the surface vibrators use a frequency of not less than num impulses per minute .
for internal type vibrators use a frequency of not less than num impulses per minute for tube vibrators and not less than num impulses per minute for spud vibrators .
when using spudtype internal vibrators adjacent to forms either handoperated or attached to spreaders or finishing machines use a frequency of not less than num impulses per minute .
measure and record the frequency of internal vibrators in plastic concrete and submit data to the engineer .
mount spud vibrators such that the free tip trails and space spud vibrators at a maximum interval of num inches .
provide an amplitude of vibration with spud vibrators that is sufficient for the vibration to be perceptible on the surface of the concrete along the entire width of the strip being placed .
measure and record the actual frequency of vibrations and submit data to the engineer .
control all vibration by the forward movement of the spreader or finishing machine so that vibration automatically ceases when stopping the forward movement of the spreader .
num device for application of membrane curing compound provide equipment for applying membrane curing compound that is selfpropelled and capable of uniformly applying the curing compound at the specified rate .
use equipment that continuously stirs the curing compound by effective mechanical means and that thoroughly atomizes the curing compound during the spraying operation so that the finished surface of the fresh concrete will not be marred .
cover the entire surface of the pavement and with slipform type paving the vertical faces by a single pass of the machine .
only use spray nozzles that are equipped with appropriate wind guards to ensure uniform application .
powerspray equipment may be used to apply curing compound to areas where it is impracticable to operate the selfpropelled equipment .
num return to table of contents num equipment for paving small or narrow areas for variable width areas other than mainline ramps and shoulders the engineer will not require the full paving train as specified for the standard run of paving .
use such equipment that is approved by the engineer .
num hand finishing tools provide straightedges that have a blade length of num feet .
use longhandled floats that have flat blades approximately num feet long by num to num inches wide and that are designed so as to remain straight and true .
use a handle for both types of tool with a length that exceeds num the width of the strip being placed by num feet .
num subgrade preparation .
keep construction of the subgrade completed for a distance of at least num feet ahead of the paving operation .
maintain the finished subgrade in a smooth compact condition and restore any areas which are disturbed prior to placing the concrete .
do not place concrete on a frozen subgrade .
ensure that the subgrade is within two percent of the optimum moisture content while placing the concrete .
uniformly apply water ahead of the paving operations as directed by the engineer .
do not allow vehicles to travel on the prepared subgrade between the subgrade trimming machine and the paving operations unless specifically authorized .
accurately trim the subgrade to the required elevation .
trim high areas to proper elevation .
fill low areas with suitable material compacted to the specified density or with concrete placed integrally with the pavement .
when slipform paving include in the width to be trimmed the areas on which the tracks of the paver will operate .
remove material planed from the subgrade before placing any concrete .
the engineer may waive the use of the planer for small or isolated areas or any areas where its use would be impracticable .
num setting forms .
num general accurately set the forms to line and grade and such that they rest firmly throughout their entire length upon the subgrade surface .
join forms neatly and tightly and brace them to resist the pressure of the equipment operating on the forms .
obtain the engineers approval of the alignment and grade of all forms before and immediately prior to the placing of concrete .
fill any subgrade that is below the established grade at the form line to grade with granular material in lifts of num inch or less for a distance of num inches on each side of the pavement edge and thoroughly compact the material .
as an exception when placing forms on a cementtreated subgrade the contractor may use wedging provided that the wedging system used adequately supports the forms without causing detrimental deflection under the weight of the paving equipment .
num tamping when placing forms on other than a cementtreated subgrade adequately tamp the materials below and adjacent to the forms with formtamping machines .
num advance preparation of forms keep sufficient forms on hand at all times and set forms so that at least num feet of forms on each side of the roadway will be accurately set and maintained true to line and grade in advance of the point where concrete is being placed .
provide sufficient forms so that it is not necessary to remove them in less than num hours after placing the concrete .
num return to table of contents num cleaning forms thoroughly clean the forms after each use and before placing concrete against them .
apply a release agent in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num protection from weather .
meet the requirements of num when placing concrete .
when rain appears imminent stop all paving operations and cover the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
num placement of reinforcement .
num general where the plans call for reinforced concrete pavement place the steel reinforcement in the pavement slab in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
at the time of the concrete placement ensure that the reinforcing steel is free from any of the following which could impair bonding of the steel with the concrete dirt oil paint grease mill scale and any loose or thick rust .
place the reinforcement as provided below .
num welded wire reinforcement place welded wire reinforcement at right angles to the centerline of the pavement and accurately to the position and location shown in the plans .
lap adjacent sheets of welded wire reinforcement not less than num inches .
make the laps only in the longitudinal members .
num bars place bar reinforcement as shown in the plans .
securely wire together transverse and longitudinal bars at their intersections .
lap splices not less than num times the nominal diameter of the bar and only in the longitudinal members .
num placing concrete .
num distribution distribute the concrete on the subgrade to such depth that when it is consolidated and finished the slab thickness required by the plans will be obtained at all points .
the surface will at no point be below the grade specified for the finished surface .
place the concrete on the subgrade in a manner which will require as little rehandling as possible .
place concrete as near to expansion and contraction joint assemblies as possible without disturbing them .
ensure that workers do not walk in the freshly placed concrete with their boots or shoes coated with earth or other deleterious substances .
num use of spreader place concrete on the subgrade by an approved spreading device .
do not place concrete from the discharge bucket or hopper onto an assembly without centering the bucket or hopper directly over the assembly .
a spreader is not required in areas where the width of slab varies intersections and small or isolated areas where it would be impractical to use a spreader .
perform the necessary hand spreading with shovels not with rakes or hoes .
num placement widths the contractor may construct the pavement either in lanes as determined by the longitudinal joints shown in the plans or for the full width in one operation .
construct the pavement to the full width of the lane or slab in a single construction operation .
when constructing pavement in separate lanes do not deviate the junction line from the true line shown in the plans by more than num inch at any point .
tool the edges of the junction to the radius shown in the plans .
when constructing pavement in separate lanes place the lanes adjacent to the low edge of the pavement as shown on the typical section first .
num consolidation along forms and joints thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along the faces of all forms and along the full length on both sides of all joint num return to table of contents assemblies by means of handoperated spudtype vibrators .
do not allow vibrators to come in contact with a joint assembly reinforcement the subgrade or a side form .
num slipform paver when placing concrete with a slipform paver operate the paver with a continuous forward movement .
if for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver immediately stop operation of the vibrating or tamping elements .
do not apply tractive force to the paving machine except that which is controlled from the machine .
in case of an emergency have available for use at the project site at least num feet of forms .
do not insert steel tiebars into the unsupported side of the freshly formed slab .
the contractor may place tiebars into position prior to extrusion from the paver by insertion through the forms by insertion through a temporary support form placed against the form slab or by other means approved by the engineer .
use a method that results in placement of the tie bars at the specified locations with no damage or disruption of the concrete .
num strikingoff consolidating and finishing concrete .
num general requirements immediately after placing the concrete strikeoff consolidate and finish it to produce a finished pavement in accordance with the crosssection width and surface finish required by the contract documents .
perform the sequence of operations as follows strikeoff vibratory consolidation screeding floating removal of laitance straightedging and final surface finish .
except as specified perform strikeoff consolidation screeding and floating by the machine method .
use equipment that is fully and accurately adjustable to produce a pavement meeting project requirements .
use equipment that is capable of operating in a consistent and smooth manner under all conditions of use .
as soon as possible after screeding while the concrete is plastic correct all flaws such as cavities blemishes marks or scratches that will not be removed by planing .
provide a concrete surface true to grade cross slope and superelevation and free of irregularities .
if the engineer permits adding water to assist the finishing operations apply water as a fog spray by means of approved spray equipment .
num machine method operate the machine over each area of pavement as few times and at such intervals as is necessary to give proper consolidation and to leave a surface of uniform texture .
avoid excessive operation over a particular area .
perform strikeoff consolidation and finishing in a manner such as to avoid damage to or misalignment of joint assemblies reinforcing steel dowels and other embedded items .
smooth the surface of the concrete and remove the excess mortar from the surface .
carry a small amount of mortar ahead of the float device as it moves on the surface of the concrete .
operate the machine over the surface of the concrete as many times as required to obtain an acceptable surface meeting the requirements specified herein .
discard excess mortar beyond the edge of the slab .
num hand methods num conditions under which allowed use hand methods in areas of narrow width or irregular dimensions where operation of mechanical equipment is impracticable .
num strikeoff and screeding use a portable screed of an approved design constructed either of metal or of other suitable material shod with metal to strikeoff and screed the concrete .
use a screed that is sufficiently rigid to retain its shape and is at least num feet longer than the maximum width of the strip to be screeded .
num return to table of contents num consolidation use handoperated spudtype vibrators to consolidate .
num floating use longhandled floats to float the concrete .
take the necessary care to avoid creating depressions or ridges during this operation .
num work bridges provide work bridges or other devices necessary for access to the pavement surface for the purpose of inspection finishing straightedging and performing corrective work .
num final finish .
num finishing as the water sheen disappears from the surface of the pavement and just before the concrete achieves its initial set drag a seamless length of damp burlap that extends the full width of the strip of the constructed pavement longitudinally along the surface to produce a uniform gritty texture .
use a burlap drag that consists of two layers of medium weight burlap with the trailing edge of the lower layer extending approximately num inches behind the upper layer .
support the burlap drag in a manner so that a length of at least num feet of burlap is in contact with the pavement .
except in areas where using hand methods to construct the pavement support the lead end of the burlap drag by a traveling bridge .
maintain the drag clean and free from encrusted mortar .
replace the burlap with new material as necessary .
num edging after applying the final finish but before the concrete has become nonplastic carefully round the edges to a num inch radius on each side of transverse expansion joints and construction joints and along any structure extending into the pavement .
produce a welldefined and continuous radius and obtain a smooth dense mortar finish .
completely remove all concrete from the top of the joint filler .
check all joints with a straightedge before the concrete has become nonplastic and if one side of the joint is higher than the other or the entire joint is higher or lower than the adjacent slabs make corrections as necessary .
num curing .
num general after completing the finishing operations and as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to not mar the surface cover and cure the entire surface and when the slipform method is used cover and cure the edges of the newly placed concrete in accordance with one or more of the methods described below .
in cases where curing requires the use of water ensure that curing has prior right to use all water supplies .
if the contractor fails to provide sufficient curing materials to adequately cure the concrete in place in a timely manner that portion of the concrete pavement section addressed in the quality control plan qcp will be suspended .
do not leave the concrete exposed for a period in excess of num minutes between stages of curing or during the curing period .
continuously cure the freshly placed concrete for a period of num hours exclusive of any periods when the temperature of the surface of the concrete falls below numf .
num whitepigmented curing compound under this method uniformly apply whitepigmented curing compound to the surfaces to be cured in a single coat continuous film at the minimum rate of num gallon to every num ftnum by a mechanical sprayer .
at the time of use thoroughly mix the compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
do not apply curing compound during periods of rainfall .
do not apply curing compound to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
should the film become damaged from any num return to table of contents cause within the required curing period repair the damaged portions immediately with additional compound .
if using side forms upon their removal immediately coat the sides of the slabs exposed to provide a curing treatment equal to that provided for the surface .
num burlap mats thoroughly saturate the mats with water before placing them .
use mats of such dimensions that as laid they extend to at least num feet beyond the edges of the strip of concrete placed .
place and weigh down the mats throughout the curing period to ensure contact with the surface being cured .
maintain the mats fully moist and in position for the entire portion of the required curing period .
num removal of forms do not remove forms from freshly placed concrete for at least num hours after placement .
remove forms carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
after removing the forms immediately cure the sides of the slab in the same manner as the surface of the pavement .
num joints .
num general construct joints at the locations and in accordance with the details shown in standard plans indexes num and num and the contract documents .
num longitudinal joints num longitudinal construction joints where the pavement is poured in strips less than the full width of the pavement construct longitudinal construction joints in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
num longitudinal lanetie joints construct longitudinal lanetie joints within the limits of a strip of pavement in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
construct the plane of weakness by sawing a groove in the hardened concrete .
complete sawing as soon as possible but in no case longer than num hours after placing the concrete .
num tie bars and bolt assemblies place deformed steel tie bars or tie bolt assemblies at the required depth parallel to the finished surface at right angles to the joint and at the uniform spacing specified or required in the plans .
place them in the plastic concrete using approved equipment or rigidly support them on the subgrade by approved devices capable of preventing displacement prior to placing of the concrete .
do not paint or coat the bars with any material before placing them in the concrete .
if placing tie bars along a longitudinal construction joint using the method of inserting bars with a num degree bend in the edge of the plastic concrete and after the concrete hardens straightening these bars use grade num reinforcing steel for such tie bars .
replace any bar broken while being straightened in an approved manner .
num transverse joints num transverse construction joints construct transverse construction joints at the end of all pours and at other locations where the paving operations are stopped for as long as num minutes .
do not place construction joints however within num feet of any other transverse joint or within num feet of either end of a section of pavement .
if sufficient concrete has not been placed to form a slab at least num feet long remove the excess concrete back to the last preceding joint .
form the joints by placing a wood or metal bulkhead accurately and securely in place in a plane perpendicular to the profile and centerline of the pavement .
install dowel bars at the construction joints .
saw or form construction joints in a manner similar to contraction joints so that a groove will be formed for holding the joint sealing compound .
num transverse contraction joints construct transverse contraction joints at the interval indicated in the plans consisting of planes of weakness created by sawing a num return to table of contents groove in the surface of the hardened concrete .
place the groove perpendicular to the surface of the pavement .
install load transfer devices in transverse contraction joints .
ensure that the sawing equipment does not damage the pavement and saw the transverse contraction joints as soon as the pavement has hardened to the degree that tearing and raveling are not excessive and before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking begins .
accomplish the joint sawing in two steps .
make the initial cut num inch wide by a depth at least num of the pavement thickness and as soon as possible but in no case longer than num hours after placing the concrete .
make a second saw cut to provide the joint dimensions indicated in the plans just prior to sealing the joint .
in cases where a strip of pavement is being placed immediately adjacent to a previously constructed strip of pavement construct transverse contraction joints using extreme care to time sawing so as to prevent uncontrolled cracks .
repair any uncontrolled cracks at no expense to the department by removing and replacing the pavement across the full width of all affected lanes or shoulders and to the nearest transverse joint in each direction .
after the final sawing clean the joint install the bond breaker and seal the joint .
num transverse expansion joints form transverse expansion joints using preformed joint filler and provide them with dowel load transfer in accordance with the details shown on the standard plans or in the plans .
form the joints during the placing of the concrete by securely staking a metal bulkhead accurately in place at the joint location or by other methods which will securely brace and support the joint filler .
where using approved devices to keep the expansion joint filler and dowels securely in place the engineer will not require a bulkhead .
protect all transverse expansion joints at the bottom and side edges by a sheet metal strip as specified in num and as shown in the contract documents .
cut the filler to the crown and shape of the slab crosssection and extended it to the subgrade .
after installation ensure that the top is not less than num inch and not more than num inches below the finished surface .
furnish the joint filler in lengths not less than the lane widths being poured except that the engineer will not require lengths greater than num feet .
where more than one section is allowed and used in a joint securely lace or clip the sections together .
place the filler normal to the pavement surface .
stake the assembly into position in such a way as to hold the assembly securely in position throughout construction .
ensure that the assembly is true to the line prescribed subject to a tolerance of num inch in the width of the slab .
obtain the engineers approval of the assembly and its installation before placing any concrete against it .
obtain the engineers approval of the crosssection and length of the stakes .
when laying the pavement in partial width slabs place transverse joints in the succeeding slab in line with the like joints in the first slab .
in the case of widening existing pavement place transverse joints in line with like joints in the existing pavement or as otherwise shown in the plans .
num loadtransfer devices provide dowel loadtransfer devices in all transverse joints .
firmly hold dowel bars in a position parallel to the surface and the centerline of the slab by approved steel supports and spacers of a type shown in the plans .
the engineer may approve the use of dowel bar supports or assemblies other than those specifically detailed in the plans .
num return to table of contents allow the dowels to be free to move in one slab as the concrete contracts and expands .
paint each dowel with one coat of zinc rich primer or red oxide alkyd based primer meeting the requirements of sspc paint num type i or type ii .
wait a minimum of num days before coating one half of the dowel with a petroleum based lubricant grease to inhibit bonding to the concrete .
provide a cap for the free end of expansion joint dowels .
position each dowel such that its final deviation from parallel to the surface of the pavement and parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the pavement does not exceed num inch .
position each dowel such that its final deviation from being centered on the joint does not exceed num inches .
position each dowel such that at no point in its length does it deviate from the surface of the pavement as shown in the plans in excess of num inch .
confirm the position of dowel bars by suitable means acceptable to the engineer which may include nondestructive testing methods .
num expansion joints around structures num expansion joints at manholes meter boxes and other projections form expansion joints by placing premolded expansion joint material about all structures and features projecting through into or against the pavement .
ensure that such joints are num inch in width .
num bridge approach expansion joints construct in accordance with standard plans index num .
num cleaning joints and cracks num cleaning joints in new pavement num sawed joints immediately after sawing the joints which require sealing completely remove the resulting slurry from the joint and the immediate area by flushing with a jet of water under pressure and by using other tools as necessary .
after flushing blow out the joints with compressed air .
after the flushed joints have dried sandblast the joint faces to thoroughly remove all foreign material .
perform sandblasting in two passes once for each face .
patch all spalled edges with an epoxy compound .
immediately prior to joint seal installation clean the joints using compressed air to remove all traces of debris and dust within and on the joint surfaces .
num nonsawed joints thoroughly clean joints which require sealing of all foreign material for the full depth of the seal installation .
with the exception of slurry removal due to sawing meet the cleaning requirements as specified for sawed joints .
num cleaning joints in existing pavement remove all existing joint sealing material and foreign material for the full depth of the new joint seal by sawing wire brushing sandblasting or other methods approved by the engineer .
remove any existing sealant or parting strip material below the tape or backer rod bond breaker and replace it with additional bond breaker .
when conditions require removal and replacement with additional bond breaker below the new joint seal obtain the engineers approval of the type of bond breaker and its installation procedure .
perform cleaning by any method or combination of methods as detailed in the plans .
flush the joint with a pressurized jet of water and use other tools as necessary to remove loose remnants and debris .
after flushing blow out the joints with compressed air .
after the flushed joints have dried sandblast the joint faces to thoroughly remove all foreign material .
perform sandblasting in two passes once for each face .
num return to table of contents patch all spalled edges with an epoxy compound .
immediately prior to joint seal installation clean the joints using compressed air to remove all traces of debris and dust within and on the joint surfaces .
num cleaning random cracks in existing pavement do not begin cleaning random cracks in existing pavement until all other concrete pavement repairs have progressed to the point where those operations will not adversely affect the installation of the new seal .
cut the random cracks to be repaired and sealed into grooved joints to the depth and width detailed in the plans .
clean the joints as specified in num .
num sealing joints and cracks seal joints in new pavement before allowing any traffic or construction equipment on the pavement .
complete sealing within num hours weather permitting of sawing .
if traffic is going to be on the pavement prior to any grinding then seal the joints with a temporary material acceptable to the engineer .
when using silicone and nonsilicone sealants in the transverse and longitudinal joints respectively always use the silicone sealants first to prevent contamination at the intersection of the joint faces .
remove nonsilicone sealant num foot in each direction from the transverse joints and replace it with silicone sealant .
use equipment equipped with nozzles that discharge the sealant at the bottom of the groove .
ensure that the apparatus develops sufficient pressure to extrude the joint sealer from the nozzles satisfactorily and to control the rate of application so as to completely fill the joint to within num inch of the surface of the pavement without spillage .
use an apparatus so constructed that it maintains the proper temperature of the sealing material within the manufacturers recommendation .
num hotpoured type sealant when the plans require hot poured sealant for specific joints fill the joint thoroughly without trapping air ensuring the sealant is recessed below the pavement surface as required and control the pouring rate to avoid spilling of sealant onto the adjacent pavement surface .
if any spilling of sealant occurs immediately remove and clean the entire surplus amount from the pavement surface .
place poured material when the ambient air temperature is numf or greater .
use an indirect heating or double boiler type heating kettle that uses oil as a heat transfer medium for hot poured sealer .
use a heating kettle that has a thermostatically controlled heat source a builtin automatic agitator and thermometers installed to indicate both the temperature of the melted sealing material and that of the oil bath .
num low modulus silicone sealant use low modulus silicone sealant of either type a nonselfleveling silicone sealant or type b andor type c selfleveling silicone sealant .
because type a will not flow into the proper shape under its own weight install and tool it so that the sealant is in firm contact with the joint faces and is formed into the appropriate shape as specified .
types b and c will normally flow into the proper shape without tooling .
exercise care to provide the required depth of recess above the sealant surface and below the pavement surface .
install the silicone sealant at temperatures above numf .
num surface requirements .
produce by grinding in accordance with section num a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
num return to table of contents num thickness determinations .
num general after completing the concrete pavement including any corrective work to meet ride requirement determine the thickness by one of following methods .
the engineer will select the locations for testing and make the determination of thickness .
sample locations will be taken at various points on the crosssection so that each test represents an area not exceeding num ydnum .
provide traffic control nondestructive equipment coring equipment and operator to obtain the samples .
num core borings to determine the actual thickness drill cores from the pavement and measure thickness in accordance with astm cnum .
replace the portions of the pavement removed by the borings at no expense to the department .
num nondestructive testing for a determination using the impactecho method measure the thickness of the pavement in accordance with astm cnum .
the initial thickness measurement will be validated by having a core boring taken at that location in compliance with num .
if the results from the impactecho test vary by plus or minus num inches from the core boring then the nondestructive test method can not be used on the pavement .
in such case the core boring will be used for acceptance of that lot of concrete .
the engineer has the option to verify the accuracy of the results at any time .
num method of calculating average thickness the department will determine the average thickness of the pavement by using the following method of calculation num .
the department will not take into account in the calculation any areas of pavement which are left in place but for which no payment will be made .
num .
when the thickness of the pavement is more than num inch greater than the specified thickness the department will consider it in the calculation as the specified thickness plus num inch .
num .
the department will calculate the average thickness for the entire job as a unit .
num deficient thickness .
num general the department will not pay for any pavement which is more than num inch less than the specified thickness .
when the pavement contains no longitudinal construction joint the department will not pay for the area of such pavement that is the product of the full width of the strip placed as a unit times the sum of the distances each way from the short core or cores to the cores on each side which show measurements within the tolerance limits .
when the pavement contains longitudinal construction joints for the width the department will use the width between longitudinal construction joint and the edge of pavement .
num deficient pavement requiring removal the engineer will evaluate areas of pavement found deficient in thickness by more than num inch and if in his judgment the deficiency is enough to seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement remove such areas and replace them with concrete of the thickness shown in the plans .
the department will not pay for the area of pavement removed or for the materials or labor involved in its removal .
when removing a section of pavement remove the full length between transverse joints .
num deficient pavement left in place if the engineer determines that the deficiency will not seriously impair the anticipated service life of the pavement the pavement may be left in place at no compensation .
num additional borings if the number of cores taken is not sufficient to indicate the thickness of the pavement additional boring locations may be requested with prior approval from the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num return to table of contents num opening pavement to traffic .
construct an earth berm along each edge of the pavement within num hours of finishing any newly placed concrete pavement .
build the berm to the full height of the pavement and at least num inches wide and sufficiently compacted to prevent underwash of the pavement .
maintain the berm until the final shoulders are complete .
except as provided below keep the pavement closed to traffic for a minimum period of num calendar days after placement of the concrete .
the engineer may permit opening of a section of pavement to traffic at an earlier time provided that representative test cylinders made in accordance with astm cnum and tested in accordance with astm cnum indicate a compressive strength of at least num psi .
cure these test cylinders in a manner identical to the corresponding section of pavement .
protect the pavement from all traffic including construction operations until the specified period of time has elapsed .
protect the pavement from ambient temperatures below numf for the calendar days or until the required compressive strength has been attained .
num method of measurement .
num concrete pavement the quantities to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards of plain cement concrete pavement and of reinforced cement concrete pavement omitting any areas not allowed for payment under the provisions of num and adjusted for average thickness as provided herein .
for purposes of payment the average thickness of pavement will determine the final pay quantities for this pavement as follows the area of pavement represented by the difference between the calculated average thickness and the specified thickness will be converted into equivalent square yards of specified thickness pavement and the quantity thereby obtained will be added to or deducted from the quantity of pavement to be paid for subject to the limitation that the maximum average of overthickness permitted in the adjustment of the quantity of pavement to be paid for will be num inch .
where the plans call for cement concrete pavement that is to be covered with asphalt concrete surface course payment will be made for the total thickness of the combination as plain cement concrete pavement .
in such cases price and payment will also include all costs of the asphalt concrete surface course constructed in accordance with section num .
reinforcing steel placed and accepted will be measured and paid for as provided in section num .
num joints and cracks for cleaning and sealing joints in new or existing concrete pavement the quantity to be paid will be the length in feet as determined by field measurement along the joints .
for cleaning and sealing random cracks in existing concrete pavement the quantity to be paid will be the length in feet as determined by field measurement along the cracks .
num bridge approach expansion joint the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in feet of bridge approach expansion joint installed in accordance with standard plans index num calculated across the pavement at right angles to the centerline of the roadway pavement completed and accepted .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including any preparation of the subgrade not included in the work to be paid for under another contract item all transverse and longitudinal joint construction including tiebars and dowel bars the furnishing of test specimens repair of core holes and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num plain cement concrete pavement per square yard .
item no .
num num reinforced cement concrete pavement per square yard .
item no .
num num cleaning and sealing joints per foot .
item no .
num num cleaning and sealing random cracks per foot .
item no .
num num cement concrete pavement for roundabout apron per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num grinding concrete pavement num description .
grind existing concrete pavement in the areas designated on the plans .
grind new concrete pavement the full width of the travel lanes .
do not grind shoulders or roundabout aprons unless indicated in the plans or required to promote drainage .
num equipment .
provide a power driven selfpropelled machine that is specifically designed to grind portland cement concrete pavement with diamondimpregnated grinding blades .
provide operate and maintain in working condition all necessary equipment to ensure performance of the work in the allotted time .
use equipment of the size shape and dimensions that does not restrict the movement of traffic in areas outside the designated limits of construction .
the equipment will be of a size that can cut or plane at least num feet wide or as approved by the engineer .
use equipment that is capable of grinding specified surfaces without causing spalls at cracks joints or other locations .
the equipment will be capable of removing any slurry or residue resulting from the grinding operation .
num construction methods .
schedule and proceed with the construction operation in a manner that produces a uniform finished surface .
grind in a manner that eliminates joint or crack faults while providing positive lateral drainage by maintaining a constant crossslope between grinding extremities in each lane .
grind transition auxiliary or ramp lane as required from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and an acceptable riding surface .
grind parallel to the centerline until the pavement surfaces of adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are in the same plane .
grind the concrete pavement to eliminate the faulting at joints and cracks maintain the overall smoothness within the limits specified and texture over the majority of the pavement surface .
take all necessary precautions to minimize the number of minor depressions in the first place and only resolve to grind such areas if necessary .
continue grinding if accumulated total areas of minor depressions exceed num of the total area of a num mile section or if directed by the engineer .
maintain the cross slope of the pavement as shown in the plans .
establish and obtain the engineers approval for a means to continuously remove grinding residue .
remove solid residue from pavement surfaces before traffic action or wind blows such residue .
do not allow residue to flow across lanes or shoulders used by public traffic or into gutters or other drainage facilities .
do not allow the discharge of any residue runoff into adjacent rivers streams lakes ponds or other bodies of water .
num final surface finish .
after the curing period use a grinding process that produces a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture .
provide a line type texture that contains parallel longitudinal corrugations that present a narrow ridge with a corduroy type appearance .
provide a surface finish with the peaks of the ridges approximately num inch higher than the bottoms of the grooves and with approximately num evenly spaced grooves per foot .
num return to table of contents grind to produce areas of uniform and neat surface appearance beginning and ending at lines perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
num acceptance testing for surface tolerance .
test the pavement surface for smoothness with a num foot long straightedge a num foot long rolling straightedge or a california type profilograph while the engineer observes the operations as described below .
for pavement surfaces not meeting the smoothness requirements provide corrective work and retesting to ensure conformity approved by the engineer .
num .
testing with a num foot straightedge use this straightedge for longitudinal profiling parallel to centerline within num feet of a bridge approach or existing pavement which is being joined .
use it for all transverse profiling of cross slopes approaches and as otherwise directed with respect to num or num below .
furnish and operate a num foot straightedge .
when portland cement concrete pavement abuts bridge approaches or pavement not under this contract ensure that the longitudinal slope deviations of the finished pavement do not exceed num inch in num foot length .
produce transverse slope deviations of the finished pavement that do not exceed num inch with the straightedge laid in a direction perpendicular to the centerline .
num .
testing with a num foot rolling straightedge use this straightedge for longitudinal profiling of short pavement sections up to num feet long including mainline and nonmainline sections on tangent sections and on horizontal curves with a centerline radius of curve less than num feet and the pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves turn lanes ramps tapers and other nonmainline pavements as directed .
furnish and operate the straightedge .
provide and operate a num foot rolling straightedge of a design acceptable to the engineer able to accurately measure surface irregularities exceeding num inch in a num foot effective length of the straightedge .
when tested with a straightedge ensure that the finished pavement profile provides a uniform surface with no deviation greater than num inch in a num foot length .
perform the profiling in lines parallel to the centerline at not more than num foot transversal spacing and extending across the transverse joints .
the contractor may confine checking through traffic lanes with the straightedge to joints and obvious irregularities as directed .
num .
testing with a california type profilograph a .
general use the profilograph on all longitudinal profiling of mainline full width pavement lanes longer than num feet and as otherwise directed .
the following terms are defined num .
profilograph a longitudinal profile testing apparatus used to measure a pavements surface profile deviations .
num .
profile trace or profilogram a surface profile record generated along the individual wheel paths using a profilograph .
such a record is analyzed to determine the rate of roughness or smoothness and to identify changes in the longitudinal pavement surface elevation that exceed a specified threshold along the pavement length traversed by the profilograph .
num .
profile index pi a profile measurement is a series of numbers representing elevation relative to a specified reference .
a profile index pi is a summary value calculated from these numbers above and below a blanking band over a specified length of pavement .
num return to table of contents num .
blanking band a band of num inch uniform height with its longitudinal center positioned optimally between the highs and the lows of the profilogram depicting at least num ft of pavement .
b .
equipment furnish calibrate and operate a california type profilograph device in accordance with fm nume .
the electronic model of a california type profilograph performs computerized data analysis and is manufactured by cox and sons inc. of colfax california model cs num or better .
c. surface test produce a riding surface meeting the requirements of fm nume and having a profile index meeting the requirements herein .
start and terminate the profile num feet from each bridge approach or existing pavement which is being joined .
take at least two pavement profile traces with bump option turned on .
locate the position of the profiles in the traffic wheel paths .
take the profiles in the direction of the traffic and parallel to and approximately num feet from the outside edges of each traffic lane .
the contractor may take additional profiles to define the limits of an outoftolerance surface variation .
upon completion of each days testing submit the profilograms to the engineer for review to determine the pavement section in compliance with these requirements .
the engineer will retain those profilograms meeting these requirements .
the engineer will return profilograms with deficiencies to the contractor for use to correct section deficiencies .
the engineer will retain the corrected profilograms along with the deficient profilograms for comparison purposes of the circumstances between the two profilograms .
ensure that pavement tested meets the profile index requirements and is applicable to the profilogram for each profile trace num .
ensure that pavement on tangent alignment and horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve num feet or more has a profile index of num inches per mile or less .
num .
ensure that pavement on horizontal curves having a centerline radius of curve num feet or more but less than num feet and pavement within the superelevation transition of such curves has a profile index of num inches per mile or less .
num .
ensure that the pavement riding surfaces have all deviations in excess of num inch in num feet removed .
the engineer will evaluate the pavement in num mile consecutive sections .
grind all areas represented by individual points having deviations in excess of num inch in num feet or less pavement length until such points do not exceed num inch .
after removing all individual deviations in excess of num inch in num feet perform additional grinding as necessary to reduce the profile index to the specified requirements .
surface smoothness tests with a california type profilograph on bridges are specified in num .
ensure that the pavement within num feet of a bridge approach or existing pavement which is being joined complies with the testing requirements of a num foot straightedge .
visually inspect transverse joints and random cracks to ensure that the adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
where misalignment of the planes of the surfaces on adjacent sides of the joints or cracks is in excess of num inch grind the pavement until the surfaces are flush .
num return to table of contents num surface corrections .
after the curing period test the surface for pavement surface smoothness in accordance with num .
plainly mark all variations from the required tolerances .
where pavement surfaces do not meet the smoothness requirements the engineer will require corrective work and retesting to ensure conformity .
eliminate high spots exceeding num inch in num feet but not in excess of num inch in num feet by grinding either with an approved machine or with a carborundum brick and water .
do not use bushhammering or other destructive means for removing irregularities .
as directed by the engineer retexture corrected high areas to give skid resistance comparable to the surrounding area .
operate all milling cutting or grinding equipment to produce a reasonably uniform finished surface without spalling the pavement joints within corrected areas .
the engineer will not require extra grinding to eliminate minor depressions in order to provide num texturing of the pavement surface .
maintain the cross slope of the pavement as shown in the plans .
repair all joint seals destroyed by grinding at no expense to the department .
remove and replace any area of pavement which after grinding still shows a deviation in excess of the allowable tolerance .
ensure that the area removed and replaced is the full length between transverse joints and the full width of the lane involved .
replace any area of concrete pavement with concrete that meets the requirements of sections num .
bear the costs of all surface corrections required and of all required removal and replacement of defective surface concrete .
if the grinding operation removes more than a total length of num consecutive feet of the grooves then regroove the entire width of the pavement for the deficient area .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section including furnishing all labor materials tools equipment testing and incidentals and for doing all work involved in grinding existing or new concrete pavement removing residue and cleaning the pavement including necessary disposal of residue and furnishing any water or air used in cleaning the pavement .
contract unit price adjustments will be made in accordance with the following schedules .
average profile index inchesmile per num mile section contract unit price adjustments percent of pavement unit bid price curvature radius num ft num ft curvature radius num ft pi num pi num num num pi num num pi num num pi num pi num corrective work required num return to table of contents pay price adjustments for incentives will be based on the initial measured average profile index prior to any corrective work .
the unit bid adjusted price will be computed using the plan surface area of grinding concrete pavement .
this unit bid price will apply to the total area of the num mile section for the lane width represented by the profilograms for the average profile index .
payment will be made under item no .
num num grinding concrete pavement per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num concrete pavement slab replacement num description .
replace the existing defective area of concrete pavement with portland cement concrete free of any uncontrolled cracks .
repair the damaged area of adjacent slabs caused by slab removal at no cost to the department .
submit a strengthmaturity relationship curve as determined by fm numcnum for opening to traffic during design mix verification .
num materials .
meet the following requirements portland cement concrete section num curing materials section num epoxy compounds section num postinstalled anchor systems for structural applications in concrete elements section num dowel bar assembly section num calcium chloride aashto mnum type num for concrete pavement slab replacement the use of pozzolans and slag is optional .
concrete pavement containing only dowel bars will be considered nonreinforced concrete .
num composition of concrete .
num mixture proportions designate the actual proportions to be used to produce a concrete with a minimum num day compressive strength of num psi .
prior to producing concrete submit the design mix for approval on a form acceptable to the department .
ensure that the design mix proportions will produce a concrete with a minimum compressive strength of num psi designated for opening to traffic at the time period specified in the contract documents .
perform the plastic property tests in accordance with section num except when the mix design contains an accelerator perform the plastic property tests prior to the addition of the accelerator .
use mixes approved by the department and obtain concrete from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
make necessary adjustment to the concrete mixwater to account for the amount of water in the accelerating admixture solution .
num delivery certification submit a delivery ticket in accordance with section num .
num demonstration slab prior to batching production concrete demonstrate the ability to furnish replacement slabs by constructing a demonstration slab .
demonstrate production techniques for slab removal dowel installation concrete placement finishing slab curing sample preparation and curing and proper timing of joint sawing .
demonstrate the ability to achieve the required compressive strengths .
use and demonstrate proficiency to the engineer of the maturity method to determine when the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of num psi in order to open the pavement to traffic .
use cylinders to verify the concrete compressive strength at num days .
schedule construction of the demonstration slab during the same time period specified in the contract documents .
if the engineer determines that elements num return to table of contents of the demonstration slab fail to meet requirements of the contract documents propose adjustments to the construction processes andor materials for the engineers approval .
the demonstration slab may be used in the final work with the approval of the engineer .
no slab replacements will be constructed until the demonstration slab is approved .
the engineer may require additional demonstration slabs until a demonstration slab conforms to the contract documents .
num batching and mixing concrete .
obtain concrete that meets the requirements of section num with the following additional requirements add all the concrete ingredients excluding the accelerator to the truck mixer at the plant .
add the accelerator to the load at the job site and record the amount on the delivery ticket .
mix the concrete for num additional revolutions at mixing speed after the accelerator is added to the mixer .
do not add accelerator to any concrete which has attained the age of num minutes measured from the beginning of the initial mixing at the plant .
incorporate the accelerator into the concrete design mix in accordance with the recommendations of the admixture manufacturer .
do not exceed the recommendations of the manufacturers technical data sheet for the dosage rate of the accelerating admixture .
num test requirements .
num general perform concrete sampling and testing in accordance with section num .
unit weight testing is required .
perform the plastic property tests after all ingredients have been added to the load except when the mix design contains an accelerator perform the plastic property tests prior to the addition of the accelerator .
num field delivered mix consistency test the concrete for consistency subject to the following tolerances from the approved mix design values slump tolerance plus or minus num inches unit weight plus or minus num pounds temperature not to exceed numf for values as specified in the approved design mix prior to the addition of accelerating mixture .
reject concrete with a slump or unit weight content that does not fall within the specified tolerances and immediately notify the concrete production facility that an adjustment of the concrete mixture is required .
if a load does not fall within the tolerances test each subsequent load and the first adjusted load .
if concrete not within the specified tolerances is not rejected or adjustments are not implemented the engineer may reject the concrete and terminate further production until corrections are implemented .
num verification of maturity curve data a new maturity curve will be required should any of the plastic properties or the unit weight measure results exceed the tolerances specified in table num for the initial sampling .
table num property tolerance test method slump num in .
astm cnum unit weight num lbs .
astm cnum num return to table of contents use the maturity method specified in this section to determine if the concrete has achieved num psi and can be opened to traffic .
use the maturity value to verify the strength of the last slab of each days placement .
additional maturity meters may be used to open other locations to traffic prior to the last slab of each day as needed provided each location has achieved the minimum strength .
num cylinder fabrication and testing the requirements of section num apply to this section .
fabricate three test cylinders for strength and maturity curve correlation testing .
fabricate the compressive strength cylinders after all ingredients including the accelerator are added .
the compressive strength cylinders and maturity curve correlation testing will be performed for the first production day when the mix design is changed to another mix design at the discretion of the engineer for each remaining placement week when a new maturity curve is required or until terminated by the engineer .
num concrete slab acceptance and testing .
reject any concrete not meeting the plastic property requirements of this section .
acceptance will be based on achieving num psi compressive strength prior to opening the slab to traffic based on the maturity method and a num day compressive strength of num psi .
meet the requirements of num and num .
perform quality control qc tests for temperature and unit weight and prepare compressive strength cylinders once per lot .
a lot is defined as one days production section num does not apply .
the engineer will evaluate the particular circumstances in each instance where a strength deficiency occurs .
strength deficiencies will be addressed in accordance with section num .
for each quality control qc cylinder that is lost missing damaged or destroyed payment for that lot will be reduced by num per num psi of the specified design strength example loss of two qc cylinders that have no verification data will require the element to be cored and a pay reduction will be assessed num psi num psi x num x num num .
this reduction will be in addition to any pay adjustment for low strength .
controlled cracks are cracks designed to occur at specific locations based on the pavement design .
all other cracks in the pavement are uncontrolled cracks .
repair uncontrolled cracked slabs which occur during the life of the contract by removing and replacing the pavement across the full width of all affected lanes or shoulders and to the nearest transverse joint in each direction .
investigate and implement immediate effective solutions to eliminate further cracks in consultation with and subject to the approval of the engineer .
num placing striking off consolidating and finishing concrete .
the requirements of section num are applicable to this section .
perform straight edging while the concrete is still in plastic state after floating is completed and the excess water removed .
furnish and operate a num foot straightedge meeting the requirements of section num .
hold the straightedge in successive positions parallel to the road centerline in contact with the surface testing until the replacement slab is straight edged from one side to the other .
advance along the road in successive stages of not more than onehalf the length of the straightedge .
fill any depressions immediately with freshly mixed concrete consolidate strikeoff and refinish .
cut down and refinish any high areas .
continue straightedge testing and surface correction until the entire surface conforms to the required grade and cross section .
ensure that transverse slope deviations of the finished pavement do not exceed num inch num return to table of contents with the straightedge laid in a direction perpendicular to the centerline .
when portland cement concrete pavement abuts bridge approaches or pavement not under this contract ensure that the longitudinal slope deviations of the finished pavement do not exceed num inch in num foot length .
produce a uniform gritty textured final finish longitudinally along the pavement by dragging a broom or seamless strip of damp burlap having at least num feet in contact with the pavement .
if the engineer identifies a surface irregularity determined to be objectionable straightedge with a num foot long straightedge and address all deficiencies in excess of num inch by grinding in accordance section num .
when required in the contract documents produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance with a longitudinal line type texture by grinding in accordance with section num .
num curing .
cure the slab as specified in section num except for time and temperature restrictions .
use a type i with dye or type id clear with dye curing compound and apply within num hour after completing the finishing operations .
after the curing compound has been applied cover the surface and exposed edges with two layers of white burlappolyethylene curing blanket conforming to section num or insulating blankets approved by the engineer .
continue curing the slab until the concrete achieves the required num psi compressive strength indicated by the maturity value .
num joints .
num general construct transverse joints as specified in section num and as shown in the standard plans except that dowels bars are installed per this section .
tie bars will not be placed along the longitudinal joints unless shown in the contract documents .
apply a bond breaker to all vertical faces of the adjacent slabs .
submit the proposed bond breaker to the engineer for approval .
clean and seal joints in accordance with section num .
num dowel bars provide dowel bars in accordance with the details shown in the contract documents .
num dowel bars at transverse joint between two replacement slabs follow the requirements of num when providing dowel bars at a transverse joint between two freshly placed replacement slabs .
num dowel bars at transverse joints between existing and replacement slabs follow the requirements of section num except drill holes and install dowel bars into the sawed face or end of the existing slab .
develop load transfer between existing and freshly placed replacement slab .
the dowels shall be free to move inside the replacement slab and epoxybonded into the existing slab .
num dowel bar installation install dowel bars in accordance with section num except as modified herein .
position each dowel such that its final deviation from parallel to the surface of the pavement and parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the pavement does not exceed num inch .
position each dowel such that its final deviation from centered on the joint does not exceed num inches .
position each dowel such that at no point in its length does it deviate from the surface of the pavement as shown in the plans in excess of num inch .
confirm the position of dowel bars by means acceptable to the engineer which may include nondestructive testing methods .
num return to table of contents use epoxy compounds in accordance with section num .
dispense the epoxy from a cartridge or from metered equipment that indicates the amount of each component material being dispensed .
inject epoxy into the hole after cleaning and prior to dowel insertion .
start injection at the back of the hole to force the epoxy to move forward during dowel insertion .
twist the dowel a minimum of one full turn during the insertion to ensure that the epoxy completely surrounds the dowel .
the injection process and viscosity of the epoxy shall be adequate to insure that the space between the surface of the dowel and the inside of the hole is completely filled with epoxy .
do not allow the epoxy to escape from the front of the hole after inserting the dowel in the hole .
use a grout retention disk num inch thick fabricated from nylon or plastic to hold epoxy in the hole during dowel insertion .
num protection and opening to traffic .
num general the requirements of section num apply to this section .
keep the placed slabs closed to traffic until the maturity value indicates that the compressive strength requirement is achieved .
submit a maturity value record to the engineer indicating that the required strength was achieved prior to opening to traffic .
the engineer may allow opening to traffic should the maturity equipment fail to provide a reading .
opening to traffic due to equipment failure does not constitute acceptance of the concrete .
protect the pavement from all traffic including construction vehicles until the maturity value indicates that the required strength has been obtained .
the protective measures shall be arranged so as not to interfere with traffic lanes being utilized for required maintenance of traffic .
num maturity method testing use a maturity curve to estimate the strength of the concrete for opening to traffic for each day of production .
embed temperature sensors at mid depth in the slab at num inches from the leading edge of the transverse joint and at num inches from the longitudinal joint or at locations designated by the engineer .
develop a strengthmaturity relationship curve using the arrhenius maturity function with an activation energy of num jmol as outlined in fm numcnum in a laboratory with personnel qualified to perform the method .
compressive strength tests as specified in fm numcnum will be performed to produce a five point curve with points before and after the anticipated time for opening to traffic .
submit the mix design supporting data and the maturity curve to the engineer for his approval .
any changes of a material source or proportion in the concrete mixture will require a new maturity curve .
num method of measurement .
the pay quantity for concrete pavement slab replacement calculated using field measured horizontal dimensions and thickness of the removed slab will be the volume in cubic yards of calculated concrete volume placed and accepted .
the pay quantity for cleaning and sealing joints will be in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment for concrete pavement slab replacement will be full compensation for all work specified in this section and shall include demonstration slab construction all joint num return to table of contents construction including tie bars and dowels furnishing of test specimens and all necessary incidentals .
price and payment for cleaning and sealing joints will be made in accordance with section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num num concrete pavement slab replacement per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num value added portland cement concrete pavement num description .
construct value added portland cement concrete pavement concrete pavement subject to a five year warranty period after final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num num .
this section applies only to new pavements including added lanes .
submit each mix design to the engineer at least num days prior to any paving work .
perform all the associated work specified in this section including continued responsibility for performing all remedial work associated with pavement distresses exceeding threshold values determined in accordance with this section and as to which notice was provided to the contractor .
the work specified in this section will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental to other contract items .
num materials and construction requirements .
meet the requirements of the following portland cement concrete section num cement concrete pavement section num grinding concrete pavement section num num statewide disputes review board .
the statewide disputes review board in effect for this contract will resolve any and all disputes that may arise involving administration and enforcement of this specification .
the contractor and the department acknowledge that use of the statewide disputes review board is required and the determinations of the statewide disputes review board for disputes arising out of this specification will be binding on both the contractor and the department with no right of appeal by either party .
meet the requirements of num .
num pavement evaluation and remedial work .
num general the departments pavement condition survey program along with observations by the engineer will be used as the basis for determining the extent and the magnitude of the pavement distresses occurring on the project .
in the event the level of distress exceeds any of the threshold values defined below remedial work as described in num by the contractor will be required .
the department will monitor the pavement for distresses and may require remedial action at any time .
the department may conduct a pavement condition survey of the value added pavement following the final acceptance of the project and at intermediate times throughout the warranty period with findings provided when considered by the department to be the obligation of the contractor .
the final survey if determined by the engineer to be necessary will be conducted before the end of the warranty period with results provided to the contractor for those conditions exceeding contract threshold values requiring remedial action that the department believes to be an obligation of the contractor .
the department will be responsible for all costs associated with the surveys .
num return to table of contents if the survey findings intermediate or final are to be disputed by the contractor written notification must be submitted to the engineer within num calendar days of the date of receipt of the information from the department .
during the warranty period the contractor may monitor the pavement using nondestructive methods and may participate with the department in the pavement condition surveys upon request .
do not conduct any coring milling or other destructive methods without prior approval by the engineer .
num distress indicators the department will use ride spalling and cracking as distress indicators in accordance with the rigid pavement condition survey handbook to evaluate the concrete pavement .
ride number rn will be established by laser profiler in accordance with fm num .
for ride evaluation purposes the project will be subdivided into lots of num mile per lane and partial lots which are segments that are less than num mile .
for the purposes of threshold values and remedial work partial lots and lots will be treated as lots .
num threshold values and remedial work threshold values and associated remedial work for the concrete pavement are specified in table num .
table num concrete pavement threshold values and remedial work type of distress threshold values remedial work ride ride number num .
num grind all deficient lots and partial lots in accordance with section num .
spalling in the wheel path four areas in any lane mile exceeding num inch in width and exceeding num inches in length or any single area exceeding num inches in width .
full depth slab replacement for a minimum of num feet in length and the full width of the slab in accordance with section num .
spalling outside the wheel path four areas in any lane mile exceeding num num inches in width and num inches in length or any single area exceeding num inches in width and num inches in length .
full depth slab replacement for a minimum of num feet in length and the full width of the slab in accordance with section num .
cracking four cracks in any lane mile with width exceeding num inch or any crack exceeding num inch .
full depth slab replacement for a minimum of num feet in length and the full width of the slab in accordance with section num .
shattered slab cracking patterns that divide the slab into three or more segments full slab replacement in accordance with section num .
num remedial work .
perform all necessary remedial work described in this section at no cost to the department .
should an impasse develop in any regard as to the need for remedial work or the extent required the statewide disputes review board will render a final decision by majority vote .
num return to table of contents remedial work will not be required if any one of the following conditions is found to apply num .
determination that the pavement thickness design as provided by the department is deficient .
the department will make available a copy of the original pavement thickness design package and design traffic report to the contractor upon request .
the contractor will be responsible for performing all remedial work associated with the pavement distress if the pavement design is provided by the contractor .
num .
determination that the accumulated esals number of num kip equivalent single axle loads in the design lane have increased by num or more than the accumulated esals used by the department for design purposes for the warranty period for the pavement design life .
in calculating esals the average annual daily traffic aadt will be obtained from the departments traffic count data and the tnum percent heavy trucks during a num hour period will be obtained from the departments traffic classification survey data .
num .
determination that the deficiency was due to the failure of the existing underlying layers that were not part of the contract work .
num .
determination that the deficiency was the responsibility of a third party or its actions unless the third party was performing work included in the contract .
if a measured distress value indicates remedial action is required per table num begin remedial work within num calendar days of notification by the department or a ruling of the statewide disputes review board .
the statewide disputes review board will determine the allowable duration for the completion of the remedial work but not to exceed num months .
if remedial action is necessary and forensic information is required it is the responsibility of the contractor to determine the source of the distress .
the contractor will not be responsible for damages to the pavement as a result of any forensic activities conducted at the discretion of the engineer .
as applicable to distress criteria for ride when two lots requiring remedial action or a partial lot and a lot are not separated by three or more lots not requiring remedial action the remedial work shall be required for the total length of all such contiguous lots and partial lots including the intermediate lots not requiring remedial action .
the contractor has the first option to perform all remedial work as determined by the department .
if in the opinion of the engineer the problem poses an immediate danger to the traveling public and the contractor can not provide temporary mitigation for the defect within num hours of written notification and restore the pavement to its original design condition within num hours of written notification the engineer has the authority to have the remedial work performed by other forces .
temporary mitigation includes the use of traffic control systems such as barricades drums or other approved devices to secure the area including lane closures if necessary and constructing temporary repairs making it safe for the roadway user until the defect can be restored to its original design condition .
the contractor is responsible for all incurred costs of the work performed by other forces should the problem remedial work be determined to be the responsibility of the contractor .
remedial work performed by other forces does not alter any of the requirements responsibilities or obligations of the contractor .
complete all remedial work to the satisfaction of the engineer .
any disputes regarding the adequacy of the remedial work will be resolved by the statewide disputes review board .
approval of remedial work does not relieve the contractor from continuing responsibility under the provisions of this specification .
num return to table of contents notify the engineer in writing prior to beginning any remedial work .
meet the requirements of the specifications when performing any remedial work .
perform all signing and traffic control in accordance with the standard plans .
provide maintenance of traffic during remedial work at no additional cost to the department .
lane closure restrictions listed in the original contract will apply to remedial work .
written requests to obtain permission for lane closures for either forensic investigation or remedial work must be made to the engineer num hours in advance of any lane closures .
do not perform any lane closures until written permission is given by the engineer .
if remedial work necessitates a corrective action to the pavement markings adjacent lanes or roadway shoulders perform these corrective actions using similar products at no cost to the department .
num failure to perform .
failure to timely submit any dispute to the statewide disputes review board failure to satisfactorily perform any remedial work or failure to compensate the department for any remedial work performed by the department and determined to be the contractors responsibility in accordance with this specification the department will suspend revoke or deny the contractors certificate of qualification under the terms of section numdnum florida statutes for a minimum of num months or until the remedial work has been satisfactorily performed or full and complete payment for remedial work performed by others made to the department whichever is longer .
should the contractor choose to challenge the departments notification of intent for suspension revocation or denial of qualification and the departments action is upheld the contractor will have its qualification suspended for an additional minimum of num months .
the remedial work is not an obligation of the contractors bond required by section num florida statutes .
num return to table of contents section num bridge approach expansion joints num description .
construct special expansion joints for concrete pavement near the bridge approach slabs that consist of a section of reinforced concrete subslab supporting the roadway concrete pavement with a portion of the roadway pavement over the subslab interrupted by a galvanized sheet metal strip in accordance with the details shown in standard plans index num and the contract documents .
num materials .
bar reinforcement use bar reinforcing steel meeting the requirements of num .
concrete for the expansion joint subslab use concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
galvanized sheet metal use galvanized sheet metal meeting the requirements shown in the plans .
seal use compression seals in accordance with section num and standard plans index num .
num construction methods .
construct the expansion joints in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num num num num standard plans index num and as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in feet calculated across the pavement at right angles to the centerline of the roadway pavement completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section or required for the expansion joint including concrete subslab sheet metal strip reinforcing steel compression seal and all additional excavation required .
payment will be made under item no .
num num bridge approach expansion joint per foot .
num return to table of contents structures section num concrete structures num description .
construct concrete structures and other concrete members with the exception of pavement and incidental concrete construction which are specified in other sections .
refer to section num for prestressed construction requirements additional to the requirements of this section .
for precast concrete structures meet the requirements of section num for inserts and lifting devices handling storage shipping and erection .
obtain incidental precast products from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
meet the following requirements concrete sections num and num penetrant sealer section num high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm section num reinforcing for concrete section num water section num curing materials section num epoxy bonding compounds sections num and num joint materials section num bearing pads section num nonshrink grout section num class num applied finish coatings section num galvanizing compound section num dowel bar assembly section num filter fabric section num the engineer will allow clean sand and sawdust for certain curing when and as specified .
use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num depth of footing .
refer to section num d. spread footings .
num falsework .
num plans at the engineers request submit detailed plans for falsework or centering to the department .
the contractor is responsible for results obtained by using these plans .
num return to table of contents num design and erection design and construct all falsework to provide the necessary rigidity and to support the loads without appreciable settlement or deformation .
use screw jacks or hardwood wedges to take up any settlement in the framework either before or during the placing of concrete .
if any weakness develops and the centering shows undue settlement or distortion stop the work remove any affected concrete and strengthen the falsework before resuming work .
support falsework which can not be founded on a satisfactory footing on piling .
space drive and remove the piling in an approved manner .
num camber provide camber to correct for settlement and deflection of falsework .
give bridges permanent camber only when shown in the plans .
num bridge deck overhang falsework for steel igirders locate the lower contact point of bridge deck overhang falsework supporting screed rails within num inches above the bottom flange .
if the lower contact point of the overhang falsework bears more than num inches above the bottom flange andor if the deck overhang is num feet or greater submit shop drawings and calculations to the engineer in accordance with section num and chapter num of the structures design guidelines sdg .
the deck overhang is measured from the centerline of the girder supporting the overhang falsework to the outside edge of the concrete deck .
num forms .
num general provide forms either of wood or metal that are as follows externally secured and braced where feasible substantial and unyielding of adequate strength to contain the concrete without bulging between supports and without apparent deviation from the neat lines contours and shapes shown in the plans .
design forms to withstand the additional forces of vibration without apparent deviation from the desired shape or position .
assemble forms to be mortartight .
if using lumber forms construct them of dressed wood of uniform thickness .
use form liners on wooden forms where class num surface finish is specified .
construct assembled forms to render a concrete surface of smooth uniform finish .
make provisions to remove forms without injury to concrete surfaces .
remove blocks and bracing with the forms and do not leave any portion of the forms in the concrete .
use the same form system for a type of work throughout .
num inspection and approval do not place concrete in a form until the form has been inspected and approved .
although the engineer inspects and approves the forms the contractor is responsible for obtaining satisfactory concrete surfaces free from warping bulging or other objectionable defects .
pay special attention to the ties and bracing .
where the forms appear to be insufficiently braced or unsatisfactorily built stop and correct defects to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num nonmetallic form materials num lumber for all surfaces use lumber that is not less than num inch in thickness dressed and free of knot holes loose knots cracks splits warps and other defects .
proportion the spacing of studs joists and wales to exclude warps and bulges and to produce true and accurate concrete surfaces .
only use structurally sound lumber .
num form liners use form liners of durable abrasion resistant materials that are unaffected by water .
use liners with a hard surface texture capable of rendering concrete surfaces of a smooth uniform texture without grain marks patterns or blemishes .
use form liner material of sufficient thickness to eliminate the reflection of irregularities undesirable patterns and marks from the forms to the surfaces .
replace liners as necessary to produce a num return to table of contents consistent concrete surface texture .
use form liners in large sheets and with true tightfitted joints which are logically located .
obtain the engineers approval of the layout of sheets .
do not use liners which have been patched .
use liner material of the same stock throughout .
num plywood the contractor may use plywood of not less than num inch in thickness manufactured with waterproof glue or protected with an approved impervious coating .
do not use pieces with bulged plies or raveled untrue edges .
num special requirements num reentrant angles use chamfered forms for exterior concrete corners and filleted forms for interior concrete corners .
use chamfers and fillets that are num by num inch and are milldressed on all sides to uniform dimensions .
the contractor may use plastic or metal chamfers and fillets provided they perform satisfactorily in producing uniform smooth concrete corner surfaces without honeycomb .
num handrails concrete barriers traffic railings and parapets construct in accordance with section num .
num endbent caps do not place forms for endbent caps until the embankment has been constructed to within num inches of the bottom of the cap .
place a mass of embankment that is sufficient to produce the subsidence displacement and settlement which may result from the construction of the total embankment .
num footings where footing concrete can be placed in dry excavation the contractor may omit cribs cofferdams and forms subject to compliance with the following limitations and conditions num .
use this procedure only in locations not exposed to view from traveled roadways .
num .
obtain required elevations shown in the plans .
num .
obtain neat line dimensions shown in the plans .
num .
fill the entire excavation with concrete to the required elevation of the top of the footing .
num .
the engineer will determine the volume of footing concrete to be paid for from the neat line dimensions shown in the plans .
num form alignment bracing and ties construct forms in such manner that they may be adequately secured for alignment shape and grade .
use bracing systems ties and anchorages that are substantial and sufficient to ensure against apparent deviation from shape alignment and grade .
do not drive nails into existing concrete .
do not use bracing systems ties and anchorages which unnecessarily deface or mark or have an injurious or undesirable effect on surfaces that will be a part of the finished surface .
if metal ties and anchorages are to remain in the concrete construct them so as to permit the removal of metal to at least num inch beneath the finished surface of concrete .
use accessories for metal ties and anchorages that allow the removal of metal to the prescribed depth while leaving the smallest possible repairable cavity .
when using wire ties cut or bend them back from the finished surface of the concrete a minimum of num inch .
do not use internal ties of wire when forming surfaces that are exposed to view .
num preparation and cleaning meet the following requirements for the condition of forms at the time of beginning concrete casting num return to table of contents num .
treat all forms with an approved formrelease agent before placing concrete .
do not use material which adheres to or discolors the concrete .
num .
clean forms of all concrete laitance from previous use and all dirt sawdust shavings loose wire ties and other debris .
num .
close and secure all inspection and cleanout holes .
num stayinplace metal forms num general utilization of stayinplace metal forms is permitted in lieu of removable forms to form concrete bridge decks between beams and between the webs of individual box girders when designated in the plans .
stayinplace metal forms may be of the cellular noncellular or noncellular with top cover sheet type .
the flutes of noncellular stayin place metal forms may be filled with polystyrene foam or concrete .
when polystyrene foam is used to fill the forms fill form flutes completely do not allow any portion of the polystyrene foam to extend beyond the limits of the flutes .
ensure that the polystyrene foam remains in its required position within flutes during the entire concrete placement process .
do not use reinforcing supports or other accessories in such a manner as to cause damage to the polystyrene foam .
replace all damaged polystyrene foam to the satisfaction of the engineer .
apply polymer sheeting to stayinplace metal forms in accordance with the requirements in the following table .
apply polymer sheeting to all faces and edges including sheared edges of support angles used on bridges with moderately and extremely aggressive superstructure environmental classifications as shown in the plans .
no polymer sheeting is required for beam attachment straps or clips partially embedded in concrete and for support angles used on bridges with a slightly aggressive superstructure environmental classification .
use polymer sheeting materials and application methods as described herein .
polymer sheeting usage requirements form type superstructure environmental classification as shown in plans slightly aggressive moderately aggressive extremely aggressive noncellular form with concrete filled flutes no polymer sheeting required polymer sheeting required on bottom side polymer sheeting required on bottom side noncellular form with polystyrene foam filled flutes polymer sheeting required on inside polymer sheeting required on both sides polymer sheeting required on both sides non cellular form with top cover sheet top cover sheet polymer sheeting required on bottom side polymer sheeting required on bottom side polymer sheeting required on bottom side non cellular form polymer sheeting required on top side polymer sheeting required on both sides polymer sheeting required on both sides cellular form no polymer sheeting allowed or required not permitted not permitted polymer sheeting not required on bottom side of form located within box girders and ubeams .
num return to table of contents prior to using stayinplace metal forms submit detailed plans for approval of the forming system including method of support and attachment and method of protecting the supporting structural steel components from welding effects .
submit design calculations for the forming system which have been signed and sealed by the specialty engineer .
detail stayinplace metal forms such that they in no way infringe upon the concrete outline of the slab shown on the plans .
use stayinplace metal forms that provide and maintain the dimensions and configuration of the original slab in regards to thickness and slope .
do not weld stayinplace metal form supports and connections to the structural steel components .
do not connect polymer coated angles or other hardware that support polymer coated metal forms to the beam attachment straps or clips by welding .
electrical grounding to steel reinforcing or fiber reinforced polymer frp reinforcing is prohibited .
protect structural steel components from damage by using a shield to guard against weld splatter weld overrun arc strikes or other damaging effects of the welding process .
upon completion of welding rest the metal form support flush on the supporting steel component .
should any weld spatter weld overrun arc strike or other effects of the welding process be evident or occur to the structural steel component immediately stop inplace welding of the metal form supports for the remainder of the work .
in this event weld all metal form supports off of the structure and erect the forms after prefabrication or use an alternate approved method of attaching the form supports .
remove improper weldment repair the supporting steel component for any improper welding .
perform all required verification and testing at no expense to the department and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
do not use stayinplace metal forms until the forming system has been approved by the engineer .
the contractor is responsible for the performance of the stayinplace forms .
structures designed detailed and dimensioned for the use of removable forms where stayinplace metal forms are permitted the contractor is responsible and shall obtain the approval of the engineer for any changes in design etc .
to accommodate the use of stayinplace forms .
the engineer will compute pay quantities of the various components of the structure which are paid on a cubic yard basis from the design dimensions shown in the plans with no allowance for changes in deflection or dimensions necessary to accommodate the stayin place forms or concrete to fill the form flutes .
the engineer will limit pay quantities of other contract items that the contractor increases to accommodate the use of stayinplace forms to the quantity required for the original plan design .
submit all changes in design details of bridge structural members that support stayinplace forms showing all revisions necessary to enable the supporting components to withstand any additional weight of the forms and the weight of any extra concrete that may be required to fill the forms .
include with the design calculations a comparative analysis of the stresses in the supporting components as detailed on the contract plans and as modified to support the forms .
use the identical method of analysis in each case and do not allow the stresses in the modified components to exceed those of the component as detailed in the contract plans .
include with the design the adjusted cambers for any changes in deflection over those shown on the original plans .
modify the beams to provide additional strength to compensate for the added dead loads imposed by the use of stayinplace forms .
obtain the additional strength by adding strands to the prestressed beams or by adding steel material to increase the section modulus of steel girders .
substantiate the added strength by the comparative calculations .
do not num return to table of contents use stayinplace forms until the forming system and all necessary design revisions of supporting members have been approved by the engineer .
structures designed detailed and dimensioned for the use of stayinplace metal forms prior to using stayinplace metal forms submit detailed plans for approval of the forming system including method of support and attachment together with design calculations .
include an analysis of the actual unit weight of the proposed forming system over the projected plan area of the metal forms .
if the weight thus calculated exceeds the weight allowance for stayinplace metal forms and concrete required to fill the forms shown on the plans then modify the supporting components to support the excess weight as specified by the contractors specialty engineer .
for all structures utilizing structural steel supporting components paint the vertical sides of the top flange prior to installation of the stayinplace metal forms in accordance with section num .
for nonpolymer sheeting form surfaces use zinc paint coating in accordance with section num to all accessories cut from galvanized sheets which are not embedded in concrete .
num design meet the following criteria for the design of stayinplace bridge deck forms num .
the maximum self weight of the stay in place metal forms plus the weight of the concrete or expanded polystyrene required to fill the form flutes where used shall not exceed num psf .
num .
design the forms on the basis of dead load of form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus num pounds per square foot for construction loads .
use a unit working stress in the steel sheet of not more than num of the specified minimum yield strength of the material furnished but not to exceed num psi .
num .
do not allow deflection under the weight of the forms reinforcement and plastic concrete to exceed num of the form span or num inch whichever is less for form spans of num feet or less or num of the form span or num inch whichever is less for form spans greater than num feet .
in all cases do not use a total loading psf that is less than num plus the product of the deck thickness measured in inches times num .
num .
use a design span of the form equal to the clear span of the form plus num inches .
measure the span parallel to the form flutes .
num .
compute physical design properties in accordance with requirements of the aisi specifications for the design of cold formed steel structural members latest published edition .
num .
for all reinforcement maintain the design concrete cover required by the plans .
num .
maintain the plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement from the top surface of the concrete deck .
num .
do not consider the permanent bridge deck form as lateral bracing for compression flanges of supporting structural members .
num .
do not use permanent steel bridge deck forms in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers .
num return to table of contents num .
secure forms to the supporting members by means other than welding directly to the member .
num materials num metal forms fabricate stayinplace metal forms and supports from steel meeting the requirements of astm anum having a coating designation gnum .
do not use form materials that are less than num inch uncoated thickness .
num polymer sheeting use polymer sheeting comprised of at least num ethylene acrylic acid copolymer capable of being applied to both gnum and gnum steel sheet as described in astm anum .
ensure that the polymer sheeting has a nominal thickness of num mils as manufactured and a minimum thickness of num mils after lamination to the steel sheet .
ensure that the polymer sheeting remains free of holes tears and discontinuities and sufficiently flexible to withstand the forming process without any detrimental effects to bond durability or performance .
ensure that the polymer sheeting is uv stabilized and contains antioxidants .
ensure that the asmanufactured polymer sheeting prior to application has an oxidative induction time oit of num to num minutes at numc in air when tested according to astm dnum .
perform additional oit tests on samples taken from the finished product polymer sheeting applied to forms resulting in a minimum oit according to astm dnum of num minutes at numc in air .
ensure that the polymer sheeting adheres to galvanized metal sufficient to prevent undercutting at penetrations made through the polymer sheeting or metal forms to the satisfaction of the engineer .
ensure that edges subjected to shear cutting are coated by the form manufacturer with two coats of a compatible liquid coating repair material before delivery to the site .
ensure that steel used to produce polymer laminated metal forms is appropriately cleaned and prepared per ncca national coil coating association standard continuous coil coating practices .
ensure that pretreatment for use in conjunction with the manufacturers polymer sheeting material is approved as compatible by the polymer sheeting manufacturer .
apply pretreatment in accordance with the polymer sheeting manufacturers procedures .
apply polymer sheeting in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and procedures .
ensure that all steel has the polymer sheeting applied prior to fabrication of the stayinplace forms and accessories .
ensure that the screws to be used in the fastening of the stayin place laminated metal forms have a corrosion resistant cladding that will not have an adverse effect to the system due to the contact of dissimilar metals .
num certification submit a written certification from the manufacturer stating the product meets the requirements of this specification along with the delivery of the coated forms to the jobsite .
ensure that the certification conforms to the requirements of section num .
ensure that the manufacturer has a quality control program conforming to iso num num standards .
num polystyrene foam use polystyrene foam comprised of expanded polystyrene manufactured from virgin resin of sufficient density to support the weight of concrete without deformation .
extrude the polystyrene foam to match the geometry of the flutes and provide a snug fit .
use polystyrene foam that has a density of not less than num pounds per cubic foot .
use polystyrene foam that has water absorption of less than num when tested according to astm cnum .
submit a written certification from the manufacturer stating the product meets the requirements of this specification along with the delivery of the product .
num return to table of contents num construction install all forms in accordance with approved fabrication and erection plans .
do not rest form sheets directly on the top of the stringer of floor beam flanges .
fasten sheets securely to form supports and maintain a minimum bearing length of num inch at each end for metal forms .
place form supports in direct contact with the flange of the stringer or floor beam .
make all attachments for coated metal forms by bolts clips screws or other approved means .
num form galvanizing repairs for any permanent exposed steel where the galvanized coating has been damaged thoroughly clean wire brush and paint it with two coats of galvanizing compound in accordance with section num to the satisfaction of the engineer .
do not touch up minor heat discoloration in areas of welds .
num polymer sheeting repairs inspect and identify areas for damage to the polymer sheeting and repair with liquid polymer coating similar and compatible with respect to durability adhesion and appearance in accordance with astm anum as furnished by the stayinplace form manufacturer .
ensure that the inspection includes checking the polymer sheeting for cuts tears cracking surface pits peeling dirt grease oil stains rust or bare areas .
reject any panels that show coating blistering peeling or cracking .
repair all polymer sheeting damage according to the following num .
surface preparation ensure that all surfaces to be repaired are clean and free of any deleterious substances .
remove all traces of dirt soil oil deposits greases and other surface contaminates in accordance with the polymer sheeting and coating manufacturers written specifications prior to touchup and recoating .
num .
application procedures ensure that the liquid polymer repair coating is applied to a clean dry surface and in accordance with the manufacturers written specifications .
apply the repair coating using a suitable paintbrush or other means acceptable to the engineer .
apply a first coat of product to the surface at num mils in thickness .
let the first coat air dry .
apply a second coat to form a complete layer and increase the thickness immediately after verifying the first coat is dry to the touch num num minutes depending on the local air drying temperature and atmospheric conditions .
apply the second coat at the same coating thickness as the first at num mils .
ensure that the total dry film thickness of the two coats is not less than num mils .
apply additional coats in this same manner until desired coating thickness is achieved .
num placing of concrete vibrate concrete to avoid honeycomb and voids especially at construction joints expansion joints valleys and ends of form sheets .
use approved pouring sequences .
do not use calcium chloride or any other admixture containing chloride salts in the concrete .
num inspection the engineer will observe the contractors method of construction during all phases of the construction of the bridge deck slab including the installation of the metal form system location and fastening of the reinforcement composition of concrete items mixing procedures concrete placement and vibration and finishing of the bridge deck .
should the engineer determine that the procedures used during the placement of the concrete warrant inspection of the underside of the deck remove at least one section of the metal forms in each span for this purpose .
do this as soon after placing the concrete as practicable in order to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix and the procedures are obtaining the num return to table of contents desired results .
remove an additional section in any span if the engineer determines that there has been any change in the concrete mix or in the procedures warranting additional inspection .
if in the engineers judgment inspection is needed to check for defects in the bottom of the deck or to verify soundness sound the metal forms with a hammer as directed by the engineer after the deck concrete has been in place a minimum of two days .
if sounding discloses areas of doubtful soundness to the engineer remove the metal forms from such areas for visual inspection after the concrete has attained adequate strength .
remove metal bridge deck forms at no expense to the department .
at locations where sections of the metal forms have been removed the engineer will not require the contractor to replace the metal forms .
repair the adjacent metal forms and supports to present a neat appearance and to ensure their satisfactory retention and where they are polymer sheeted coat all exposed surfaces of stayinplace metal form system elements that are not coated or are damaged with a field applied liquid polymer coating as specified in num .
as soon as the form is removed the engineer will examine the concrete surfaces for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if irregularities are found and the engineer determines that these irregularities do not justify rejection of the work repair the concrete as directed and provide a general surface finish in accordance with num .
if the engineer determines that the concrete where the form is removed is unsatisfactory remove additional metal forms as necessary to inspect and repair the slab and modify the method of construction as required to obtain satisfactory concrete in the slab .
remove and replace all unsatisfactory concrete as directed at no expense to the department .
if the method of construction and the results of the inspections as outlined above indicate that sound concrete has been obtained throughout the slabs the amount of sounding and form removal may be reduced when approved by the engineer .
corrosion of assembly screws will not be considered a structural or aesthetic problem and is considered acceptable .
provide the facilities for the safe and convenient conduct of the inspection procedures .
num stayinplace concrete forms num general permanent stayinplace precast reinforced concrete forms may be used in lieu of removable forms to form concrete bridge deck slabs subject to the conditions contained herein .
precast reinforced concrete stayinplace forms are not permitted to construct a composite concrete deck .
do not use precast prestressed concrete stayinplace forms to form any permanent bridge decks .
when detailed plans for structures are dimensioned for the use of removable forms provide additional slab thickness elevation changes changes in design etc .
to accommodate the use of stayinplace forms subject to the engineers approval .
the engineer will compute pay quantities of the various component members of the structure which are paid on a cubic yard basis from the design dimensions shown in the plans with no allowance for changes in deflection and changes in dimensions necessary to accommodate the stayinplace forms .
the engineer will limit pay quantities of other contract items which are increased to accommodate the use of stayinplace forms to the quantity required for the original plan design .
prior to using stayinplace forms submit for approval detailed plans of the forming system and design calculations .
indicate on the plans the form panel sizes placing patterns type of mastic or felt bearing material and type and method of caulking between panels .
num return to table of contents also submit appropriate changes in design details of structural members supporting stayinplace forms showing any revisions necessary to enable the supporting components to withstand the additional weight of the forms and perform equally as contemplated in the plans .
all calculations and details submitted shall be sealed by the contractors engineer of record .
modify the beams to provide additional strength to compensate for the added dead loads imposed by the use of stay inplace forms .
obtain this strength by adding additional strands to prestressed girders or increasing the section modulus for steel girders .
do not use stayinplace forms until the forming system and any necessary design revisions of supporting structural members have been approved by the engineer .
the department is not responsible for the performance of the stayinplace forms by its approval .
num materials construct permanent concrete forms of precast reinforced concrete with a class num surface finish .
as a minimum use the same class of concrete and numday minimum compressive strength as being used to construct the bridge deck .
use welded steel wire reinforcement meeting the requirements of section num .
num design use the following criteria for the design of permanent bridge deck forms num .
design the forms on the basis of deadload of form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus an unfactored live load of num psf for construction loads .
meet the aashto design requirements for service loads and ultimate loads as applicable .
num .
deflection under the weight of the forms reinforcement and the plastic concrete shall not exceed num of the form span or num inch whichever is less .
in all cases do not use a loading that is less than num psf total .
num .
use a design span of the form equal to the clear span of the form between supports .
measure the span of concrete forms parallel to the centerline of the form panels .
num .
compute physical design properties of concrete forms in accordance with current aashto design procedures .
num .
ensure that all reinforcement contained in the castinplace concrete has the minimum cover shown in the plans or not less than one inch whichever is greater .
measure the minimum cover normal to the plane of the bottom of the castinplace concrete .
for stayin place concrete forms with other than plane surfaces in contact with the castinplace concrete such as regularly spaced geometrical shapes projecting above the plane of the bottom of the cast inplace concrete meet the following special requirements a .
space geometrical shapes projecting above the bottom plane of the castinplace concrete used to provide support for reinforcement no closer than num feet apart and of sufficient height to maintain the required concrete cover on the bottom mat of reinforcing bars .
b. construct all other geometrical shapes projecting above the plane of the bottom of the castinplace concrete to provide a minimum vertical clearance of num inch between the closest surface of the projections and the secondary longitudinal reinforcing bars in the deck slab .
c. do not allow a minimum horizontal distance from the surface of any transverse reinforcing bars to surfaces of the stayinplace form of less than num num inches .
num return to table of contents for all reinforcement for the stayinplace form panels provide a minimum of num inch concrete cover except that for construction in a salt or other corrosive environment provide a minimum of num num inches concrete cover .
num .
maintain the plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement from the top surface of the concrete deck .
measure the minimum cover of the bottom mat of reinforcement normal to the top of the precast concrete form panel .
num .
do not consider the permanent bridge deck form as lateral bracing for compression flanges of supporting structural members .
num .
do not use permanent concrete bridge deck forms in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers .
num .
do not allow the maximum weight of the concrete form to exceed num pounds per square foot of form surface .
num construction install all forms in accordance with approved fabrication and erection plans .
for concrete forms provide a minimum bearing length of at least num num inches but not exceeding num num inches .
support concrete forms on the beams or girders by continuous layers of an approved mastic or felt bearing material that will provide a mortar tight uniform bearing .
use a mastic or felt bearing material that has a minimum width of num inch and a maximum width of num num inches .
seal joints between concrete form panels with caulking tape or other approved method .
num placing of concrete place the concrete in accordance with the requirements of num .
immediately prior to placing the slab concrete saturate concrete stay inplace form panels with water .
num inspection inspect the concrete in accordance with the requirements of num .
after the deck concrete has been in place for a minimum period of two days inspect the forms for cracks and excessive form deflection and test for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding with a hammer as directed by the engineer .
remove for visual inspection form panels found to be cracked that show evidence of leakage and form panels which have a deflection greater than adjacent panels by num inch or more which show signs of leakage .
if sounding discloses areas of doubtful soundness to the engineer remove the form panels from such areas for visual inspection after the concrete has attained adequate strength .
remove permanent bridge deck form panels at no expense to the department .
at locations where sections of the forms have been removed the engineer will not require the forms to be replaced .
repair the adjacent forms and supports to present a neat appearance and to ensure their satisfactory retention .
as soon as the form is removed the engineer will examine the concrete surfaces for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if irregularities are found and the engineer determines that these irregularities do not justify rejection of the work repair the concrete as directed and provide a general surface finish in accordance with num .
if the concrete where the form is removed is unsatisfactory as determined by the engineer additional forms shall be removed as necessary to inspect and repair the slab and modify the methods of construction as required to obtain satisfactory concrete in the slab .
remove and replace all unsatisfactory concrete as directed at no expense to the department .
num return to table of contents if the methods of construction and the results of the inspections as outlined above indicate that the contractor has obtained sound concrete throughout the slabs the contractor may moderate the amount of sounding and form removal when approved .
provide all facilities for the safe and convenient conduct of the inspection procedures .
num underdrain and weep holes .
provide weep holes in all abutments and retaining walls .
provide a continuous underdrain for box culverts in accordance with standard plans index num .
provide weep holes that are at least num inches in diameter and not more than num feet apart .
place the outlet ends of the weep holes just above the ground line in front of abutments and retaining walls .
cover the exterior openings of all weep holes with galvanized wire mesh and a minimum of num cubic feet of clean broken stone or gravel wrapped in type d num filter fabric to allow free drainage but prevent the fill from washing through .
num placing concrete .
numweather restrictions num concreting in cold weather do not place concrete when the air temperature at placement is below numf .
meet the air temperature requirements for mixing and placing concrete in cold weather as specified in section num .
during the curing period if noaa predicts the ambient temperature to fall below numf for num hours or more or to fall below numf for more than num hours enclose the structure in such a way that the air temperature within the enclosure can be kept above numf for a period of num days after placing the concrete or until the concrete reaches a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
assume all risks connected with the placing and curing of concrete .
although the engineer may give permission to place concrete the contractor is responsible for satisfactory results .
if the placed concrete is determined to be unsatisfactory remove dispose of and replace the concrete at no expense to the department .
num concreting in hot weather meet the temperature requirements and special measures for mixing and placing concrete in hot weather as specified in section num .
spray reinforcing bars and metal forms with cool fresh water just prior to placing the concrete in a method approved by the engineer .
assume all risks connected with the placing and curing of concrete .
although the engineer may give permission to place concrete the contractor is responsible for satisfactory results .
if the placed concrete is determined to be unsatisfactory remove dispose of and replace the concrete at no expense to the department .
num wind velocity restrictions do not place concrete for bridge decks if the forecast of average wind velocity at any time during the planned hours of concrete placement exceeds num mph .
obtain weather forecasts from the national weather service hourly weather graph for the city closest to the project site .
num lighting requirements provide adequate lighting for all concrete operations conducted at night .
obtain approval of the lighting system prior to starting the concrete operations .
num return to table of contents num inspections before placing concrete do not place concrete until the depth and character of the foundation and the adequacy of the forms and falsework have been approved by the engineer .
do not deposit any concrete until all reinforcement is in place and has been inspected and approved by the engineer .
num exposure to water do not expose concrete other than seal concrete in cofferdams to the action of water before final setting .
do not expose such concrete to the action of salt or brackish water for a period of seven days after placing the concrete .
protect the concrete during this period by keeping salt or brackish water pumped out of cofferdams .
num general requirements for placing concrete deposit concrete as nearly as possible in its final position .
do not deposit large quantities at one point and then run or work it along the forms .
take special care to fill each part of the forms to work coarse aggregate back from the face and to force concrete under and around reinforcing bars without displacing them .
use a method and manner of placing concrete that avoids the possibility of segregation or separation of aggregates .
if the engineer determines that the quality of concrete as it reaches its final position is unsatisfactory remove it and discontinue or adjust the method of placing until the engineer determines that the quality of the concrete as placed is satisfactory .
use metal or metallined open troughs chutes or other means of concrete conveyance which have no aluminum parts in contact with the concrete .
as an exception chutes made of aluminum for ready mixed concrete trucks no longer than num feet may be used .
this exception does not apply to any other means of concrete conveyance .
where steep slopes are required use chutes that are equipped with baffles or are in short lengths that reverse the direction of movement .
where placing operations would involve dropping the concrete freely more than num feet deposit it through pipes troughs or chutes of sheet metal or other approved material .
use troughs chutes or pipes with a combined length of more than num feet only with the departments authorization .
keep all troughs chutes and pipes clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing them with water after each run or more often if necessary .
place concrete against supporting material that is moist at the time of concrete placement .
if additional water is required uniformly apply it ahead of the concrete placement as directed by the engineer .
do not place concrete on supporting material that is frozen .
the contractor may use a moisture barrier in lieu of controlling the foundation grade moisture when approved by the engineer .
num placing concrete by belt conveyor place concrete by means of a belt conveyor system with written department authorization .
remove conveyor belt systems which produce unsatisfactory results before continuing operations .
take concrete samples for assurance testing at the discharge end of the belt conveyor system .
make available to the engineer the necessary platform to provide a safe and suitable place for sampling and testing .
remove any concrete placed in an unsatisfactory manner at no expense to the department before continuing operations .
use conveyor belt systems that do not exceed a total length of num feet measured from end to end of the total assembly .
arrange the belt assembly so that each section discharges into a vertical hopper arrangement to the next section .
to keep segregation to a minimum situate scrapers over the hopper of each section to remove mortar adhering to the belt and to deposit it into the hopper .
equip the discharge end of the conveyor belt system with a hopper and a chute or suitable deflectors to cause the concrete to drop vertically to the deposit area .
num return to table of contents in order to avoid delays due to breakdowns provide standby equipment with an alternate power source prior to the beginning of the placement .
after the beginning of the placement direct the discharge from the belt conveyor so that the concrete always falls on freshly placed concrete .
num placing concrete by pumping in general use concrete pumping equipment that is suitable in kind and adequate in capacity for the work proposed .
use a pump discharge line that has a minimum diameter of num inches .
use a pump and discharge lines that are constructed so that no aluminum surfaces are in contact with the concrete being pumped .
operate the pump to produce a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets .
when using cement slurry or similar material to lubricate the discharge line when pumping begins collect such material at the point of discharge .
dispose of the collected slurry in areas provided by the contractor .
control the pump discharge locations so that the placement locations of the various lots of concrete represented by strength test cylinders can be identified in the event the test cylinders indicate deficient strength .
when concrete is placed by pumping take all test samples of concrete at the end of the discharge line except in accordance with the provisions of section num .
num consolidation consolidate the concrete by continuous working with a suitable tool in an acceptable manner or by vibrating as set forth in num .
when not using vibrators thoroughly work and compact all thinsection work with a steel slicing rod .
spade all faces and flush the mortar to the surface by continuously working with a concrete spading implement .
num obstructions in cases where because of obstructions difficulty is encountered in puddling the concrete adjacent to the forms bring the mortar content of the mix into contact with the interior surfaces by vibrating the forms .
produce the vibrations by striking the outside surfaces of the forms with wooden mallets or by other satisfactory means .
in placing concrete around steel shapes place it only on one side of the shape until it flushes up over the bottom flange of the shape on the opposite side after which place it on both sides to completion .
after the concrete has taken its initial set exercise care to avoid jarring the forms or placing any strain on the ends of projecting reinforcing bars .
num requirements for successive layers place concrete in continuous horizontal layers approximately num inches thick .
to avoid obtaining a plane of separation or a cold joint between layers vibrate the concrete in accordance with num .
num vibration of concrete num general consolidate all concrete except seal steel pile jackets and concrete for incidental construction by the use of mechanical vibrators .
num vibrators provide adequate vibrators on the project that are approved by the engineer before beginning concrete work .
generally provide vibrators of the internal type .
for thin sections where the forms are especially designed to resist vibration the contractor may use external vibrators .
use a vibrator with a minimum frequency of num impulses per minute with sufficient intensity and duration to cause complete consolidation of the concrete without causing segregation of the materials .
for vibrating thin heavily reinforced sections use heads of such size to secure proper vibration of the concrete without disturbance of either the reinforcing bars or the forms .
num number of vibrators required use a sufficient number of vibrators to secure the compaction of each batch before the next batch is delivered without delaying the num return to table of contents delivery .
in order to avoid delays due to breakdowns provide at least one standby vibrator with an appropriate power source .
num method of vibration use vibrators to consolidate properly placed concrete .
do not use them to move concrete about in the forms .
insert the vibrators in the surface of concrete at points spaced to ensure uniform vibration of the entire mass of the concrete .
insert the vibrator at points that are no further apart than the radius over which the vibrator is visibly effective .
allow the vibrator to sink into the concrete by its own weight and allow it to penetrate into the underlying layer sufficiently so that the two layers are thoroughly consolidated together .
after thoroughly consolidating the concrete withdraw the vibrator slowly to avoid formation of holes .
num hand spading when necessary in order to secure wellfilled forms free from aggregate pockets honeycomb bubbles etc .
spade the concrete by hand along the surfaces of the forms and in all corners following the vibration .
num columns place concrete in columns in one continuous operation for each lift as shown in the plans .
num slabs and bridge decks num bulkheads screed rails and screeding devices strikeoff the concrete using an approved metal screed operating on rails or bulkheads .
use devices which do not contain aluminum parts .
prior to placing concrete provide an approved screed capable of strikingoff and screeding the surface of the slab or deck to the required shape .
set all necessary bulkheads and screed rails to the required grade .
use bulkheads screed rails and screeding devices that permit vertical profile adjustment to the grade satisfactory for providing straight transverse slopes differing transverse slopes broken as shown in the plans andor transverse slopes with changing grade along the longitudinal length of slab or deck .
locate the screed rails so the entire placement surface can be screeded to grade without using intermediate screed rails unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
use a screed consisting of a truss or heavy beams that will retain its shape under all working conditions and a set of rotating drums with a diameter sufficient to carry a num inch mortar roll in front of and parallel to the axis of the drums while making an initial pass .
adjust the drums to prevent mortar buildup forming behind the trailing edges of the drums .
for long bridges as defined in num provide a device that automatically smoothes the concrete surface to an untextured finish and that is attached to and is moved by the rolling drum screed .
as an alternate to the drum type screed a mechanical screed with a metal strikeoff may be used .
equip the mechanical screed with mechanical vibrators to provide continuous uniform vibration to the entire length unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
small and irregularly shaped areas that can not be mechanically screeded may be screeded in a manner approved by the engineer .
num screed demonstration subsequent to the placement of all reinforcing bars and prior to placing any slab or deck concrete demonstrate that the proposed equipment and methods can finish the concrete to the specified grades while maintaining the specified cover over the reinforcement .
provide the demonstration over the entire length and width of the spans to be placed .
num screeding operations perform concrete placement and screeding as independently controlled mechanical operations .
ensure that the passing of the screed and num return to table of contents forward movement of the screeding equipment are independent of the movement of concrete placement equipment .
level the concrete in front of the screed as near to the finished grade as possible to prevent the screed from rising off the rail and forming uneven ridges behind the screed .
pass the screed over the slab or deck as many times as necessary to obtain a satisfactory surface and provide a concrete surface true to grade and crown and free of irregularities .
do not add water to the concrete surface to assist in finishing operations unless specifically authorized by the engineer .
if the engineer permits the addition of water apply only a fog mist above the concrete surface by means of approved power driven spray equipment .
for long bridges as defined in num do not manually or mechanically float the concrete surface or apply a texture by broom or any other device to the concrete surface produced by the screeding process .
correct isolated surface irregularities in accordance with num .
num placing operations select an approved concrete design mix which ensures complete placement of all slab or deck concrete between construction joints before initial set begins in the plastic concrete .
on placements of num ydnum or less the minimum placement rate is num cubic yards per hour .
on placements of greater than num cubic yards the minimum placement rate is num cubic yards per hour .
the engineer will not permit slab or deck placements until an acceptable plan for meeting the minimum placement rate is approved .
num concrete decks on steel spans where concrete decks are placed on steel spans release the temporary supports under the bridge before placing any concrete .
num concrete decks on tbeams for castinplace tbeam construction cast the slabs and beams in one continuous operation .
as an exception where special shear anchorage or keys are provided for in the plans or approved by the engineer the beams and slabs may be constructed in successive placements .
num diaphragms place concrete diaphragms at least num hours before the bridge deck slabs are placed unless otherwise indicated in the plans .
num weather protection provide an approved means of protecting unhardened concrete from rain .
position the protection system to shield the concrete from rain and running water .
provide a shield impervious to water over the slab or deck concrete of sufficient size to protect all areas of slab or deck concrete subject to water damage and include a means of intercepting and diverting water away from freshly placed concrete .
arrange the equipment so that the weather protection system can be erected over unhardened concrete .
when there is a possibility of rain during concrete placement operations place the weather protection system in standby readiness capable of being deployed in a timely manner .
use the weather protection immediately when rain begins so that slab or deck concrete damage will not occur .
do not place concrete during rain .
assume responsibility for damage to the slab or deck in the case of failure of the weather protection system .
num concrete box culverts in general place the base slab or footing of concrete box culverts and allow them to set before constructing the remainder of the culvert .
in this case make suitable provision for longitudinal keys .
construct bottom slabs footings and apron walls num return to table of contents as a monolith if practicable .
where transverse construction joints are necessary place them at right angles to the culvert barrel and make suitable provision for keys .
in the construction of box culverts having walls num feet or less in height the sidewalls and top slab may be constructed as a monolith or may place the concrete in the walls and allow it to set before placing the top slab concrete .
where the height of the box culvert walls exceed num feet place the walls and allow the concrete to set at least num hours before placing the top slab concrete .
in such cases form keys in the sidewalls .
when casting the walls and top slabs of box culverts as a monolith ensure that any necessary construction joints are vertical .
design all construction joints with formed keys .
provide keys that are beveled as shown in the plans or as directed but do not allow the edge of the beveled material forming the key to be less than num num inches from the edge of the concrete .
construct each wingwall if possible as a monolith .
ensure that construction joints where unavoidable are horizontal and so located that no joints will be visible in the exposed face of the wing above the ground line .
precast box culvert sections may be used in lieu of castinplace box culvert construction provided the provisions in section num are satisfied .
num seals .
num general wherever practicable dewater all foundation excavations and deposit the concrete in the dry as defined in num .
where conditions are encountered which render it impracticable to dewater the foundation before placing concrete the engineer may authorize the construction of a concrete foundation seal of the required size .
then dewater the foundation and place the balance of the concrete in the dry .
when required to place seal concrete the contractor is responsible for the satisfactory performance of the seal in providing a watertight excavation for placing structural concrete .
the department will provide and pay for the seal concrete as an aid to the construction of the structure .
repair seal concrete as necessary to perform its required function at no expense to the department .
num method of placing carefully place concrete deposited under water in the space in which it is to remain by means of a tremie a closedbottom dump bucket of not less than num cubic yard capacity or other approved method .
do not disturb the concrete after depositing it .
deposit all seal concrete in one continuous placement .
do not place any concrete in running water and ensure that all form work designed to retain concrete under water is watertight .
num use of tremie use a tremie consisting of a tube having a minimum inside diameter of num inches constructed in sections having watertight joints .
do not allow any aluminum parts to have contact with the concrete .
ensure that the discharge end is entirely seated at all times and keep the tremie tube full to the bottom of the hopper .
when dumping a batch into the hopper keep the tremie slightly raised but not out of the concrete at the bottom until the batch discharges to the bottom of the hopper .
stop the flow by lowering the tremie .
support the tremie such as to permit the free movement of the discharge end over the entire top surface of the work and to permit its being lowered rapidly when necessary to choke off or retard the flow .
provide a continuous uninterrupted flow until completing the work .
exercise special care to maintain still water at the point of deposit .
num return to table of contents num time of beginning pumping do not commence pumping to dewater a sealed cofferdam until the seal has set sufficiently to withstand the hydrostatic pressure and in no case earlier than num hours after placement of the concrete .
num construction joints .
num location make construction joints only at locations shown in the plans or in the placement schedule unless otherwise approved in writing .
if not detailed in the plans or placement schedule or in case of emergency place construction joints as directed .
num provisions for bond and transmission of shear use shear key reinforcement where necessary to transmit shear or to bond the two sections together .
num preparations of surfaces before depositing new concrete on or against concrete which has hardened retighten the forms .
roughen the surface of the hardened concrete in a manner that will not leave loosened particles aggregate or damaged concrete at the surface .
thoroughly clean the surface of foreign matter and laitance and saturate it with water .
num placing concrete continuously place concrete from joint to joint .
carefully finish the face edges of all joints which are exposed to view true to line and elevation .
num joints in sea water or brackish water for concrete placed in sea water or brackish water do not place any construction joints between points num feet below the mean low water elevation and num feet above the mean high water elevation .
num joints in long box culverts for long concrete box culverts vertical construction joints may be placed at a spacing not less than num feet .
when using transverse construction joints ensure that longitudinal reinforcing is continuous through the joint and that the joint is vertical .
num crack control grooves in concrete bridge decks when the plans require crack control grooves in the top surface of decks either install a tooled v groove prior to initial concrete set or saw a groove using an early entry dry cut saw .
when using an early entry dry cut saw operate in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
commence sawing as soon as the concrete has hardened enough to permit standing on the surface without leaving visible tracks or impressions and before uncontrolled concrete cracks occur .
num expansion joints .
num general after meeting the smoothness criteria in num construct expansion joints to permit absolute freedom of movement .
carefully remove all loose or thin shells of mortar likely to cause a spall with movement at a joint from all expansion joints as soon as possible .
num sealed joints fill expansion joints with a preformed joint filler .
cut the filler to conform to the crosssection of the structure and furnish it in as few pieces as practicable using only a single piece in each curb section .
do not use small pieces that would tend to come loose .
prepare joints to be sealed and apply the sealer in accordance with approved manufacturers directions .
num joint system installation install expansion joints before or after the deck planing required by num following the manufacturers instructions .
when installed after deck planing install the edge rail assemblies in the blockouts on a profile tangent between the ends of the deck andor approach slab to within a plus num and minusnum inch variation .
num return to table of contents when installed before deck planing install the edge rail assemblies num inch plus or minus num inch below the top surface of the deck or approach slab to compensate for concrete removal during planing .
num contact and bearing surfaces .
num separation of surfaces in general separate all contact surfaces between superstructure and substructure or end walls and between adjacent superstructure sections by a layer of astm dnum class s type iii organic felt .
when an organic felt bond breaker is specified for other structures use either one layer of astm dnum class s type iii or two layers of astm dnum type ii organic felt .
num finishing of bearing surfaces construct bearings surfaces areas to the tolerances as specified herein and in the other parts of the contract documents .
when using neoprene bearing pads finish the concrete surface to a uniform rough texture using a burlap drag fine bristle broom or float .
for metal or high load rotational bearings fill minor depressions num inch maximum caused by finishing bush hammering or grinding with a low viscosity epoxy meeting the requirements of num type fnum applied by the use of a squeegee .
bearing surfaces may be ground to final position with carborundum .
check all bearing surfaces with a metallic straightedge prior to setting bearings or neoprene pads .
num deviation from specified elevations for steel beam superstructures construct to the elevation shown on the plans plus or minus num feet and do not exceed a num feet difference between specified elevations of bearing areas of adjacent bearings measured between the centerlines of bearing areas .
num deviation from specified elevations for concrete beam superstructures construct to the elevation shown on the plans plus or minus num feet .
num projecting irregularities projecting irregularities will not exceed num inch .
num variations in flatness for neoprene pads in any direction the pad is to be flat to within num inch .
pads designated to be sloped are not to deviate from the theoretical slope by the same amount .
num variations in flatness for metal or high load rotational bearings construct the bearing area to the tolerance indicated for the measured length along the orthogonal axes .
bearing area length up to num inches long to plus or minus num inch .
bearing area length over num inches up to num inches long to plus or minus num inch .
bearing area length over num inches long to plus or minus num inch .
num bearing pads use bearing pads for seating bridge shoes ends of beams and slabs of the types specified or required in the plans .
furnish and install neoprene pads as detailed in the plans .
place neoprene pads where specified or required directly on concrete surfaces finished in accordance with the requirements of this article .
ensure that pads bearing areas of bridge seats and metal bearing plates are thoroughly cleaned and free from oil grease and other foreign materials .
exercise care in fabrication of related metal parts to avoid producing conditions detrimental to the performance of the pads such as uneven bearing excessive bulging etc .
the engineer will evaluate the degree of deformation and condition of bearing num return to table of contents pads in the completed bridge on or before the final inspection required by num or when requested by the contractor .
as directed by the engineer correct horizontal bearing pad deformations that at the time of inspection exceed num of the bearing pad thickness or that the engineer predicts will exceed num of the bearing pad thickness during future high or low temperature periods .
payment for this correction effort will be considered extra work in accordance with num .
num anchor bolts and dowels .
set anchor bolts and dowels as specified in section num .
galvanize all anchor bolts as specified in section num .
num epoxy bonding compounds .
where epoxy bonding compounds for bonding concrete are specified or required apply the epoxy bonding materials only to clean dry structurally sound concrete surfaces .
provide surface preparation application and curing of epoxy bonding compound in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for each particular application .
use an epoxy bonding compound listed on the departments apl .
num removal of forms .
use the table below as the criterion for minimum time or compressive strength required before removal of forms or supports .
when using the time period criterion include in the time period all days except days in which the temperature falls below numf .
use the specified numday minimum compressive strength value as stated in num for each class of concrete utilized .
location of concrete placement minimum time for form removal for any strength concrete minimum of numday compressive strength for form removal num deck slabs top slabs of culverts and bottom of caps forms under sidewalks and safety curb overhangs extending more than num feet a class ii bridge deck num days num b class ii other than bridge deck num days num c class iii num days num d class iv num days num e class v num days num num walls piers columns sides of beams and other vertical surfaces num hours num num front face form of curbs num hours num for mass concrete remove forms in accordance with num reference num do not place additional load on the section until num of the specified numday concrete strength is attained .
also refer to num .
when using the percent of required strength cast test cylinders for each mix for compressive strength determination or develop a curing concrete strength versus time curve st num return to table of contents curve which can be used in lieu of multiple test cylinders to determine when percent of required strength has been met .
prior to curve use obtain the engineers approval of the st curve and its supporting data .
an approved testing laboratory may be used to provide this information with approval of the engineer .
plot st curves using at least three different elapsed times that begin once test cylinders are cast however one of the elapsed times must be prior to the contractors intended form removal .
each elapsed time plotted must have a corresponding compressive strength computed by averaging the compressive strength of two test cylinders .
cure such test cylinders as nearly as practical in the same manner as the concrete in the corresponding structural component and test them in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum .
perform cylinder casting curing and testing at no expense to the department and under the observation of the engineer .
when the st curve indicates a compressive strength equal to or greater than the percentage of specified strength shown in the table above for form removal the contractor may remove the forms .
when the ambient air temperature falls numf or more below the ambient air temperature that existed during development of a st curve use a st curve that corresponds to the lower temperature and that is developed in accordance with this section .
do not remove forms at any time without the consent of the engineer .
even when the engineer provides consent to remove the forms the contractor is responsible for the work .
num finishing concrete .
num general surface finish required for all surfaces after placing and consolidating the concrete strikeoff all exposed surfaces to the lines and grades indicated in the plans in a manner that will leave a surface of uniform texture free of undesirable surface irregularities cavities and other defects .
cut back metal ties supporting reinforcement conduit and other appurtenances a minimum of num inch from finished surface .
after removing excess mortar and concrete and while the concrete is still in a workable state carefully tool all construction and expansion joints .
leave joint filler exposed for its full length with clean edges .
ensure that finished work in addition to that specified above is compatible and complementary to the class of surface finish required .
remove all laitance loose material form oil and curing compound from exposed surfaces that do not require forming and from exposed surfaces requiring forming after form removal .
remove fins and irregular projections flush with the surface .
clean saturate with water and fill all holes tie cavities honeycomb chips and spalls .
prior to filling prepare the surface to ensure that patching mortar will bond to the existing concrete .
exercise care during the roughening process to prevent excessive defacement and damage to the surface of the existing concrete .
use patching mortar blended from the mix ingredients of the existing concrete .
ensure the patching mortar closely matches the color of the existing concrete when fully cured .
as an alternative mortar consisting of the following materials may be used num parts of ordinary gray portland cement num part of white portland cement num part of fly ash and num to num parts of sand .
the blended mortar must closely match the color of the filled element once fully cured and the proportion of white portland cement may be adjusted to achieve as close a match as possible .
regardless of the type patching mortar used provide a mortar surface closely resembling the existing surface .
num return to table of contents cure the newly placed mortar using a curing blanket or a type i clear curing compound at a uniform coverage as recommended by the manufacturer but not less than num gallon per square yard .
in the event unsatisfactory surfaces are obtained repair these surfaces by methods approved by the engineer or the affected concrete will be rejected .
repair any surface or remove rejected concrete at no expense to the department .
num surface finishes num general in addition to the general surface work specified for all exposed concrete surfaces the engineer may require one of the classes of surface finish listed below .
for all such exposed surfaces begin finish work for the applicable class specified along with the general finish work immediately after removal of the forms .
in order to further ensure the required quality of the finish remove forms no later than the minimum time specified for the forms to remain in place .
satisfactorily repair finished concrete surfaces which are subsequently disfigured or discolored at no expense to the department .
provide the required class of surface finish for the various items of structural concrete as shown in the plans .
num class num surface finish as soon as the pointing has sufficiently set thoroughly saturate the exposed surfaces with water and rub them with a medium coarse carborundum stone .
continue rubbing until the surface has been ground to a paste and remove all form marks irregularities and projections .
in this process do not introduce any additive material other than water .
after the rubbing has produced a smooth surface of uniform color allow the material which has been ground to a paste to reset under proper curing conditions .
subsequently as a second operation resaturate the concrete surfaces with water and thoroughly rub them with a fine carborundum stone .
continue this rubbing until the surface has a smooth fine grain texture of uniform color .
the contractor may substitute a class num applied finish coating in accordance with num as an alternate surface finish on all areas where class num surface finish is specified .
num class num surface finish as soon as pointing has sufficiently set thoroughly saturate the exposed concrete surfaces with water and rub them with a medium coarse carborundum stone .
continue rubbing until the surface has been ground to a paste and remove all form marks irregularities and projections .
in this process do not introduce any additive material other than water .
after rubbing has produced a smooth surface finish of uniform color carefully brush the material which has been ground to a paste to a uniform texture and allow it to reset under proper curing conditions .
carefully protect these surfaces from disfigurement and discoloration during subsequent construction operations .
num class num surface finish where this surface finish is specified use forms with a form liner .
where specified or required on the plans use no .
num coarse aggregate for concrete .
after concrete has been placed in the forms and compacted finish all exposed surfaces which are not contained by the forms to produce a surface texture as nearly equal to that produced by the form as practicable .
generally finish unformed surfaces to a smooth dense surface with a steel trowel .
num return to table of contents perform all work including general surface finish work in a manner that will preserve the same surface texture and color produced by the form liner .
pointed areas may be rubbed with a dry carborundum stone .
num class num deck finish num general apply a class num finish on bridge decks and concrete approach slabs .
on short bridges bridges having a length less than or equal to num feet and on miscellaneous bridges pedestrian trail and movable spans regardless of length meet the finish and smoothness requirements of num and num .
on long bridges bridges having a length greater than num feet meet the finish and smoothness requirements of num and num .
when an existing bridge deck is widened see the plans for the finish and smoothness requirements of the existing bridge deck and its new widened section .
after meeting the screeding requirements of num and curing requirements of num and the smoothness requirements herein groove the bridge deck and approach slabs .
regardless of bridge length finish decks with less than num num inches of top cover in accordance with the requirements for short bridges .
num plastic surface finish for short and miscellaneous bridges after screeding is completed check the surface of the plastic concrete with a num foot straightedge positioning and halflapping the straightedge parallel to the centerline to cover the entire surface .
immediately correct deficiencies of more than num inch measured as an ordinate between the surface and the straightedge .
finish the concrete surface to a uniform texture using a burlap drag fine bristle broom or float .
finish the deck to a smooth surface having a sandy texture without blemishes marks or scratches deeper than num inch .
num plastic surface finish for long bridges do not moisten manually float or apply texture to the concrete surface after the screed with attached smoothing device has passed unless correction of isolated surface irregularities is warranted and this should be done as soon as possible after screeding while the concrete is plastic .
correct all flaws such as cavities blemishes marks or scratches that will not be removed by planing .
if the engineer permits the addition of water when correcting flaws apply moisture to the concrete surface only if required and only in the immediate vicinity of the isolated irregularity .
apply a quantity of moisture not greater than what is needed to facilitate correction of the irregularity and apply only a fog mist above the concrete surface by power driven spray equipment approved by the engineer .
num smoothness requirements for short bridges and miscellaneous bridges including approach slabs perform a final straightedge check with a num foot straightedge positioning and halflapping the straightedge parallel to the centerline approximately num feet apart to cover the entire surface .
correct all irregularities greater than num inch measured as an ordinate to the straightedge by grinding .
perform grinding by the abrasive method using hand or power tools or by machine to leave a smooth surface within a num inch tolerance .
num smoothness evaluation and concrete surface planing long bridges including approach slabs prior to planing provide a smoothness evaluation of the completed bridge deck and exposed concrete surfaces of approach slabs by a computerized cox californiatype profilograph in accordance with the criteria herein and fm nume .
furnish this evaluation through an independent provider approved by the engineer using equipment num return to table of contents calibrated by the engineer .
all bridge deck and concrete approach slab surfaces to within num feet of gutter lines are subject to this smoothness evaluation .
prior to initial profilograph testing complete work on the bridge deck and approach slabs .
thoroughly clean and clear the bridge deck and approach slab areas to be evaluated for smoothness of all obstructions and provide the smoothness evaluation .
ensure that no radio transmissions or other activities that might disrupt the automated profilograph equipment are allowed during the evaluation .
average the profile index value for the bridge deck including the exposed concrete surfaces of the approach slabs for the left and right wheel path of each lane .
the maximum allowable profile index value for acceptable smoothness is num inches per mile utilizing the num inch blanking band .
apply these criteria to a minimum of num feet of each lane .
additionally correct individual bumps or depressions exceeding a cutoff height of num inch from a chord of num feet see astm enum on the profilograph trace .
ensure that the surface meets a num inch in num feet straightedge check made transversely across the deck and approach slabs if determined necessary by the engineer .
provide additional profilograph testing as necessary following longitudinal planing and any other actions taken to improve smoothness until a profile meeting the acceptance criteria is obtained .
regardless of whether expansion joints are installed before or after deck planing is complete plane off the concrete deck surface to a minimum depth of num inch and also meet or exceed the profilograph smoothness criteria .
longitudinally plane the entire bridge deck and exposed concrete surfaces of the approach slabs using a selfpropelled planing machine with gang mounted diamond saw cutting blades specifically designed for such work .
use the profilograph generated smoothness data to establish the optimum planing machine settings .
plane the deck surface to within num feet of the gutter line so that there is a smooth transition without vertical faces or sudden surface discontinuities from the fully planed surface to the unplaned surface .
use a machine with a minimum wheel base length of num feet constructed and operated in such manner that it does not cause strain or damage to deck or approach slab surfaces excessive ravels aggregate fractures or spalling .
the equipment shall be approved by the engineer .
perform longitudinal planing parallel to the roadway centerline and provide a consistent textured surface .
clean the surface of all slurrydebris generated during this work concurrently with operation of the machine .
after the deck has been planed the minimum num inch reevaluate the surface smoothness using the profilograph testing described above .
perform cycles of planing and profilograph retesting as necessary until the deck and exposed concrete surfaces of approach slabs are in compliance with the smoothness criteria but do not exceed the maximum concrete removal depth of num inch .
num grooving after the concrete surface profile as required by num has been accepted by the engineer and prior to opening the bridge to traffic groove the bridge deck and approach slabs perpendicular to the centerline of the structure .
do not groove the deck surface of pedestrian or trail bridges unless otherwise shown in the contract documents .
cut grooves into the hardened concrete using a mechanical saw device which will leave grooves nominally num inch wide and num inch deep .
space the grooves apart in random spacing center of grooves in the following sequence num inch num inch num inch num inch num inch num inch num inch in num inch repetitions across the width to be grooved in one pass of the mechanical saw device .
one num inch sequence may be adjusted by num sequence increments to accommodate num return to table of contents various cutting head widths provided the general pattern is carried out .
the tolerance for the width of the grooves is plus num inch to minus num inch and the tolerance for the depth of grooves is plus or minusnum inch .
the tolerance for the spacing of the grooves is plus or minusnum inch .
cut grooves continuously across the deck or approach slab to within num inches of gutter lines at traffic railing curb line and median divider .
at skewed metal expansion joints in bridge deck surfaces adjust groove cutting by using narrow width cutting heads so that all grooves of the bridge deck surface or approach slab surface end within num inches measured normal to centerline of the joint leaving no ungrooved surface adjacent to each side of the joint greater than num inches in width .
ensure that the minimum distance to the first groove measured normal from the edge of the concrete joint or from the junction between the concrete and the metal leg of the armored joint angle is num inch .
produce grooves that are continuous across construction joints or other joints in the concrete surface less than num inch wide .
apply the same procedure described above where the gutter lines at traffic railing curb lines and median dividers are not parallel to the centerline of the bridge to maintain the num inches maximum dimension from the grooves to the gutter line .
cut grooves continuously across formed concrete joints .
num class num applied finish coating num general place an applied finish coating upon all concrete surfaces where the plans indicate class num applied finish coating .
apply the finish coating after completion of the general surface work specified for all exposed concrete surfaces .
select an applied finish coating from the apl meeting the requirements of section num .
num material for the coating material use a commercial product designed specifically for this purpose .
use only coating material that is manufactured by one manufacturer and delivered to the job site in sealed containers bearing the manufacturers original labels .
submit the manufacturers written instructions to the engineer .
num surface preparation prepare the surface prior to the application of an applied finish coating by providing a surface finish in accordance with the requirements of num .
the engineer will not require surface voids that are num inch or less in width and depth to be grouted prior to application of the finish coating .
fill surface void larger than num inch in width and depth an approved high strength non metallic non shrink grout meeting the requirements of section num mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply the grout by filling the surface voids using burlap pads float sponges or other acceptable methods .
as soon as the grout has taken its initial set brush the surface to remove all loose grout leaving the surface smooth and free of any voids .
ensure that the surface to be coated is free from efflorescence flaking coatings curing compound dirt oil and other substances deleterious to the applied finish coating .
prior to application of the finish coating onto precast or castinplace concrete surfaces test the concrete surface at num foot intervals for the presence of curing compound using one or two drops of muriatic acid placed on the concrete surface .
if curing compound is present there will be no reaction between the acid and the concrete .
if there is no reaction remove the compound by pressure washing the concrete surfaces .
prepare the surfaces in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and ensure that they are in a condition consistent with the manufacturers requirements .
clean surfaces of existing structures in accordance with num .
num application apply the finish coating utilizing a method recommended by the manufacturer .
when applying the finish coating by spraying supply heavy num return to table of contents duty spray equipment capable of maintaining a constant pressure necessary for proper application .
mix and cure all coating materials in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
apply the finished coating at a rate of num plus or minus num square feet per gallon .
num finished product produce a texture of the completed finish coat that is generally similar to that of rubbed concrete .
ensure that the completed finished coating is tightly bonded to the structure and presents a uniform appearance and texture .
if necessary apply additional coats to produce the desired surface texture and uniformity .
upon failure to adhere positively to the structure without chipping flaking or peeling or to attain the desired surface appearance remove coatings entirely from the structure and reapply the finish coating after surface preparation until achieving the desired finished product .
do not allow the average thickness of the completed finish coating to exceed num inch .
num material tests and certification before any portion of any shipment of finish coating is applied on the project submit to the engineer a certificate from the manufacturer attesting that the commercial product furnished conforms to the same formula as that previously subjected to the tests specified in section num .
in addition submit the following product analysis obtained from the manufacturer for each batch of the material used num .
weight per gallon .
num .
consistency krebs units .
num .
weight percent pigment .
num .
weight percent vehicle solids .
num .
infrared spectra of vehicle solution .
num final straightedging for surfaces to receive asphalt concrete surface test the slab surfaces of pouredinplace decks which are to be surfaced with an asphalt concrete wearing course for trueness with a num foot straightedge as specified above .
as an exception correct only irregularities of more than num inch measured as an ordinate either above or below the general contour of the surface .
the engineer will not require belting or brooming of slabs that are to be surfaced with an asphalt concrete wearing course .
for curing meet the requirements specified for other deck slabs .
num finishing bridge sidewalks finish bridge sidewalks in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num .
num curing concrete .
num general cure castinplace and precast nonprestressed concrete as required herein for a minimum duration of num hours .
if forms are loosened or removed before the num hour curing period is complete expand the curing to cover these surfaces by either coating with curing compound or extending the continuous moist cure area .
until curing has begun retain concrete surface moisture at all times by maintaining a surface moisture evaporation rate less than num pound per square foot per hour .
periodically at the site of concrete placement prior to and during the operation measure the ambient air temperature relative humidity and wind velocity with industrial grade weather monitoring instruments to determine the onsite evaporation rate .
if the evaporation is or is likely to become num pound per square foot per hour or greater employ measures to prevent moisture loss such as application of evaporation retarder application of supplemental moisture by fogging or reduction of the concrete temperature during batching .
compute the evaporation num return to table of contents rate by using the nomograph in the aci manual of concrete practice part num section numr guide to curing concrete or by using an evaporation rate calculator approved by the engineer .
num methods except where other curing methods are specified select from the following options the chosen methods for curing all concrete components .
num .
continuous moisture place burlap on the surface and keep it continuously saturated for the curing period by means of soaker hoses or automatic sprinklers .
water flow may be metered to cycle repetitively for five minutes on and five minutes off during the num hour curing period .
do not apply moisture manually .
if side forms are loosened or removed during the curing period extend the burlap so as to completely shield the sides of the members .
num .
membrane curing compound apply a white type num curing compound to all surfaces at a uniform coverage as recommended by the manufacturer but not less than num gallon per square yard .
allow surfaces covered by the membrane curing compound to remain undisturbed for the curing period .
recoat any cracks checks or other defects in the membrane seal which are detected during the curing period within one hour .
if side forms are loosened during the curing period maintain surface moisture and remove the forms within one hour and immediately coat the formed surfaces with a membrane curing compound .
bottom surfaces shall be similarly coated after removal of or from the forms .
if curing compound is to be applied by spraying use a compressor driven sprayer of sufficient size to provide uniform mist .
standby equipment is required in case of mechanical failure and hand held pumpup sprayers may be used only as standby equipment .
num .
curing blankets curing blankets may be used for curing the top surfaces of members while the member side forms remain in place .
do not use curing blankets which have been torn or punctured .
securely fasten all edges to provide as tight a seal as practical .
should the system fail to maintain a moist condition on the concrete surface discontinue use of the blankets and continue curing using another method .
keep curing blankets in place for the duration of the curing period .
num .
accelerated cure a .
general accelerated curing of the concrete can be achieved by use of either low pressure steam curing radiant heat curing or continuous moisture and heat curing .
if accelerated curing is completed before the num hour curing period has elapsed continue curing for the remaining part of the num hour curing period in accordance with one of the curing methods listed above .
if accelerated curing is used furnish temperature recording devices that will provide accurate continuous and permanent records of the time and temperature relationship throughout the entire curing period .
provide one such recording thermometer for each num feet of placement length or part thereof .
initially calibrate recording thermometers and recalibrate at least annually .
the preheating period shall equal or exceed the time of initial set as determined by astm cnum and shall not be less than num hours .
when the ambient air temperature is above numf allow the member to remain undisturbed in the ambient air for the preheating period .
if the ambient air temperature is below numf apply heat during the preheating period to hold the air surrounding the member at a temperature of num to numf .
to prevent moisture loss from exposed surfaces during the preheating period enclose members as soon as possible after casting or keep the surfaces wet by fog mist or wet blankets .
use enclosures for heat curing that allow free circulation of heat about num return to table of contents the member with a minimum moisture loss .
the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers may be used provided they are kept in good repair and secured in such a manner to prevent the loss of heat and moisture .
use enclosures that cover the entire placement .
during the application or removal of the heat do not allow the temperature rise or fall within the enclosure to exceed numf per hour .
do not allow the curing temperature throughout the enclosure to exceed numf .
maintain the curing temperature within a temperature range of num to numf until the concrete has reached the required form removal strength for precast and castinplace components or the required release strength for prestressed concrete components .
b. lowpressure steam the steam used shall be in a saturated condition .
do not allow steam jets to impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
cover control cylinders to prevent moisture loss and place them in a location where the temperature is representative of the average temperature of the enclosure .
c. curing with radiant heat apply radiant heat by means of pipes circulating steam hot oil or hot water or by electric heating elements .
do not allow the heating elements to come in direct contact with the concrete or the forms .
distribute sources of heat in a manner that will prevent localized high temperatures above numf .
to prevent moisture loss during curing keep the exposed surfaces wet by fog mist or wet blankets .
d. continuous moisture and heat this method consists of heating the enclosure in combination with the continuous moisture method described above .
in addition to the curing blankets an auxiliary cover for retention of the heat will be required over the entire placement .
support this cover at a sufficient distance above the placement being cured to allow circulation of the heat .
num silica fume concrete cure silica fume concrete a minimum of num hours using continuous moisture cure .
no substitution of alternative methods nor reduction in the time period is allowed .
after completion of the num hour curing period apply a membrane curing compound to all concrete surfaces .
apply curing compound according to num .
num bridge decks and approach slabs cure bridge decks and approach slabs for a duration of seven days .
apply a membrane curing compound to the top surface in accordance with num using a compressor driven sprayer .
in general apply curing compound when the surface is damp and after all pooled water has evaporated .
for short bridges begin applying curing compound immediately after the initially placed concrete has been floated straightedged textured and a damp surface condition exists and continue applying compound as concrete placement progresses with as little interruption as possible until the entire top surface has been coated with compound .
for long bridges begin applying curing compound to the initially placed concrete as soon as a damp surface condition exists and continue applying compound as concrete placement progresses with as little interruption as possible until the entire top surface has been coated with compound .
for all bridges the elapsed time between the initial placement of deck or approach slab concrete and the completed application of curing compound must not exceed num minutes .
the num minute limit may be extended by the engineer if project specific factors cool temperatures high humidity retarding admixtures etc .
prolong wet surface conditions .
prior to the first deck or approach slab placement submit to the engineer the method that will be used to periodically measure the rate of application of curing compound in gallons per square foot as the concrete placement progresses .
prior to the placement of each deck or approach slab submit to the engineer the anticipated quantity of curing compound in gallons num return to table of contents along with the corresponding square feet of concrete to be covered to meet the coverage rate in num .
compute the actual quantity of curing compound applied at the conclusion of each concrete placement and submit the quantity to the engineer .
apply the curing compound from a work platform .
place curing blankets on all exposed surfaces which are not formed as soon as possible with minimal effect on the surface texture .
place the curing blankets with sufficient overlapping seams to form an effective moisture seal .
before using curing blankets mend tears splits or other damage that would make them unsuitable .
discard curing blankets that are not repairable .
wet all curing blankets immediately after satisfactorily placing them and maintain them in a saturated condition throughout the seven day curing period .
supply sufficient quantity of water meeting the requirements of section num at the job site for wetting the blankets .
where a bridge deck or approach slab is to be subjected to walking wheeling or other approved construction traffic within the seven day curing period protect the curing blankets and the concrete surface from damage by placing wooden sheeting plywood or other approved protective material in the travel areas .
when the ends of the curing blankets are rolled back to permit screeding of adjacent concrete keep the exposed surfaces wet throughout the period of exposure .
bridge deck bottom and side forms may be removed after num hours upon compliance with num .
approach slab side forms may be removed after num hours .
apply membrane curing compound to all surfaces stripped of forms within one hour of loosening .
apply curing compound according to num .
num construction joints cure construction joint areas using either the continuous moisture or curing blankets method .
num concrete barriers traffic railings parapets and end post ensure concrete is cured in accordance with num except that a clear type numd curing compound that must contain a fugitive dye may be used in lieu of type num .
if type numd is used its removal per num during finishing is not required .
when construction is by the slip form method coat all concrete surfaces with a curing compound that meets the requirements of num either within num minutes of extrusion or before the loss of water sheen whichever occurs first .
ensure a curing compound coating period of not less than seven days after application .
prior to each concrete placement submit to the engineer the method that will be used to periodically measure the rate of application in gallons per square foot .
also prior to each placement submit to the engineer the anticipated quantity of curing compound in gallons that will be used to meet the coverage rate specified in num along with the corresponding square footage of concrete barriers traffic railings parapets and end posts to be coated with that quantity .
measure the actual quantity of curing compound that is applied during each concrete placement and submit the quantity to the engineer .
applied finish coatings that are on the apl and that are flagged as permitted for use as a curing compound may be used in lieu of a curing compound .
if an applied finish coating is used in lieu of a curing compound have a backup system that is in full compliance with num num available at all times to ensure that an effective alternative system will be immediately available if the applied finish coating can not be applied within num minutes of extrusion or before the loss of water sheen .
num removal of membrane curing compounds provide the longest possible curing duration however remove curing compound on portions of members to be bonded to other concrete .
compounds may be removed by either sand or water blasting .
water blasting num return to table of contents requires the use of water meeting the requirements of section num and a minimum nozzle pressure of num psi .
num protection of concrete .
num opening to traffic do not open concrete bridge decks approach slabs or culverts to traffic for at least num days after concrete placement .
during placement operations concrete may be wheeled across previously placed slabs after they have set for num hours and plank runways are used to keep the loads over the beams .
num storing materials on bridge slabs do not store heavy equipment or material other than light forms or tools on concrete bridge slabs or approach slabs until num days after they have been placed .
obtain approval from the engineer prior to storing materials tools or equipment on bridge decks at any time .
disperse any such loads to avoid overloading the structure .
num time of placing superstructure do not place the weight of the superstructure or beams on concrete substructure elements for at least num days after placement .
num alternate procedure as an alternative to the time delay periods set forth in num and num test cylinders may be prepared and tested by the contractor in accordance with num and a determination made using one of the following methods num .
when the cylinder test results indicate the minimum num day compressive strength shown in the plans concrete bridge decks approach slabs and culverts may be opened to traffic or the superstructure and beams may be placed on caps .
num .
submit signed and sealed calculations prepared by a specialty engineer demonstrating that the concrete caps can safely support the weight of the girders for the current concrete strength to the engineer for approval .
in any event comply with the curing provisions of num .
num precast planks slabs and girders .
num general where so shown in the contract documents the contractor may construct concrete planks slabs girders and other structural elements by precasting .
in general use a method that consists of casting structural elements in a casting yard curing as specified in num transporting them to the site of the work installing them on previously prepared supports and where so shown in the plans joining them with pouredinplace slabs or keys .
handle and install precast prestressed members as specified in section num .
num casting cast precast elements on unyielding beds or pallets .
use special care in casting the bearing surfaces on both the elements and their foundations in order that these surfaces shall coincide when installing the elements .
check bearing surfaces on casting beds with a level and a straightedge prior to the casting .
similarly check corresponding surfaces on the foundations during finishing operations .
num pouredinplace keys where precast elements are to be joined with poured inplace keys carefully align the elements prior to pouring the keys .
num surface finish finish the surface as specified in num num except that where precast slabs and pouredinplace keys form the riding surface give the entire surface a broomed finish .
num return to table of contents num moving placing and opening to traffic reinforced precast members may be moved from casting beds placed in the structure and opened to traffic at the ages shown in the following table handling from casting beds to storage areas num days placing in structure num days opening to traffic precast elements num days castinplace slabs over precast girders num days castinplace keys joining precast slabs num days as an alternate procedure in lieu of the time delay periods set forth above test beams may be cast from representative concrete and cure them identically with the concrete in the corresponding structural component .
test the test beams in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum .
when the test results indicate a flexural strength of num psi or more any of the operations listed above may proceed without completing the corresponding time delay period .
num setting prestressed slabs before permitting construction equipment on the bridge to erect slab units submit sketches showing axle loads and spacing and a description of the intended method of setting slab units to the engineer for approval .
do not use axle loads spacing and methods of setting which produce stresses in the slab units greater than the allowable stress .
num protection of precast elements the contractor is responsible for the safety of precast elements during all stages of construction .
the engineer will reject any precast elements that become cracked broken seriously spalled or structurally impaired .
remove rejected precast elements from the work at no expense to the department .
num form material form material used to form hollow cores may be left in place .
ensure that the form material is neutral with respect to the generating of products harmful to the physical and structural properties of the concrete .
the contractor is responsible for any detrimental effects resulting from the presence of the form material within the precast element .
num cleaning and coating concrete surfaces of existing structures .
for the purposes of this article an existing structure is one that was in service prior to the start of the project to which this specification applies .
for existing structures clean concrete surfaces that are designated in the contract documents as receiving class num applied finish coating by pressure washing prior to the application of coating .
use pressure washing equipment producing a minimum working pressure of num psi when measured at or near the nozzle .
do not damage or gouge uncoated concrete surfaces or previously coated concrete surfaces during cleaning operations .
remove all previously applied coating that is no longer adhering to the concrete or that is peeling flaking or delaminating .
ensure that after the pressure wash cleaning and the removal of nonadherent coating that the cleaned surfaces are free of efflorescence grime mold mildew oil or any other contaminants that might prevent proper adhesion of the new coating .
after cleaning has been successfully completed apply class num applied finish coating in accordance with num or as otherwise specified in the plans .
num approach slabs .
construct approach slabs at the bridge ends in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num using class ii bridge deck concrete .
place the reinforcement as specified in num and section num .
num return to table of contents num disposition of cracked concrete .
num general the disposition of cracked concrete is described in this article and applies to all castinplace concrete members and once installed to the precast and prestressed concrete members that are produced in accordance with num num num num num and num .
num investigation documentation and monitoring the engineer will inspect concrete surfaces as soon as surfaces are fully visible after casting with the exception of surfaces of precast concrete products produced in offsite plants between num and num days after the component has been burdened with full dead load and a minimum of num days after the bridge has been opened to full unrestricted traffic .
the engineer will measure the width length and depth of each crack and establish the precise location of the crack termination points relative to permanent reference points on the member .
the engineer will determine if coring of the concrete is necessary when an accurate measurement of crack depth can not be determined by use of a mechanical probe .
the engineer will monitor and document the growth of individual cracks at an inspection interval determined by the engineer to determine if cracks are active or dormant after initial inspection .
the engineer will perform all final bridge deck crack measurements once the deck is free of all debris and before transverse grooves are cut and after planing is complete for decks that require planing .
provide the access equipment and personnel needed for the engineer to safely perform this work at no expense to the department .
core cracks for use by the engineer in locations and to depths specified by the engineer at no expense to the department .
num classification of cracks the engineer will classify cracks as either nonstructural or structural .
in general nonstructural cracks are cracks num inch or less deep from the surface of the concrete however the engineer may determine that a crack greater than num inch deep is nonstructural .
in general structural cracks are cracks that extend deeper than num inch .
as an exception all cracks in concrete bridge decks that are supported by beams or girders will be classified as nonstructural and repair will be in accordance with num .
however if the engineer determines that repair under num is unacceptable repair in accordance with num .
a crack that is fully or partially underwater at any time during its service life will be classified as a structural crack unless the environment note on the general notes sheet in the plans categorizes the substructure as slightly aggressive in which case the nonstructural crack criteria may apply as determined by the engineer .
review and comment on the engineers crack classification however the engineer will make the final determination .
num nonstructural cracking significance the engineer will determine the cracking significance .
the cracking significance will be determined on the basis of total crack surface area as a percentage of total concrete surface area .
cracking significance will be categorized as isolated occasional moderate or severe according to the criteria in tables num and num .
cracking significance will be determined on a lot by lot basis .
a lot will typically be made up of not more than num square feet and not less than num square feet of concrete surface area for structures other than bridge decks or typically not more than num square feet or not less than num square feet for bridge decks .
a lot will not extend beyond a single elevation range as shown in table num or num. review and comment on the engineers determination of cracking significance however the engineer will make the final determination .
num return to table of contents num repair method repair or remove and replace cracked concrete as directed by the engineer .
additional compensation or time will not be granted for repair or removal and replacement of cracked concrete when the engineer determines the cause to be the responsibility of the contractor .
num nonstructural cracks repair each crack using the method as determined by the engineer for each lot in accordance with table num or num .
when further investigation is required to determine repair or rejection submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num signed and sealed by a specialty engineer to determine the strength and durability of the proposed repair .
upon approval of the engineering analysis report ear and final determination of the engineer repair or remove and replace the cracked concrete in accordance with the ear .
num structural cracks submit an engineering analysis scope in accordance with num signed and sealed by the contractors engineer of record to determine the strength and durability of the proposed repair ..
upon approval of the ear and final determination of the engineer repair or remove and replace the cracked concrete in accordance with the approved ear .
num return to table of contents table num disposition of cracked concrete other than bridge decks see separate key of abbreviations and footnotes for tables num and num elev .
range crack width range inch num x crack width cracking significance range per lot num isolated less than num occasional num tonum moderate num tonum severe num or gtr .
environment category sa ma ea sa ma ea sa ma ea sa ma ea elevation num to num ft amhw x num nt nt ps num nt ps num ps num ps num ps num num x num nt ps num ei num ps num ei num ei num ps num num x num nt ps num ei num x num ps num num x num num x num num x num x num elev .
more than num ft to num ft amhw crack width sa ma ea sa ma ea sa ma ea sa ma ea x num nt nt ps num nt ps num ps num ps num ps num ps num ps num num x num nt ps num ei num ps num ps num ei num ps num ei num num x num nt ps num ei ei ei num x num ps num ei ei ei num x num ei num x num num x num x num elev .
over land or crack width sa ma ea sa ma ea sa ma ea sa ma ea x num nt nt nt nt ps num ps num ps num ps num ps num ps num num x nt ps ps ps ps ei ps ei ei ps investigate to determine appropriate repair num num or rejection reject and replace reject and replace investigate to determine appropriate repair num num or rejection num return to table of contents num num num num num num num num num num num x num nt ps num ei ei ei ei ei ei num x num ps num ei ei ei ei ei num x num ei ei ei ei num x num ei num x num x num investigate to determine appropriate repair num num or rejection reject and replace num return to table of contents table num disposition of cracked concrete bridge decks see separate key of abbreviations and footnotes for tables num and num elev .
range crack width range inch num x crack width cracking significance range per lot num isolated less than num occasional num tonum moderate num tonum severe num or gtr .
environment category s a ma ea sa m a ea sa ma ea s a m a e a elevation num feet or less amhw x num n t nt nt nt nt nt nt nt nt num x num n t nt ei m nt nt eim eim ei m eim num x num n t nt ei m nt ei m eim eim ei m num x num n t nt ei m nt ei m num x num ei m ei m ei ei num x num ei m ei ei num x num ei m ei x num elevation over land or more than num feet amhw crack width s a ma ea sa m a ea sa ma ea s a m a e a x num n t nt nt nt nt nt nt nt nt num x num n t nt nt nt nt eim nt ei m eim num x num n t nt ei m nt nt eim eim ei m num x num n t nt ei m nt ei m num x num n t ei m ei ei m num x num n t ei m ei num x num n t ei m x num reject and replace investigate to determine appropriate repair num num or rejection reject and replace investigate to determine appropriate repair num num or rejection num return to table of contents key of abbreviations and footnotes for tables num and num type abbreviation abbreviation definition repair method ei epoxy injection m methacrylate nt no treatment required ps penetrant sealer environment category ea extremely aggressive ma moderately aggressive sa slightly aggressive reference elevation amhw above mean high water footnotes num cracking significance range is determined by computing the ratio of total cracked surface area tcsa to total surface area tsa per lot in percent tcsatsa x num then by identifying the cracking significance range in which that value falls .
tcsa is the sum of the surface areas of the individual cracks in the lot .
the surface area of an individual crack is determined by taking width measurements of the crack at num representative locations and then computing their average which is then multiplied by the crack length .
num crack width range is determined by computing the width of an individual crack as computed in num above and then identifying the range in which that individual crack width falls .
num when the engineer determines that a crack in the num inch to num inch width range can not be injected then for table num use penetrant sealer unless the surface is horizontal in which case use methacrylate if the manufacturers recommendations allow it to be used and if it can be applied effectively as determined by the engineer .
num a perform epoxy injection of cracks in accordance with section num .
seal cracks with penetrant sealer or methacrylate as per section num. b use only methacrylate or penetrant sealer that is compatible according to manufacturers recommendations with previously applied materials such as curing compound or paint or remove such materials prior to application .
num when possible prior to final acceptance of the project seal cracks only after it has been determined that no additional growth will occur .
num methacrylate shall be used on horizontal surfaces in lieu of penetrant sealer if the manufacturers recommendations allow it to be used and if it can be applied effectively as determined by the engineer .
num unless directed otherwise by the engineer repair cracks in bridge decks only after the grinding and grooving required by num num is fully complete .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantities of concrete to be paid for will be the volume in cubic yards of each of the various classes shown in the plans in place completed and accepted .
the quantity of precast anchor beams to be paid for will be the number in place and accepted .
the quantity of bridge deck grooving to be paid for will be the area in square yards of bridge deck and approach slab completed and accepted .
the quantity of bridge deck grooving and planing to be paid for will be the area in square yards of bridge deck and approach slab completed and accepted .
except for precast anchor beams for any item of work constructed under this section and for which measurement for payment is not to be made by the volume of concrete measurement and payment for such work will be as specified in the section under which the work is specified in detail .
no separate payment will be made for obtaining the required concrete finish .
num calculation of volume of concrete num dimensions the quantity will be computed by the plan dimensions of the concrete within the neat lines shown in the plans except that no deduction will be made for num return to table of contents weep holes deck drains or encroachment of inlets and pipes in box culverts and no chamfers scorings fillets or radii num num innum or less in crosssectional area will be taken into account .
num pay quantity the quantity to be paid for will be the original plan quantity measured as provided in num except that where the plans call for an estimated quantity of miscellaneous concrete for contingent use the contingent concrete will be measured as the actual quantity in place and accepted .
num items not included in measurement for payment no measurements or other allowances will be made for work or material for forms falsework cofferdams pumping bracing expansionjoint material etc .
the volume of all materials embedded in the concrete such as structural steel pile heads etc .
except reinforcing bars or mesh will be deducted when computing the volume of concrete to be paid for .
for each foot of timber pile embedded num cubic feet of concrete will be deducted .
the cost of furnishing and placing dowel bars shall be included in the contract unit price for the concrete .
num deck girders and beam spans in computing the volume of concrete in deck girders and beam spans the thickness of the slab will be taken as the nominal thickness shown on the drawings and the width will be taken as the horizontal distance measured across the roadway .
the volume of haunches over beams will be included in the volume to be paid for .
num stayinplace metal forms when using stayinplace metal forms to form the slab of deck girder and beam spans the volume of concrete will be computed in accordance with the provisions of num except that the thickness of the slab over the projected plan area of the stayinplace metal forms will be taken as the thickness shown on the drawings above the top surface of the forms .
the concrete required to fill the form flutes will not be included in the volume of concrete thus computed .
num bridge deck grooving the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in square yards computed using the area bound by the gutter lines at traffic railings curbs and median dividers and the beginning and end of the bridge or the end of approach slabs whichever is applicable constructed in place and accepted .
num bridge deck grooving and planing the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in square yards computed using the area bound by the gutter lines at traffic railings curbs and median dividers and the beginning and end of the bridge or the end of approach slabs whichever is applicable constructed in place and accepted .
num composite and plain neoprene bearing pads the quantity to be paid for will be the original plan quantity computed using the dimensions of the pads shown in the plans .
num cleaning and coating concrete surfaces the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square feet for the areas shown in the plans .
num basis of payment .
num concrete num general price and payment will be full compensation for each of the various classes of concrete shown in the contract documents .
num concrete placed below plan depth authorized concrete placed in seal or footings num feet or less below the elevation of bottom of seal or footing as shown in the plans will be paid for at the contract price set forth in the contract documents under the pay items for substructure concrete .
num return to table of contents authorized concrete used in seal or in the substructure where no seal is used at a depth greater than num feet below the bottom of seal or footing as shown in the plans will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
such payment will be full compensation for the cofferdam construction for excavation and for all other expenses caused by the lowering of the footings .
num seal concrete required but not shown in plans when seal concrete is required as provided in num and there is no seal concrete shown in the plans it will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
num precast anchor beams price and payment will be full compensation for the beams including all reinforcing and materials necessary to complete the beams in place and accepted .
no separate prices will be allowed for the various types of anchor beams .
num reinforcing reinforcing bars wires and mesh will be measured and paid for as provided in section num except that no separate payment will be made for the welded wire reinforcement used in concrete jackets on steel piles or reinforcement contained in traffic railings concrete barriers traffic separators or parapets .
where so indicated in the plans the department will not separately pay for reinforcing used in incidental concrete work but the cost of such reinforcement shall be included in the contract unit price for the concrete .
num bridge deck grooving price and payment will be full compensation for all grinding grooving equipment labor and material required to complete the work in an acceptable manner .
num bridge deck grooving and planing price and payment will be full compensation for all grooving planing equipment labor and material required to complete the work in an acceptable manner .
num composite and plain neoprene bearing pads price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials required to complete installation of the pads .
num cleaning and coating concrete surfaces price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials required .
the cost of coating new concrete will not be paid for separately but will be included in the cost of the item to which it is applied .
num general the above prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all forms falsework joints weep holes drains pipes conduits bearing pads setting anchor bolts and dowels surface finish and cleaning up as shown in the plans or as directed .
where the plans call for water stops include the cost of the water stops in the contract unit price for the concrete .
unless payment is provided under a separate item in the contract documents the above prices and payments will also include all clearing and grubbing removal of existing structures excavation as provided in section num and expansion joint angles and bolts .
the department will not change the rate of payment for the various classes of concrete in which steel or frp may be used due to the addition or reduction of reinforcing .
the department will not make an allowance for cofferdams pumping bracing or other materials or equipment not becoming a part of the finished structure .
the department will not pay for concrete placed outside the neat lines as shown in the plans .
when using stayinplace metal forms to form bridge decks the forms concrete required to fill the form flutes attachments supports shoring accessories and all miscellaneous num return to table of contents items or work required to install the forms shall be included in the contract unit price of the superstructure concrete .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num class ns concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class i concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class ii concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class iii concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class iv concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num precast anchor beams each .
item no .
num num bridge deck grooving per square yard .
item no .
num num class v concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num bridge deck grooving and planing per square yard .
item no .
num num class vi concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num cleaning and coating concrete surfaces per square foot .
item no .
num composite neoprene pads per cubic foot .
item no .
num plain neoprene bearing pads per cubic foot .
num return to table of contents section num threesided precast concrete culvert num description .
design and construct a threesided precast concrete culvert for the threesided concrete culvert structure shown in the contract documents .
threesided precast concrete culverts are defined as monolithic arched segments frame segments with vertical walls and either horizontal or arched top slabs or threesided proprietary precast concrete bridge systems .
meet the requirements of num .
num materials .
ensure that the materials used for the construction of precast culverts have certification statements from each source showing that they meet the applicable requirements of the following portland cement concrete section num reinforcing for concrete section num precast concrete drainage products section num riprap section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregate section num curing materials section num materials for concrete repair section num nonshrink grout section num geotextile fabrics section num the gradation requirements of aggregates are not applicable when using drycast concrete .
num limitations on use .
do not use threesided precast culverts in lieu of foursided culverts described in section num however they may be considered as a cost savings initiative proposal csip in accordance with section num .
provide the required section num concrete class and concrete cover in accordance with the structures design guideline for the environmental classification shown in the plans for the culvert location .
do not use a threesided precast culvert to extend the inlets of existing multicell culverts due to the potential for clogging with debris .
num materials acceptance and testing .
num general meet concrete materials testing inspection and acceptance requirements of section num as modified herein precast culverts are produced using certificationacceptance criteria therefore assume responsibility for performance of all quality control testing and inspections in accordance with section num .
prepare cure and test the test cylinders in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum test methods .
follow the alternative method of concrete compaction in accordance with astm cnum if the consistency of concrete is too stiff for compaction by rodding or internal vibrations .
expose shipping strength test cylinders to the same curing conditions as the precast concrete sections .
the numday test cylinders shall be cured in accordance with section num .
num return to table of contents perform all concrete quality control testing and inspections in accordance with num .
for training and other qualifications meet the requirements of section num .
test all qc samples for compressive strength in a laboratory meeting the requirements of section num .
num quality assurance inspection and testing the engineer will perform periodic inspections sampling and testing to ensure of the quality and acceptability of the materials methods techniques procedures and processes being utilized by the manufacturing facility in the fabrication of precast concrete culverts .
num special requirements for drycast concrete drycast concrete is defined as a very low slump concrete that requires continuous and intense vibration to compact the concrete enabling immediate removal of the side forms without detrimental effects to the concrete when used in a drycast manufacturing process .
the target slump and air content ranges in table num in section num and the plastic property tolerances in table num in section num are not applicable to drycast concrete .
perform absorption tests on specimens from each lot of drycast production in accordance with the test methods in astm cnum .
the absorption of each specimen must not exceed num of the dry mass for test method a procedure or num for test method b procedure .
all specimens must be free of visible cracks and must represent the full thickness of the product .
test specimens after num days of standard curing or prior to the date of shipping if the precast concrete culvert sections are to be shipped before the completion of the numday curing period .
core three specimens for test method b in accordance with astm cnum and meet the sampling location and size requirements of astm cnum .
prepare or core a minimum of one specimen for test method a in accordance with the test cylinder requirements of astm cnum .
when the initial absorption specimen from a concrete culvert section fails to conform to the requirements of this section the absorption test may be made on another specimen from the same culvert section and the results of the retest may be substituted for the original test results for acceptance of the lot .
the manufacturer may test each concrete culvert section within a lot and cull the culvert sections not meeting absorption requirements marking them as deficient with waterproof paint or other approved means .
deficient culvert sections must not be shipped to the project site .
reduce the frequency of absorption tests to one test every five lots when the results of five consecutive lots meet the specified limit .
num design requirements .
provide a design that complies with the requirements of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and the structures design guidelines .
perform a bridge load rating in accordance with the structures design guidelines for any design with a total span equal to or greater than num feet when measured between the inside face of end supports along the centerline of the roadway crossing .
submit design calculations shop drawings and load rating for approval in accordance with section num .
ensure that the contractors engineer of record performs the design of the precast culvert and signs and seals the design plans calculations and load rating .
when the channel lining design is not provided in the contract documents or must be redesigned submit a hydraulic analysis and scour evaluation signed and sealed by the contractors engineer of record .
line the channel between footings with either a num inch minimum thick castinplace reinforced concrete slab with a num inch minimum depth toe wall at the inlet and outlet end of the num return to table of contents structure or a blanket of revetment designed in accordance with the department drainage manual .
use lining designed to withstand the hydraulic forces and extend the lining a minimum of num feet beyond the ends of the structure .
a riprap rubble ditch lining with a minimum thickness of num inches will be permitted if the flow velocity corresponding to the design flood scour event does not exceed five feet per second .
filter fabric must be used in conjunction with any revetment in accordance with section num .
design and construct the connection between the revetment or concrete slab and the culvert footing to prevent the migration of soil through the connection .
ensure that the bottoms of spread footings are a minimum of num inches below the bottom of the channel lining .
num other elements of a precast culvert system .
extend reinforcing from precast sections to provide adequate splice lengths or utilize a mechanical rebar splicing system steel reinforcing only listed on the departments approved product list apl for securing reinforcing dowels for castinplace headwalls and wingwalls .
precast headwalls wingwalls and culvert footings are permitted .
precast culvert footings must span a minimum of three culvert units and provide shear connections between adjacent units with keyed joints or castinplace closure sections .
precast footings under wingwalls are not permitted .
submit all connection details for precast elements to the engineer for approval .
all mechanical connections must be galvanized in accordance with num or type num uns snum stainless steel except in extremely aggressive environments only type numl uns num stainless steel is permitted for welded connections and type num stainless steel for non welded shapes and fasteners .
unless otherwise addressed in the plans bedding material and compaction requirements for wingwalls and toe walls shall be the same as required for the footing in num except that the granular material may be placed to the inside edge of the toe wall .
all requirements of section num and section num apply to the fabrication of castinplace elements .. num fabrication .
num casting cast precast elements in unyielding beds and forms .
ensure bearing surfaces in casting forms are level and straight and vertical surfaces are plumb prior to casting .
ensure surfaces within the forms against which concrete will be cast are clean and free from rust and hardened residual concrete .
provide full concrete cover clearance to all form wires and other miscellaneous pieces of metal except as permitted by section num .
bend all tie wires away from the form surface to provide maximum concrete cover .
provide inserts and lifting devices in accordance with num .
num surface finish finish the precast elements in accordance with num .
num curing perform the curing by any method prescribed in sections num and num or by any other department approved alternative curing method included in the manufacturers qc plan or combinations thereof that have provided satisfactory results .
num fabrication tolerances num internal dimensions ensure the internal dimensions do not vary more than one percent or two inches whichever is less from the design dimensions with a maximum of num inches .
the haunch dimensions shall not vary more than num inches from the design dimensions .
num return to table of contents num slab and wall thickness ensure the slab and wall thicknesses are not less than that shown in the design plans or approved shop drawings by more than five percent or num inches whichever is greater .
a thickness more than that required in the design will not be a cause for rejection .
num length of opposite surfaces ensure the variations in laying lengths of two opposite surfaces of the culvert segments are not more than num inch except where beveled ends for laying curves or skewed ends are specified by the engineer .
num length of section ensure the underrun in length of segments is not more than num inch per foot of length with a maximum of num inch in any culvert segment .
the total underrun in length of the inplace precast culvert must not be less than num inches from the design length .
num tongue and groove joints or ends ensure the planes formed by the ends of precast culvert sections do not vary perpendicular from the joint axis by more than num inches for internal spans or heights less than num feet or more than num inches for internal spans or heights of num feet or greater .
num position of reinforcement meet the requirements of num for the maximum variation in the position of slab steel .
meet the requirements of num for the maximum variation of the wall steel except that the concrete cover must not be less than num inches nor more than num inches from the design dimensions .
num area of reinforcement provide the area of reinforcement as indicated in the plans or approved shop drawings as a minimum .
if welded wire reinforcement is utilized in lieu of mild steel reinforcement the provisions of num shall apply .
reinforcing steel areas greater than specified in the shop drawings will be acceptable when the reinforcing spacing is equal or less than specified in the shop drawings .
substitution of mild steel or welded wire reinforcement for fiber reinforced polymer frp reinforcing or vice versa is not permitted .
num removal of forms remove forms after the concrete has attained the minimum compressive strength requirements in the producer qc plan but not less than num psi .
products manufactured with drycast concrete are exempt from this requirement .
num lifting and removal from casting area handle all products including those manufactured by the drycast process upon the concrete attaining sufficient compressive strength as determined by the manufacturer and included as part of the producer qc plan but not less than num psi .
limit the flexural stresses from handling to three times the square root of the specified numday strength .
num joints .
produce precast units with keyways at the adjoining surfaces or with butt joints between adjacent units .
in the keyways use a nonshrink grout listed on the apl .
design and construct the adjoining surfaces so that when placed together they make a continuous line of units with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities within the permissible variations given in section num of astm cnum .
seal all joints between precast units with a bituminous seal or low modulus silicone sealant listed on the apl and provide an external sealing band in accordance with astm cnum along the outside of the joint .
determine the minimum width of sealing bands by substituting the larger of the clear rise or span of the precast concrete box section for the equivalent pipe diameter in astm cnum tables num and num .
install external sealing band wrap in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
cover the external sealing band with a strip of filter fabric adhered to the precast unit .
ensure that the filter fabric strip is a minimum of num return to table of contents num inches wide and meets the requirements of section num .
obtain the engineers approval of the adhesive used .
exercise care during backfilling to prevent damage to the filter fabric .
construct headwalls wingwalls and other special features in place or as detailed on the shop drawings .
leave sufficient steel exposed or utilize a mechanical rebar splicing system listed on the apl in end units for connection of headwalls wingwalls and other castinplace sections .
num handling storage and shipping .
handle store and ship precast culverts in a manner that prevents chipping cracks fractures and excessive bending stress .
do not ship precast culverts to the project site prior to the completion of the num hour curing period and attainment of the required numday compressive strength .
the manufacturer is permitted to verify the shipping strength test before num days by testing compressive strength cylinders that are cured under conditions similar to the product or by testing temperature match cured cylinders .
the manufacturer may use the maturity method astm cnum pulse velocity method in accordance with astm cnum or any other approved nondestructive test method to estimate the strength of concrete for determining form removal and handling strengths or before verification of shipping strength by test cylinders .
curing temperature and cycle must be monitored on a minimum of one precast culvert curing cell from each day of production when nondestructive test methods or temperature match cured cylinders are used to determine concrete strengths .
the shipping strength test is the average compressive strength of two test cylinders .
do not ship any products until the qc managers stamp is affixed to the product .
num repairs and rejection .
evaluate cracks spalls and other deficiencies in accordance with num except that cracks will be classified in accordance with num .
classify fractures and cracks passing through the wall or slab except for a single end crack that does not exceed the depth of the joint as structural cracks .
repair nonstructural cracks in accordance with num substructure requirements and all other deficiencies in accordance with num or the plants approved repair methods that are included as part of the producer qc plan .
ensure that the original performance and durability of the repaired precast culverts are maintained .
use materials for concrete repair that will meet or exceed the strength requirement of the class of concrete used .
materials meeting the requirements of section num may be substituted for nonshrink grout when required by num .
precast culvert elements are subject to rejection if they fail to conform to any of the specification requirements after repair or when damaged ends would prevent making a satisfactory joint .
num marking .
clearly mark indelibly the following information on the interior of each precast unit by indention water proof paint or other approved method as described in the producer qc plan three sided structure span rise maximum and minimum design earth cover skew angle date of manufacture serial number project number and name or trademark of manufacturer .
num construction requirements .
prior to constructing the footing prepare the bearing soil in accordance with section num for spread footings .
if a precast concrete footing is used prepare a num inch thick layer of compacted granular bedding material to a minimum width of num inches outside the footing width num return to table of contents and meet the density requirements of num .
provide bedding material in accordance with standard plans index num select material with not more than num fines passing the no .
num u.s. standard sieve or other granular material approved by the engineer .
accomplish all footing construction in dry or dewatered excavations as defined in num .
when coarse aggregate is approved for use as an alternate bedding or foundation backfill material fully wrap the coarse aggregate with a layer of type dnum geotextile filter fabric as specified in section num .
at each end of any concrete slab channel lining substitute the coarse aggregate with select material within four feet of toe walls .
form a num inches deep key in the top surface of the footing num inches wider than the wall thickness .
ensure that footings reach a compressive strength of num psi before placing precast units .
place the units as shown in the shop drawings .
carefully set the structure to the true line and grade .
set the units in a bed of mortar placed in the keyway in the top of the footing .
fill the keyway with mortar and float the mortar flush with the top of the footing or use shims between the footer and culvert during setting then inject nonshrink grout under the culvert walls .
seal blockouts and holes provided for lifting or joint restraint by using an epoxy mortar or nonshrink grout in accordance with sections num or num .
carefully place backfill against the filter fabric and joint seal to avoid damage to the material .
use mechanical tampers or approved compacting equipment to compact all backfill and embankment immediately adjacent to each side of the structure .
place the backfill within num feet of each side of the structure in lifts of num inches or less loose depth .
do not operate heavy compaction equipment within num feet of the structure .
ensure that the backfill elevation differential between both sides of the structure does not exceed num inches .
backfill behind wingwalls in accordance with section num .
carry backfill in front of wingwalls to ground lines shown in the plans .
num shop drawings .
submit details of all precast culvert elements and modifications to castinplace elements for approval to the engineer prior to manufacturing in accordance with num .
these shop drawings must include the proposed layout full reinforcing details lifting devices a note describing the casting method for the precast culverts and full details of any modifications to castinplace elements and any connections .
all details must be submitted as a complete package including modifications to castinplace elements .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity at the price bid for the sum of the items shown in the contract documents .
the length of precast culvert is measured along the centerline of the structure from the outside face of the headwalls at each end .
no increase in length will be permitted for multiple barrel precast culvert installations or extension of precast culverts ends to avoid skewed end conditions .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section necessary to complete the structure including dewatering excavation channel excavation channel lining backfilling footings headwalls wingwalls toe walls and other miscellaneous items .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num precast threesided culvert per foot .
num return to table of contents section num precast concrete box culvert num description .
provide precast foursided concrete box culverts as an alternative to the structure shown in the contract documents .
only monolithic segments or twopiece segments with threesided bottom sections and a simple support top slab section are permitted .
twopiece segments are limited to installations with a minimum of two feet fill height above the top slab .
construct headwalls wingwalls and other special features using castinplace concrete .
precast wingwalls cutoff walls or headwalls are not permitted unless otherwise noted in the contract documents .
meet the requirements in num .
num materials .
ensure that the materials used for the construction of precast box culverts have certification statements from each source showing that they meet the applicable requirements of the following portland cement concrete section num reinforcing for concrete section num precast concrete drainage products section num wire for site cage machines section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregate section num curing materials for concrete section num materials for concrete repair section num nonshrink grout section num liner repair systems section num joint materials astm cnum astm cnum or astm cnum geotextile fabrics section num the gradation requirements of aggregates are not applicable when using drycast concrete .
use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num materials acceptance and testing of precast box culverts .
num general meet the requirements of section num except as modified herein prepare cure and test the test cylinders in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum test methods .
follow the alternative method of compaction in accordance with astm cnum if the consistency of concrete is too stiff for compaction by rodding or internal vibrations .
expose shipping strength test cylinders to the same curing conditions as the precast concrete box sections .
perform all concrete quality control testing and inspections in accordance with num .
for training and other qualifications meet the requirements of section num .
test all qc samples for compressive strength in a laboratory meeting the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents num quality assurance inspection and testing the engineer will perform periodic inspections sampling and testing to ensure of the quality and acceptability of the materials methods techniques procedures and processes being utilized by the manufacturing facility in the fabrication of precast concrete box culverts .
num special requirements for drycast concrete drycast concrete is defined as a very low slump concrete that requires continuous and intense vibration to compact the concrete enabling immediate removal of the side forms without detrimental effects to the concrete when used in a drycast manufacturing process .
the target slump and air content ranges of section num table num and the plastic property tolerances of section num table num are not applicable to drycast concrete .
perform absorption tests on specimens from each lot of drycast production in accordance with the test methods in astm cnum .
the absorption of each specimen must not exceed num percent of the dry mass for test method a procedure or num percent for test method b procedure .
all specimens must be free of visible cracks and must represent the full thickness of the product .
test specimens after num days of standard curing or prior to the date of shipping if the precast box sections are to be shipped before the completion of the num day curing period .
core three specimens for test method b in accordance with astm cnum and meet the sampling location and size requirements of astm cnum .
prepare or core a minimum of one specimen for test method a in accordance with the test cylinder requirements of astm cnum .
when the initial absorption specimen from a concrete box section fails to conform to this specification the absorption test may be made on another specimen from the same box section and the results of the retest may be substituted for the original test results for acceptance of the lot .
the manufacturer may test each box section within a lot and cull the box sections not meeting absorption requirements marking them as deficient with waterproof paint or other approved means .
deficient box sections must not be shipped to the project site .
reduce the frequency of absorption tests to one test every five lots when the results of five consecutive lots meet the specified limit .
num design of precast concrete box sections .
num general in lieu of a castinplace concrete box section or if specified in the contract documents provide precast box culverts in accordance with standard plans index num num and the following segment lengths must be between num feet and num feet .
shortside wall lengths for end segments of skewed culverts may be less than num feet when approved by the engineer .
provide tongue and groove joints at the ends of segments .
for twopiece box culvert segments provide keyed joints for the top slabtowall connection to prevent lateral displacement at the top of the walls and doublesided tongue and groove joints in the bottom slab to minimize differential settlement between segments .
alternate methods to prevent differential settlement may be used when included in the contract documents or approved by the engineer .
concrete cover at the joints may be reduced from the nominal cover shown in the contract documents in accordance with the standard plans but not less than num inch clear to the ends or inside mating surfaces of the joints or num inches clear to the outside surface of the joint for slightly and moderately aggressive environments or num inches clear to the outside surface for extremely aggressive environments .
num return to table of contents meet one of the following design options num equivalent to castinplace designs provide precast box segments identical to the plan details including reinforcing steel grade or frp reinforcing type sizes and spacings concrete cover concrete class and slab and wall dimensions .
reinforcing bar sizes and spacings may be reduced provided the equivalent area of reinforcing is provided in each layer .
haunch dimensions may be increased with the approval of the engineer but not greater than num inches for box culverts with internal spans less than num feet or num inches for box culverts with larger internal spans .
num standard precast designs provide precast box segments in accordance with standard plans index num with the same hydraulic opening fill height and reinforcing bar cover as shown in the plans for the most critical design loading combination .
perform a bridge load rating in accordance with the structures design guidelines for any multiple barrel culverts with a total span equal to or greater than num feet when measured between the inside face of end supports along the centerline of the roadway crossing .
num modified or special designs submit modified designs which differ from the standard precast designs in num with modifications to the wall and slab thickness haunch dimensions or the use of frp reinforcing .
submit special designs for sizes elements and loads other than those referenced in num .
redesign box culverts using the same aashto design specification live load hydraulic opening fill height minimum concrete class and concrete cover as shown in the contract documents .
special designs will be required for all twopiece concrete box culvert segments .
provide a minimum member thickness not less than num of the thickness of the corresponding member of an equivalent standard plans index num num box culvert but not less than num inches for culverts with num inch concrete cover or num inches for num inch concrete cover .
perform a bridge load rating in accordance with the structures design guidelines for any redesign with a total span equal to or greater than num feet when measure between the inside face of end supports along the centerline of the roadway crossing .
num design submittals submit shop drawings for all design options in accordance with num .
submit design calculations revised plans and load rating when required for approval in accordance with section num for modified or special designs .
ensure that a specialty engineer performs the design for modified designs of the box culvert and signs and seals the calculations .
ensure that the contractors engineer of record performs any bridge load rating and the design for any special designs and signs and seals the revised plans calculations and load rating .
num other elements of a precast box culvert system .
extend reinforcing from precast sections to provide adequate splice lengths or utilize a mechanical rebar splicing system steel reinforcing only listed on the departments approved product list apl for securing reinforcing dowels for headwalls toe walls and wingwalls .
cast all elements of the headwalls and wingwalls footing and stem inplace unless otherwise noted in the contract documents .
cast all cutoff or toe walls for precast box end segments inplace only .
extend the depth of cutoff or toe walls an additional num inches with the limits of the bedding material .
bedding material and compaction requirements for wingwalls are the same as required for precast box sections except that the granular material may be placed to num return to table of contents the inside edge of the toe wall unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
bedding material is not required for castinplace wingwall footings .
all requirements of section num and section num apply to the fabrication of these elements .
backfill the locations behind the walls in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num fabrication .
num casting cast precast elements in unyielding beds and forms .
ensure bearing surfaces in casting forms are level and straight and vertical surfaces are plumb prior to casting .
ensure surfaces within the forms against which concrete will be cast are clean and free from rust and hardened residual concrete .
provide full concrete cover clearance to all form wires and other miscellaneous pieces of metal except as permitted by section num .
bend all tie wires away from the form surface to provide maximum concrete cover .
provide inserts and lifting devices in accordance with num .
num surface finish finish the precast elements in accordance with num .
num curing perform the curing by any method prescribed in sections num and num or by any other department approved alternate curing method included in the approved producer qc plan or combinations thereof that have provided satisfactory results .
num fabrication tolerances num internal dimensions ensure the internal dimensions do not vary more than num from the design dimensions with a maximum of num inch .
ensure the haunch dimensions do not vary more than num inch from the design dimensions .
num slab and wall thickness ensure the slab and wall thickness are not be less than that shown in the plans or approved shop drawings by more than num percent or num inch whichever is greater .
a thickness more than that required in the design will not be a cause for rejection although payment will be for plan quantity only .
num length of opposite surfaces ensure the variations in laying lengths of two opposite surfaces of the box section are not more than num inch per foot of clear span with a maximum of num inches for precast boxes with a clear span of up to num feet and a maximum of num inches for boxes with a clear span greater than num feet .
the exception to this is when beveled ends for the purpose of laying curves or skewed ends are specified by the engineer .
num length of section ensure the under run in length of sections is not more than num inch per foot of length with a maximum of num inches in any box section .
num tongue and groove joints or ends ensure the planes formed by the ends of box sections do not vary perpendicular from the joint axis by more than the following num .
profiled rubber gasket joints astm cnum num inch per foot of internal span with a maximum num inches for internal spans or heights less than or equal to num feet and a maximum of num inches for internal spans greater than num feet .
num .
preformed flexible joints astm cnum num inches for internal spans or heights less than num feet or more than num inches for internal spans or heights of num feet or greater .
num position of reinforcement meet the requirements of num for the maximum variation in the position of slab reinforcing .
meet the requirements of num for the maximum variation of wall reinforcing except that the concrete cover must not be less than num inches nor more than num inches from the design dimensions .
num return to table of contents num area of reinforcement provide the area of reinforcement as indicated in the plans or approved shop drawings as a minimum .
if welded wire reinforcement is utilized in lieu of mild steel reinforcement the provisions of num apply .
num removal of forms remove forms after the concrete has attained the minimum compressive strength requirements included as part of the producer qc plan but not less than the following vertically cast walls and slabs for foursided sections num psi threesided box culvert bottom section num psi horizontally cast selfsupporting slabs or walls num psi products manufactured with drycast concrete are exempt from these requirements .
num lifting and removal from casting area handle all products including those manufactured with drycast concrete after the concrete attains sufficient compressive strength as determined by the manufacturer but not less than the following unless otherwise approved in the producer qc plan vertically cast and stored elements walls and slabs num psi formpallet supported elements walls or slabs num psi selfsupporting foursided sections num psi selfsupporting horizontal slabs or threesided sections num psi limit the flexural tension stresses from handling to a maximum allowable stress of three times the square root of the concrete compressive strength in psi prior to the concrete attaining the required numday strength .
num handling storage and shipping .
handle store and ship precast box culverts in a manner that prevents chipping cracks fractures and excessive bending stress .
do not ship precast box culverts before the concrete attains the required numday strength .
the manufacturer is permitted to verify the shipping strength test before num days by testing compressive strength cylinders that are cured under the conditions similar to the product or by testing temperature match cured cylinders .
the manufacturer may use the maturity method astm cnum pulse velocity method in accordance with astm cnum or any other approved nondestructive test method to estimate the strength of concrete for determining form removal and handling strengths or before verification of shipping strength by test cylinders .
curing temperature and cycle must be monitored on a minimum of one box culvert curing cell from each day of production when nondestructive test methods or temperature match cured cylinders are used to determine concrete strengths .
the shipping strength test is the average compressive strength of two test cylinders .
do not ship any products until the qc managers stamp is affixed to the product .
num return to table of contents num repairs and rejection .
evaluate cracks spalls and other deficiencies in accordance with num .
classify fractures and cracks passing through the wall or slab except for a single end crack with a length that does not exceed the depth of the joint as major cracks .
walls and slab areas outside the middle half of the internal span will be considered noncritical locations for the purpose of evaluating cracks .
repair cracks and all other deficiencies in accordance with num or the plants approved repair methods that are included as part of the producer qc plan .
ensure that the original performance and durability of the repaired box culverts are maintained .
use materials for concrete repair that will meet or exceed the strength requirement of the class of concrete used .
materials meeting the requirements of section num may be substituted for nonshrink grout when required by num .
precast box culvert elements are subject to rejection if they fail to conform to any of the specification requirements after repair or when damaged ends would prevent making a satisfactory joint .
num marking .
ensure each section of precast box culvert has permanently and clear marking on an inside face by indentation waterproof paint or as specified in the producer qc plan showing the manufacture date serial number project number and manufacturers name or symbol .
the top of the box culvert must also be clearly indicated with waterproof paint or as specified in the producer qc plan .
num trench foundation laying and backfill .
num general meet the requirements of section num andor section num for trench excavation foundation construction laying and backfilling and the following lay all precast box culvert sections on a dry slightly yielding foundation to ensure uniform bearing across the full width of the bottom slab .
provide dewatering devices if applicable in accordance with num capable of maintaining a stable and surfacedry trench bottom .
construct any temporary sheet piling used in cofferdams retaining walls and to incorporate the contractors specific means and methods in accordance with num .
num bedding provide bedding that consists of a minimum num inch depth of select material with not more than num fines passing the no .
num u.s. standard sieve in accordance with standard plans index num or other granular material approved by the engineer .
place bedding in maximum num inch compacted layers below the culvert to a minimum width of num inches outside the exterior walls of the culvert and meet the density requirements of num .
when coarse aggregate is approved for use as an alternate bedding material wrap the bottom and sides of the coarse aggregate with a layer of type dnum geotextile filter fabric as specified in section num and substituted the coarse aggregate with select material within num feet of the cutoff or toe walls at each end of the precast box culvert .
obtain the engineers approval before using flowable fill for bedding material .
provide other special bedding material when required by the contract documents .
set grade forms num inches outside each exterior wall of the box culvert .
uniformly compact this material and then grade off using the forms .
set the grade forms approximately num inches to num inches above the theoretical grade line to allow for soil compression .
adjust this distance to yield the proper grade but do not use in lieu of the proper compaction of the granular bedding material .
remove the forms after placing the precast box culvert section .
num return to table of contents num placement of precast box culvert sections obtain the engineers approval of the method of controlling line and grade during culvert installation .
use a method that allows rapid checking of the previously laid sections .
maintain line and grade on sections previously set .
the engineer will consider sections which do not retain the plan line within num foot or grade within num foot during laying of subsequent sections as not having been laid to line and grade .
take up and relay sections not to line and grade without additional compensation .
num placement of multiple barrel culverts for multiple barrel installations using singlecell precast box sections provide positive lateral support between the precast box culverts consisting of nonshrink grout concrete meeting the requirements of section num or nonexcavatable flowable fill prior to backfilling .
provide partial height backfill or bracing to maintain alignment when approved by the engineer .
num backfilling begin backfilling only after the engineers approval .
seal blockouts and holes provided for lifting or joint restraint by plugging using an epoxy mortar or nonshrink grout in accordance with sections num or num and properly cure to ensure a sound and watertight plug prior to backfilling .
num underdrain and weep holes provide a continuous underdrain in accordance with standard plans index num .
num joints .
num general make field joints for precast concrete box culvert sections with either profile rubber gaskets or preformed joint sealants unless otherwise detailed in the plans or approved shop drawings .
joint openings at the outside face must not exceed num inches in the assembled position at any location along the joint perimeter .
ensure a minimum num overlap of the joint tongue and groove around the entire perimeter of the box in the assembled position .
completely wrap the outside of each joint with type dnumgeotextile filter fabric as specified in section num .
provide fabric with a minimum width of num feet and a length sufficient to ensure a minimum overlap of num inches .
the filter fabric must extend a minimum of num inches beyond each side of the joint .
secure the fabric tightly against the box culvert sections with metal or plastic strapping .
other methods which will hold the fabric securely against the wall of the culvert until the backfill is placed and compacted may be used when approved by the engineer .
when specified in the plans secure the joint by a suitable device capable of holding the sections to line and grade as well as fully home .
remove these devices and repair locations as necessary if intrusive into the concrete after placing and compacting sufficient backfill to secure the sections .
num profile rubber gaskets install field joints in accordance with the joint manufacturers instructions and meet the following num .
meet the requirements of astm cnum num .
store all gaskets in a cool place prior to use num .
submit to the engineer written details regarding configuration of the joint and gasket required to create a soiltight seal .
do not apply mortar joint compound or other filler which would restrict the flexibility of the joint .
num preformed flexible joint sealants install field joints in accordance with the joint manufacturers instructions and meet the following num .
meet the requirements of astm cnum num .
submit to the engineer a written recommendation of the size crosssectional area of joint sealant which will create a soiltight seal .
ensure that this amount is the minimum num return to table of contents quantity of bitumen sealant used .
do not brush or wipe joint surfaces which are to be in contact with the joint sealant with cement slurry .
fill minor voids with nonshrink grout num .
thoroughly clean and dry all joint surfaces which are to be in contact with the sealant material .
when recommended by the sealant manufacturer apply a primer of the type recommended to all joint surfaces which are to be in contact with the sealant material .
num .
apply sealant to form a continuous seal around each joint .
the sealant must be protected by a removable wrapper .
do not remove the paper wrapper on the exterior surface of the preformed flexible joint sealant until immediately prior to joining the precast sections .
apply the joint sealant only to dry surfaces .
when the atmospheric temperature is below numf either store the joint sealant in an area above numf or artificially warm the joint sealant to numf in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
after assembly ensure that there is full contact and compression of the sealant for the entire perimeter of the joint as evidenced by the presence of minor bulging along any visible edges of the sealant .
neatly trim any extruded sealant flush with the concrete surface .
num watertight joint treatment provide watertight joints when shown in the contract documents .
utilize an external sealing band in accordance with astm cnum in addition to the requirements of num or num .
determine the minimum width of sealing bands by substituting the larger of the clear rise or span of the precast concrete box section for the equivalent pipe diameter in astm cnum tables num and num .
install external sealing band wrap in accordance with the manufacturers instructions prior to wrapping the joint with geotextile filter fabric .
num shop drawings .
submit details of all precast box culvert elements for approval to the engineer prior to manufacturing in accordance with num .
these shop drawings must include the proposed layout lifting devices and a note describing the casting method for the precast box culverts and details of any modifications to castinplace sections or connections thereto .
all details must be submitted as a complete package including modifications to castinplace sections .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity for the structure shown in the contract documents in accordance with num and num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including the cost of special bedding material and its placement additional cutoff or toe wall depth temporary sheet piling graded forms joint materials filter fabric material attachment of the filter fabric dewatering excavation channel excavation and lining backfilling restraining devices and any other materials or equipment necessary to make a complete and accepted installation .
payment will be made under pay items for concrete culverts reinforcing steel roadway and frp reinforcing .
num return to table of contents section num epoxy injection of cracks in concrete structures num description .
inject epoxy into cracks in portland cement concrete .
num materials .
meet the requirements of section num and as follows use type e compound epoxy for injection .
use type fnum compound epoxy for sealing crack surfaces in preparation for injection .
use epoxy materials listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num equipment .
for the equipment used to inject the epoxy meet the recommendations of the epoxy injection material manufacturer and the following requirements num .
use equipment that has the capacity to automatically proportion the material components within the mix ratio tolerances set by the epoxy materials manufacturer .
num .
use equipment that has the capacity to automatically mix the epoxy component materials within the pump and injection apparatus .
the engineer will not allow batch mixing .
num .
use equipment that has the capacity to inject the epoxy resin under controlled variable pressures up to num psi with a pressure gauge mounted at or near the nozzle to indicate the actual working pressure .
num injection personnel qualifications .
employ personnel trained in performing injection work similar to that required for the project to carry out the epoxy injection of cracks in concrete .
provide an onsite supervisor for the epoxy injection work who is qualified by one of the following methods num .
certified by the manufacturer of the epoxy injection material as having the necessary competence to accomplish the epoxy injection work in a satisfactory and safe manner in compliance with these specifications .
num .
they can furnish documented evidence that they have a minimum of three years experience of onsite supervision of similar epoxy injection work and a list of five contracts in which similar epoxy injection was acceptably completed .
ensure that the listed experience in on site supervision and completed contracts contains the project name and location names of contracting parties the owners name brief description of the work and dates of completion of the epoxy injection work .
submit written evidence showing personnel training and the onsite supervisors qualification to the department prior to beginning any epoxy injection work .
num crack surface preparation and cleaning requirements .
clean the area surrounding the cracks of all deteriorated concrete efflorescence and other contaminants detrimental to the adhesion of the surface sealing epoxy compound .
clean the interiors of the cracks with air under sufficient pressure to remove loose materials entrapped within the crack including efflorescence .
num return to table of contents num sealing cracks for epoxy injection .
after cleaning drill injection port holes using a swivel drill chuck and hollow drill bits including a vacuum attachment which will remove dust and debris generated during drilling .
determine the spacing of the injection port holes by the size of the crack and the depth of the crack in the concrete substrate .
generally space the injection ports from num to num inches apart .
determine the actual spacing of injection ports by field trials .
drill the holes to a minimum depth of num inch exercising care in aligning the hole along the plane of the crack so that the hole follows the crack for the full num inch depth .
insert the injection ports in the drilled holes approximately num inch allowing for a small reservoir below the injection port .
after cleaning the cracks and drilling the injection port holes seal the crack surface and the injection ports with suitable epoxy .
num epoxy injection .
inject the epoxy in accordance with the epoxy manufacturers instructions .
determine the actual injection procedures and pressures in field trials based on crack widths and depth into the substrate and sufficiency of the results .
num cleaning after epoxy injection .
clean concrete surface areas of excess epoxy materials and injection ports after completing the epoxy injection work .
clean in a manner which will not damage the concrete by scraping light sand blasting grinding use of solvents or any other appropriate method approved by the engineer .
clean excess materials so that no epoxy material or injection ports extend beyond the plane surface of the concrete .
num acceptance .
drill three cores located in each days work as directed by the engineer .
take drilled core samples containing representative crack sizes .
the engineer will accept the epoxy injection work represented by the core samples when the core samples indicate that num of the crack void greater than num inch wide is filled with epoxy resin and the concrete of the core sample is bonded through the crack into a unit .
reinject epoxy injection work which does not satisfy the acceptance criteria and correct it as necessary at no expense to the department .
install additional injection ports as required to achieve satisfactory reinjection of epoxy resin .
after the epoxy injection work is completed and accepted fill the core holes with an epoxy mortar consisting of one part by volume epoxy injection resin and four parts by volume clean dry sand .
supply the sand in moisture proof bags .
do not use previously opened bags of sand for making epoxy mortar .
the contractor may use one part by volume epoxy material for sealing with one part by volume clean dry sand in lieu of the above .
num method of measurement .
num epoxy material the quantity to be paid will be the volume in gallons authorized injected and accepted .
num inject and seal crack the quantity to be paid will be the length in feet authorized and accepted measured along the approximate centerline of the sealed crack .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
num epoxy material price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing the epoxy material and miscellaneous related costs storage handling etc .
num inject and seal crack price and payment will constitute full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment incidentals and materials except epoxy for cleaning and sealing the crack and all labor and equipment for injecting the crack .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num epoxy material per gallon .
item no .
num num inject and seal crack per foot .
num return to table of contents section num sealing cracks and concrete structure surfaces num description .
seal concrete surfaces and cracks in concrete using materials surface preparation and application of penetrant sealers and high molecular weight methacrylates hmwm as specified in this section and in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations .
consult with the fdot state materials office smo in the event of conflict between the manufacturers recommendations and this specification .
perform surface preparation and application to all areas as shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num penetrant sealers .
num materials use alkylalkoxysilane penetrant sealers with num percent solids and active materials dispersed in water that meet the following table num physical properties of penetrant sealers appearance white or light gray color or fugitive dye voc content epa method num less than num gl flash point astm num greater than numf seta resistance to chloride ion penetration aashto tnum and tnum less than num poundsydnumcriteria of num at num inch level num poundsydnum criteria of num at num inch level water absorption test astm c num num maximumnum hours num maximumnum days nchrp num series ii cube test water weight gain num reduction minimum absorbed chloride num reduction minimum series iv southern climate absorbed chloride num reduction minimum scaling resistance astm c num non air entrained concrete num rating no scaling num cycles num surface preparation for penetrant sealer num general prepare concrete surfaces to receive a penetrant sealer in accordance with these specifications dependent on whether the surfaces are of recently cast concrete new construction or of existing concrete .
num surface preparation for new construction remove substances such as dust grime dirt curing compounds form oil debris etc .
by water blasting light sandblasting wire brushing or other methods acceptable to the engineer all in accordance with the penetrant sealer manufacturers recommendations .
when using cleaning methods other than water blasting wash the cleaned surfaces with water meeting the requirements of section num as a final cleaning operation .
num surface preparation for existing concrete remove substances such as dust grime dirt stains mineral deposits oil bituminous materials debris and all other num return to table of contents deleterious material by using water blasting equipment of sufficient operating capacity and pressure all in accordance with the penetrant sealer manufacturers recommendations .
num cleaning equipment use approved water blasting equipment to clean existing concrete surfaces .
use water blasting equipment which is specifically manufactured to clean concrete surfaces .
use equipment that has a minimum rated nozzle capacity of num psi using the spray head proposed for use in the work .
num water for blasting use water meeting the requirements of section num .
num concrete surface cleaning operation exercise sufficient care during the cleaning operation to minimize the removal of the concrete matrix .
furnish hand tools power grinders and other similar equipment to remove materials which can not be removed by water blasting without abrading the concrete matrix beyond acceptable limits .
wash concrete surfaces cleaned by methods other than water blasting with water blasting equipment as the final cleaning operation .
limit the duration of water blasting to provide a light abraded surface .
do not allow surface abrasion to exceed num inch .
the engineer will not require further cleaning of stains still apparent after abrading to a depth of num inch .
avoid exposure of coarse aggregate by water blasting .
reclean concrete surfaces which become contaminated before applying the penetrant sealer at no expense to the department prior to applying the penetrant sealer .
num application of penetrant sealer materials apply the penetrant sealer only to surfaces which have been prepared in accordance with these specifications and approved by the engineer .
for application of the penetrant sealer meet these specifications and the penetrant sealer manufacturers recommendations .
prior to application of any penetrant sealer cure concrete for a minimum of num days .
apply penetrant sealer no later than ten days after completion of the surface preparation and prior to any contamination of the prepared surfaces as determined by the engineer .
num application equipment apply the penetrant sealer using any suitable air or airless sprayer with an operating pressure of approximately num psi .
num application limitations apply the penetrant sealer material only when the ambient air temperature is between num and numf .
apply the penetrant sealer only to concrete surfaces which have dried a minimum of num hours after water from any source last contacted the concrete surfaces .
do not apply the penetrant sealer when winds are blowing num mph or more during rainfall or when water spray or mist is present .
num application apply the penetrant sealer only to concrete surfaces that have been prepared in accordance with the requirements and limitations set forth in these specifications .
determine the actual coverage rate in square feet per gallon on the basis of field trials .
conduct a field trial to determine coverage rate at the beginning of any penetrant sealer application operation .
conduct additional confirmation field trials at a frequency of once for every num ftnum applied each production day of application or when the character of the work changes whichever is sooner .
for each field trial determine the optimum coverage rate for num ftnum of surface area .
maintain the penetrant sealer application rate between num and num ftnum covered per gallon of penetrant sealer used .
apply the penetrant sealer in a uniform manner num return to table of contents without puddling and skips .
redistribute any penetrant sealer which is applied and subsequently puddles in low areas over the concrete surfaces by use of a squeegee .
begin the application of the penetrant at the lowest elevation and proceed upward toward higher elevations unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
maintain operating pressures in the sprayers used for application of the penetrant sealer material sufficiently low so that atomization or misting of the material does not occur .
saturate cracks to refusal when used as crack sealer per num .
num control of materials num packaging and identification deliver the penetrant sealer to the project in unopened sealed containers with the manufacturers label identifying the product and with numbered seals intact .
ensure that each container is clearly marked by the manufacturer with the following information num .
manufacturers name and address .
num .
product name .
num .
date of manufacture .
num .
expiration date .
num .
lot identification number .
num .
container serial number .
num manufacturers certification submit to the engineer a certification conforming to the requirements of section num from the manufacturer confirming that the penetrant sealer meets the requirements of this section .
do not incorporate these materials into the project until the engineer has accepted and approved the certification for the material .
submit such certification for each lot of material delivered to the project .
in each certification identify the serial or lot numbers of the containers certified .
num materials sampling for tests the engineer may require samples from each lot or container of materials delivered to the project or from containers at the point of use .
when samples are required furnish samples in accordance with the engineers instructions .
num storage of materials store materials delivered to the job site in original unopened containers within an appropriate storage facility .
use a storage facility that provides protection from the elements and safe and secure storage of the materials .
num unused material in opened containers do not return unused material in opened containers to storage for later use .
either apply such material to appropriate areas on concrete surfaces or remove and dispose of it at offsite locations provided by the contractor .
num acceptance the engineer will accept penetrant sealer application when it is determined that the contractor has properly cleaned all surface areas to be sealed and has applied the penetrant sealer within the required rates of application .
num high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm .
num general perform the surface preparation and application of a high molecular weight methacrylate to seal cracks on horizontal and slightly sloped concrete surfaces as approved by the engineer .
applications on bridge decks and other riding surfaces will require the addition of sand over the treated areas to increase the surface friction number fn measured as described by aashto tnum .
the rate of application ftnum of concrete per gallon and the application method and equipment to achieve a minimum average penetration of num inch must be approved by the smo prior to commencement of work based on the size depth and the internal condition of cracks .
num return to table of contents submit a written sealer application plan based on the above described crack characteristics for approval by the smo .
in addition provide a minimum of num days advanced notice so that personnel from the smo may be present at the beginning of work to evaluate the cracks and submit final approval of the application rate if such is requested by the engineer .
make arrangements with the material manufacturer to provide an onsite technical representative with a minimum of ten previous projects with experience in the application and formulation of the methacrylates for the initial application and certify that the mixing ratio application methods and sand broadcasting are correct and in accordance with their recommendations .
the representative shall then visit the site to provide quality assurance observations every two weeks for applications lasting longer than two weeks .
maintain a daily log of used resin material to be verified by the engineer .
include the drum or container identification number in the log as well as the date and location of use .
retain the containers at the jobsite until the engineer verifies its use and authorizes removal from the site .
num materials use a methacrylate system that has a three component formulation consisting of methacrylate monomer cumene hydroperoxide chp initiator and cobalt promoter .
use a hmwm monomer that is approved by the department and included on the departments approved product list apl .
use initiator and promoter approved by the monomer manufacturer .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products must submit an application conforming to the requirements of section num along with the following documentation num .
manufacturers material installation instructions showing the product can be installed in accordance with this section .
num .
independent laboratory test data and results showing the product has been tested in accordance with the requirements of this section and meets the requirements .
num .
qualification of their onsite representatives .
num properties use a methacrylate material that meets the following physical and performance requirements table num physical properties of methacrylate resin viscosity brookfield rvt num cps at num rpm density astm dnum num num lbgl at numo f flash point astm dnum numof pensky martens cc odor low bulk cure speed num hours numof max .
surface cure num hours numof max .
gel time astm num num minutes max .
tack free time num hours max .
at numof and num relative humidity compressive strength aashto tnum num psi min tensile strength astm cnum num psi min shear bond adhesion astm cnum num psi min elongation astm dnum num to num wax content num do not use methacrylate with elongation less than num for concrete decks supported by steel girders .
num return to table of contents the monomer shall have a shelf life of no less than num months and shall be no more than num months old at the time of application .
provide each container shipped to the job site with the following information on a manufacturers label manufacturers name product name lot or batch number date of production and drum serial number .
identify the catalysts by their generic classification and provide the date of manufacture .
num sand use uniformly graded num or similar clean bagged blast sand for spreading over the applied polymer on bridge decks and other riding surfaces .
certify that the sand has a maximum moisture content that does not exceed num and that the maximum amount of dust or other material that may pass through a no .
num sieve num content is not greater than num .
store the sand at a location that will preserve the above described conditions and characteristics of the sand until applied .
num identifier use methacrylates with a fluorescent dye when applying methacrylate over previously sealed cracks .
the fluorescent dye shall be part of the manufacturer formulation and be clearly fluorescent under a uv light source provided by the contractor .
num surface preparation num cleaning on the day of application thoroughly power sweep the area to be treated to remove all dust dirt or debris present .
on bridge decks and other riding surfaces use a tractor mounted or similar power broom with nonmetallic bristles suitable for the intended purpose .
use a power vacuum after sweeping when sealing cracks on grooved bridge decks .
reclean the deck as necessary immediately prior to the application as debris may be blown back onto the work area by adjacent traffic or other means .
if present remove oils and oil based substances from the concrete surface using an approved solvent .
num containment provide adequate containment to prevent the sealer material from flowing beyond the designated area of application .
plug any drain holes or openings within the work area .
prevent airborne material from dispersing onto open traffic lanes or outside the work area .
num raised pavement markers rpms protect by masking or clean after application all existing rpms affected by the application of the methacrylate .
alternatively remove and replace such rpms as indicated in the contract documents .
num application num equipment apply the methacrylate material according to the manufacturers specifications using mobile equipment capable of distributing material on large areas of decks and riding surfaces .
apply the material by hand using adequate containers for isolated or localized applications .
num mixing mix the methylmethacrylate material following the manufacturers specified mixing proportions for the catalysts .
perform the initial mixing by equally dividing the resin to be used into two separate containers .
in all instances mix the initiator chp at the hmwm manufacturers specified volume with num of the monomer resin in one container and the cobalt promoter at the hmwm manufacturers specified volume with the other num in the second container .
after properly blending combine the two resins and mix as per manufacturers instructions .
for spray bar application mix the activatorresin blend and the promoterresin blend through a static mixer in the feed line located ahead of the material num return to table of contents distribution bars where polymerization would start .
calibrate the valves to the static mixer to ensure a one to one mixing ratio of the two blends .
num polymer application mobile distribution distribute the monomer uniformly over the work area using a pressure nozzle or spray head distribution bar system .
provide feed to the distribution bars using positive displacement pumps moving equal amounts of the two monomer blends from two calibrated drums .
calibrate the equipment to mix the two monomer blends to the recommended ratio by volume within plus or minus num .
the discharge volume shall be calibrated to the moving speed to provide a discharge rate capability ranging from num to num square feet per gallon at a pressure ranging from num to num psi .
the typical application rate of the material is approximately num square feet per gallon .
prior to application of the monomer the smo will approve the final production application rate based on the internal characteristics of the cracks as determined from contractor supplied cores that the engineer approves as being representative of the overall cracking conditions .
num polymer application localized distribution distribute the material by hand over the work area using pails or other suitable containers adequate for the size of the area .
this only applies to localized small areas or areas where the use of mobile distribution equipment would be considered impractical as approved by the engineer .
do not reuse containers or mixing paddles fully or partially contaminated with polymerized methacrylate .
num sealing of cracks regardless of the method used to apply the material over the concrete surface work the material back and forth over the cracks to maximize the amount of material to be absorbed by the cracks .
move the material over the cracks using brooms squeegees or paint brushes as appropriate based on the size of the area .
commence this operation immediately after distributing the material on the concrete surface .
continue this operation until no additional material is flowing inside the cracks or the material begins to exhibit signs of polymerization .
do not distribute material over areas larger than what the available personnel can effectively work over the cracks within the limits of the pot life .
num sand distribution apply sand over the monomer treated area within a timely period following the application of the polymer based on the manufacturers recommendations for the existing conditions .
use equipment that will produce a uniform distribution of the sand over the treated area .
if wheel mounted use a sand spreader that has pneumatic tires compatible with the treatment material such that no tire footprints are left on the deck surface .
use an initial application rate of num plus or minus num pounds of sand per square yard of treated area and adjust the rate as necessary to produce a friction number fn of no less than fnnumr greater than or equal to num at num days .
coordinate with the engineer to conduct a preliminary onsite friction test to determine the actual sand application rate prior to the beginning of production application .
if friction numbers below those specified are obtained completely remove all loose sand from the surface and reapply the polymer at a rate of num square feet per gallon and spread additional sand as necessary to achieve the specified friction numbers .
remove the surface material by grinding shot blasting or other approved method if satisfactory friction values are not achieved .
friction tests will be conducted by the state materials office .
num return to table of contents num opening riding surfaces to traffic protect the sand covered area from vehicular traffic until the polymer has fully cured .
after curing power vacuum to remove excess sand from the riding surface before opening to traffic .
num acceptance tests verify penetration of the methacrylate into the cracks by extracting a num inch diameter core num inch deep for every num square feet or less if application is less than num square feet of sealed concrete .
use caution to prevent cutting the reinforcing steel .
frequency of verification may be reduced by the smo with the concurrence of the engineer .
test curing on the treated area using a cotton strand or cotton ball .
consider the material fully cured and ready for traffic when polymer does not adhere to the cotton ball when pressed against the treated surface and then pulled away .
obtain approval from the engineer prior to reopening area to traffic .
num limitations apply the material only under weather conditions recommended by the manufacturer and when no rainfall has occurred during the previous num hours and no rain is expected for the next num hours following completion of the application .
num method of measurement .
prestressed precast items designated in the plans to be sealed with penetrant sealer will not be measured for separate payment .
the contractor shall include the cost of cleaning sealing and applying penetrant sealer with the cost of the prestressed precast items .
for castinplace surfaces to be sealed with penetrant sealer the quantities to be paid for will be the volume in gallons of penetrant sealer as determined by use of the field measured area satisfactorily sealed divided by the approved application rate based on field trials and the area in square feet of cleaning and sealing concrete surfaces as determined by field measurement completed and accepted .
quantities of high molecular weight methacrylate to be paid will be based on the volume in gallons of monomer resin material not including the promoter initiator and fluorescent dye actually used to seal the cracked surfaces at the approved application rate and the dimensions of the treated areas in square feet .
the area of application will be computed based on the plan dimensions of concrete surface sealed with methacrylate .
for localized application the engineer will determine the method of measurement that most accurately reflects the area of application in square feet .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including cleaning furnishing and applying the material required to satisfactorily clean and seal cracks and designated surface areas testing and miscellaneous related costs including storage handling etc .
no additional compensation will be made for material reapplication or removal due to contractor error or to correct deficient friction values .
payment will be made under item no .
num penetrant sealer per gallon item no .
num methacrylate monomer per gallon item no .
num cleaning and sealing concrete surfaces square foot num return to table of contents section num reinforcing for concrete num description .
furnish and place steel and fiber reinforced polymer frp reinforcing of the quality type size and quantity designated .
obtain all frp reinforcing bars from a producer on the departments production facility listing .
num materials .
meet the following requirements steel bar reinforcement num steel welded wire reinforcement num frp bar reinforcement num num protection of material .
num steel reinforcing store steel reinforcement above the surface of the ground upon platforms skids or other supports and protect it from mechanical injury and surface deterioration .
ensure that the steel reinforcement is free from loose rust scale dirt paint oil and other foreign material prior to incorporation into the work .
num fiber reinforcing polymer frp reinforcing store frp reinforcement above the surface of the ground in boxes or upon platforms skids or other supports and protect it from mechanical injury and direct exposure to uv light .
ensure that the frp reinforcement is free from dirt paint oil and other foreign material prior to incorporation into the work .
num bending splicing and cutting .
num steel reinforcing fabricate reinforcing bars as prescribed in the crsi manual of standard practice .
shop bend the reinforcement cold to the shapes indicated in the plans .
do not bend the reinforcement to shape in the field .
minor bending adjustments may be performed in the field with the approval of the engineer .
do not hot bend or straighten weld or thermal cut reinforcing steel .
num fiber reinforcing polymer frp reinforcing no field fabrication of frp reinforcing bars is permitted except tying and field cutting per aci num .
do not bend or straighten couple thermal cut or shear cut frp reinforcing bars .
num placing and fastening .
num general unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the tolerance for bar spacing is plus or minus num inch from the plan position and the tolerance for concrete cover is minus num inch or plus num inch from the plan dimensions .
construct all tie patterns referenced by this section in accordance with the crsi manual of standard practice .
num concrete blocks for spacing use precast concrete blocks to space and support the reinforcing bars .
use concrete blocks with a strength equal to or greater than the concrete in which they are to be placed and have wires cast into them for fastening to the reinforcing bars .
moistcure the blocks for at least three days .
submit a certification verifying the class of concrete used to fabricate the concrete blocks and identifying the batch and load of concrete from which the concrete blocks were cast .
num tying num return to table of contents num steel reinforcing tie steel reinforcing using pliable steel wire that readily bends and twists without breaking and that provides a tie of sufficient strength to hold the steel reinforcing in its proper position .
tie stainless reinforcing steel using plastic coated pliable steel wire or stainless steel wire meeting the requirements of astm anum uns snum .
num fiber reinforcing polymer frp reinforcing tie frp reinforcing using selflocking plastic straps or plastic coated pliable steel wire that readily bends and twists without breaking and that provides a tie of sufficient strength to hold the frp reinforcing in its proper position .
num splices where splices are authorized rigidly clamp the bars or tie them in a manner meeting the engineers approval .
use the lap splice length as shown on the plans .
num steel reinforcing do not use welded splices for steel reinforcing except as specifically authorized by the engineer and meeting the requirements of aws d num structural welding code reinforcing steel .
use mechanical couplers or splice devices for steel reinforcing that are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num fiber reinforcing polymer frp reinforcing do not use mechanical couplers for frp reinforcing .
use lap splices only .
num footings num supports support footing mat reinforcing with concrete blocks having dimensions not greater than num by num inches by plan clearance .
fasten concrete blocks to the steel using the castin wires .
num tolerances place footing mat reinforcing within num inch vertically from the plan bottom clearance and within num inch from the plan side clearance .
num tying tie footing mat reinforcing with a doublestrand single tie at all intersections on the periphery and at alternate intersections within the mat .
num dowel bars for columns and walls num supports and positioning position dowel bars projecting into columns and walls so as to allow splicing of the vertical bars to the dowels and to tie the dowel bars in their plan position .
support the dowel bars by a rigid template such that concrete placement does not disturb their position .
support the reinforcing prior to placement of the footing concrete and do not insert dowel bars into the plastic concrete .
num tolerances place the dowels within num inch of their plan position and with a side clearance tolerance not exceeding num inch .
num verticals and hoops for columns num spacingoff from side forms space column reinforcing bars from the side forms by concrete blocks of dimensions not exceeding num inches by num inches by clearance dimension .
securely fasten each block to the reinforcing .
num tolerances and clearance num .
column verticals place column verticals within num inch of their plan position .
ensure that the side form clearance is within num inch of the specified clearance .
num .
column hoops place every hoop within num inch of the plan position for the specific hoop with no accumulation of such tolerance caused by the spacing between any two hoops .
ensure that side form clearance for any hoop is within num inch of its specified clearance .
num tying tie the column hoops to the column verticals at each intersection by a cross tie or figure num tie .
num return to table of contents num wall reinforcing not including dowel bars num supports space wall reinforcing bars from the side forms by concrete blocks of dimensions not greater than num inches by num inches by clearance dimensions .
fix the spacing between wall mats by means satisfactory to the engineer .
num tolerance except when necessary to clear a fixture place reinforcing bars within num inch of plan position .
ensure that the number of bars in any affected unit is as specified and place the remainder of the bars not thus affected within num inch of plan location .
num tying tie retaining wall reinforcing bars with a cross tie or figure num tie at each intersection on the periphery and at every third intersection within the mat .
if workmen use the reinforcing as a ladder provide additional ties as directed by the engineer .
tie noise and perimeter wall reinforcing bars with a single tie at each intersection on the periphery and at every third intersection within the mat .
num beams and caps num supports maintain bottom clearances by approved heavy beam bolsters .
support additional layers of main longitudinal reinforcing bars from the lower layers by heavy upperbeam bolsters placed directly over low supports .
begin the spacing of beam bolsters at not more than num feet from the end of the beams or caps and space the additionally required bolsters at not more than num feet .
use concrete blocks having dimensions not greater than num inches by num inches by specified clearance fastened to the reinforcing bars by the castin wires for spacing the upper main longitudinal bars below the top bars .
maintain the side clearance by concrete blocks having dimensions not greater than num inches by num inches by required clearance fastened to the reinforcing bars by the castin wires .
num tolerances place the main longitudinal reinforcing bars so as to provide a bottom and top clearance within num inch of the plan vertical dimensions for all layers .
space the bars from side forms within num inch of the specified spacing .
place stirrups within num inch of the plan position for each individual stirrup and do not allow the tolerance to accumulate .
num tying tie all intersecting bars with a doublestrand single tie .
num deck slabs num supports num .
bottom mats support the bottom mat of reinforcing bars using slab bolsters or concrete blocks .
use one row of slab bolsters placed num inches from the edge of the slab and two rows down each deck section between beams .
do not allow the spacing between rows to exceed num feet measured center to center .
use concrete blocks num inches by num inches by clearance dimensions .
space concrete blocks num feet on center as a maximum .
num .
top mats support the top mats of reinforcing bars by either continuous or individual high chairs .
provide high chairs along both sides of each beam and approximately num inches back from the edge of the beam .
place the outside row of high chairs num inches from the edge of the slab .
if using individual high chairs do not allow the longitudinal spacing to be greater than num feet .
as an alternate to the above on prestressed beam construction the contractor may support the top mat of reinforcing bars on the shear connectors bent to the proper elevation with one line of high chairs centered between the beams .
num return to table of contents num .
truss bars support truss bars at each end of the top bends by continuous high chairs or by individual high chairs spaced longitudinally at not more than num feet .
num tolerances ensure that top and bottom clearances are within num inch from those shown in the plans .
ensure that end and bottom clearances are within num inch from those shown in the plans .
ensure that end and edge clearances are within num inch of the clearance specified .
place curb bars within num inch in any direction of the plan position .
num tying tie all reinforcing bars in each layer with a doublestrand single tie at every intersection on the periphery and at every third intersection in the interior area .
if encountering difficulty in maintaining the reinforcing bars in position during the placing of concrete tie additional intersections as necessary to hold the reinforcing bars secure .
num box culverts num supports num .
bottom slabs in the bottom slabs of box culverts provide supports for singlemat reinforcing bars and for bottommat reinforcing bars including placement and spacing as specified for footing mat steel in num .
in addition where the plans call for more than one mat of reinforcing bars in the bottom slab of the culvert support the top mat away from the bottom mat either by upper beam bolsters or by other means satisfactory to the engineer .
num .
walls place space and support the reinforcing bars in walls of box culverts in accordance with the requirements of num .
num .
top slabs in the top slabs of box culverts support the bottom mats of reinforcing bars by a row of slab bolsters num inches from the inside face of the walls and with additional rows of bolsters at spacings not exceeding num feet center to center .
as an exception unless the engineer deems the use of the slab bolsters as necessary to obtain proper support the contractor may use concrete blocks as the supporting device .
use blocks of dimensions not greater than num inches by num inches by the required clearance with spacings not exceeding num feet in any direction .
fasten blocks to the reinforcing steel by the castin wires .
num .
truss bars support truss bars as specified in num .. num tolerances use tolerances in placing the reinforcing bars in box culvert slabs as specified for deck slabs in num .
use tolerances for placing bars in walls as specified in num .
num tying tie reinforcing bars in box culverts as specified for deck slabs in num .
num cleaning before placing any concrete clean all mortar from the reinforcement .
num bar supports num general provide reinforcing bar supports manufactured in accordance with all requirements of the crsi manual of standard practice .
use bar supports of adequate strength to withstand a num pound concentrated load without permanent deformation or breakage with deflection less than num of the support height .
ensure that no more than num of the reinforcing bar supports exhibit unsatisfactory performance breakage or permanent deformation during bar tying andor concrete placement operations .
if a bar support does not achieve this level of performance num return to table of contents reduce the average spacing between bar supports by num or remove that product from use on the job .
ensure that bar supports do not move during concrete placing operations .
to prevent movement tie supports to the reinforcing bars .
when using bar supports on corrugated metal stayinplace forms use supports specifically designed for the form being used .
for structural elements located in extremely aggressive environments do not use metal bar supports in contact with removable forms or floor surfaces to support reinforcing bars .
num metal bar supports for metal bar supports in contact with removable forms provide supports constructed with molded plastic legs or plastic protected metal legs or bolster rails .
do not allow any portion of the bar support other than the molded plastic leg or plastic protected portion of the metal leg or bolster rail to be closer than num inch from the removable form surface for concrete to be cast .
submit certification verifying that all metal bar supports meet the following requirements num .
that they are manufactured from cold drawn steel wire in accordance with the wire sizes and geometrical dimensions shown in the crsi manual of standard practice chapter num .
num .
that the plastic used for protection of the steel legs or bolster rails has a thickness of num inch or greater at points of contact with the form work .
provide plastic protection by a dipping operation by adding premolded plastic tips to the legs of the support or by molding plastic to the top wire of the support .
ensure that the plastic material used for protection of steel legs does not chip crack deform or peel during use .
do not use metal bar supports to support frp reinforcing bars .
num plastic bar supports and spacers use nonstackable plastic bar supports and spacers .
bar supports shall be able to meet the concentrated load requirements of num within a working temperature range of num to numf .
spacers shall be able to provide sufficient strength to support reinforcing steel in the required position without deformation and relaxation under job conditions .
for drilled shafts use wheel spacers with a smooth perimeter surface .
submit protection from sunlight until placed in the form and mold in a configuration which does not restrict concrete flow and consolidation .
all plastic bar supports and spacers shall have a maximum water absorption of num at num days as per astm dnum .
plastic bar supports and spacers made of recycled plastic products must meet the additional requirements of section num .
submit to the engineer independent lab test data and certification verifying that the plastic spacers meet the requirements specified herein .
use plastic bar supports listed on the departments apl .
provide each individual bar support with an identification number unique to the particular model permanently marked on the surface as included in the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of products for inclusion on the apl must submit an application in accordance with section num and include certified test reports from an independent laboratory showing that the plastic bar supports meet all the requirements specified herein .
num return to table of contents num welded deformed steel wire reinforcement .
num general provide welded deformed steel wire reinforcement as shown in the plans or as a substitute for deformed bar reinforcement when approved on the shop drawings .
propose substitutions of welded deformed steel wire reinforcement in a manner that provides a crosssectional area per foot of welded deformed steel wire equal to that provided in the plans for deformed bar reinforcement .
orient the deformed wires of welded deformed steel wire reinforcement in the same position as bar reinforcement detailed in the plans .
cross wires of welded deformed steel wire reinforcement may be deformed or smooth and must have a cross sectional area at least num greater than the area of the deformed wire .
num design when welded deformed steel wire reinforcement is substituted for deformed bar reinforcement ensure that the development length splices shear reinforcement and distribution meet the requirements of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
num method of measurement .
num reinforcing steel the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in pounds of reinforcing steel stainless reinforcing steel or low carbon chromium reinforcing steel incorporated into the completed work and accepted subject to any changes approved by the engineer .
the quantity will not include the reinforcing steel all types in any item of work for which the basis of payment already includes the steel reinforcement .
no additional payment will be made for substitutions of welded deformed wire reinforcement proposed by the contractor .
no separate payment will be made for reinforcing steel all types in pipe endwalls .
no deduction will be made from reinforcing steel all types quantities for encroachment of inlets and pipes in box culverts .
the lengths to be used in the calculation will be the detailed lengths of bars as shown in the plans .
num unit weights of steel bars the unit weights used will be crsi standard reinforcing steel bar weights .
num welded wire reinforcement where welded wire reinforcement is to be paid for by weight the quantity to be paid for will be the product of the area in square feet of the welded wire reinforcement incorporated into the completed work and accepted multiplied by the manufacturers standard weight per square foot .
when welded deformed steel wire reinforcement is substituted for deformed bar reinforcement the quantity to be paid for will be the quantity which would be paid for if bar reinforcement as detailed in the plans were utilized based on plan quantity .
num fiber reinforcing polymer frp reinforcing the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in linear feet of bar incorporated into the completed work and accepted subject to any changes approved by the engineer .
the quantity will not include the frp bar in any item of work for which the basis of payment already includes the frp bars .
the lengths to be used in the calculation will be the detailed lengths of bars as shown in the plans .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all welding all clips spacers ties mechanical couplers etc .
and wire or other material used for fastening the reinforcement in place .
if spliced bars are used when full length bars might reasonably be required the quantity paid for will be only that which would be obtained if full length bars were used with no allowance for lap .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num num reinforcing steel per pound .
item no .
num num stainless reinforcing steel per pound .
item no .
num num low carbon chromium reinforcing steel per pound .
item no .
num num fiber reinforced polymer reinforcing bar per linear foot .
num return to table of contents section num installation of postinstalled anchor systems and dowels for structural applications in concrete elements num description .
prepare and install postinstalled anchor systems and dowels in hardened concrete as indicated in the plans as directed by the engineer and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and this section .
postinstalled anchors and dowels in this section are intended for use in structural applications where designated in the plans .
num materials .
num adhesive bonded anchors and dowels use adhesive bonding material systems which meet the requirements of section num and are included on the approved product list apl .
use anchors and dowels installed in positions ranging from vertically downward to horizontal .
num type hv adhesives use type hv adhesive bonding materials for all installations other than constructing doweled pile splices .
do not use type hv adhesives as a substitute for type hshv adhesives .
num type hshv adhesives use higher strength type hshv adhesive bonding materials for installation of traffic railing reinforcement and anchor bolts into existing concrete bridge decks and approach slabs .
type hshv adhesives may be used as a substitute for type hv adhesives provided the length and diameter of the anchor bolt and drilled hole remain as designed for the type hv adhesive .
num storage of materials store materials delivered to the job site in the original unopened containers within an appropriate facility capable of maintaining storage conditions consistent with the manufacturers recommendations .
num equipment .
install adhesivebonded anchor systems with equipment conforming to the manufacturers recommendation for the type of system installed .
num preparing of concrete members .
num adhesivebonded anchors and dowels ensure that concrete members receiving adhesivebonded anchors or dowels are structurally sound and free of cracks in the vicinity of the anchor or dowel to be installed .
unless other equipment is recommended by the adhesive manufacturer drill holes to the diameter required by the manufacturer but as a minimum not less than num of the diameter including deformations nor more than num of the nominal diameter of the steel bar anchor or dowel using a rotary hammer drill and bit .
use a metal detector specifically designed for locating steel in concrete to avoid conflicts with existing steel reinforcement whenever placement tolerances and edge clearances permit .
perform core drilling through existing steel reinforcement only when approved by the engineer .
dry the drilled holes completely prior to cleaning and installing the anchors or dowels .
clean and prepare drilled holes in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations but as a minimum use oil free compressed air to remove loose particles from drilling brush inside surface to free loose particles trapped in pores then use compressed air num return to table of contents again to remove the remaining loose particles .
use a nonmetallic bristle brush and avoid over brushing to prevent polishing the inside surface of the drilled hole .
num installation methods .
num adhesivebonded anchors and dowels remove all debris oils and any other deleterious material from the anchors and dowels to avoid contamination of the adhesive bonding material .
install anchors or dowels in accordance with the details shown in the plans and the manufacturers instructions with particular attention to requirements and limitations due to anchor position dampness ambient temperature and curing .
use adequate quantities of the adhesive bonding material to fill the drilled hole to within num inch of the concrete surface measured after placement of the steel bar or anchor .
for horizontal and downwardly inclined installations provide temporary supports to maintain the anchors or dowels in the center of the drilled holes until the adhesive bonding material has cured .
num field testing of postinstalled anchor systems and dowels .
num general provide an independent testing agency to perform field testing of post installed anchors or dowels under the direction of a professional engineer registered in the state of florida .
submit test reports for each lot signed and sealed by the professional engineer .
perform restrained static tension tests to prevent damage to the surrounding concrete .
a restrained test is defined as a test conducted in accordance with astm enum except that the test equipment support clearance requirements of astm enum do not apply .
the opening in the reaction base shall be approximately equal to the drilled hole diameter for the anchor to preclude concrete or masonry failure but allow bond failure for the adhesivebonded anchors and dowels .
displacement measurement for field testing is not required .
divide the postinstalled anchors or dowels into lots for testing and acceptance .
each lot must contain a maximum of num anchors or dowels of the same type manufacturer diameter embedment length and adhesive bonding material system if applicable installed on the same day .
randomly select four of the anchors or dowels in each lot for testing except if there are three or less in the lot in which case test all anchors or dowels unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
if three consecutive lots have no failing tests sample the next three lots at a num rate rounded up to the nearest whole number and if these lots have no failing tests sample at a rate of num rounded up to the nearest whole number for the remaining lots unless there is a failure however regardless of lot size sample at least one anchor or dowel per lot .
for every failed field test perform two additional field tests on adjacent untested anchors or dowels within the lot .
continue additional field tests until no more test failures occur or all anchors or dowels within the lot are tested .
for the next lot after a failed lot randomly select four of the anchors or dowels in each lot for testing except if there are three or less in the lot test all anchors or dowels unless otherwise directed by the engineer then conform to the sampling rate procedure above including rate reductions as appropriate for subsequent lots .
num adhesivebonded anchors field test installed anchors and dowels for applications connecting traffic railings to bridge decks approach slabs and concrete pavement using type hshv adhesives .
the engineer may also require field testing of installed anchors and dowels for other applications .
any field testing of installed anchors which is required by the engineer and not quantified in the contract documents shall be paid for by the department unless a failure occurs during the field testing .
num return to table of contents test individual anchors and dowels by proof loading in tension to num of the specified bond strength in accordance with section num based on the nominal anchor or dowel diameter and embedment depth but not more than num of the yield strength of the anchor or dowel unless otherwise shown in the contract documents .
num removal replacement of failed test specimens remove all anchors and dowels that fail the field test in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation and without damage to the surrounding concrete .
for adhesivebonded anchors redrill holes to remove adhesive bonding material residue and clean in accordance with num .
reinstall new anchors and dowels in accordance with num .
do not reuse the failed anchors and dowels unless approved by the engineer .
assign reinstalled anchors into new lots only containing reinstalled anchors or dowels of the same diameter embedment length and adhesive bonding material system and field test in accordance with num .
num acceptance .
the engineer will base acceptance of postinstalled anchor systems on determining that the material requirements of section num the installation and testing requirements of this section and the placement requirements of the plans have been met .
num basis of payment .
the work specified in this section will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental work .
num return to table of contents section num inlets manholes and junction boxes num description .
construct inlets manholes and junction boxes from reinforced concrete as shown in the standard plans and the plans .
furnish and install the necessary metal frames and gratings .
construct yard drains from concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
adjust structures shown in the plans to be adjusted or requiring adjustment for the satisfactory completion of the work .
for precast structures meet the requirements in num .
num composition and proportioning .
num concrete for inlets manholes and junction boxes use class ii or iv concrete as designated in the plans and standard plans and as specified in section num .
for yard drains use concrete as specified in section num .
num mortar for brick masonry make the mortar by mixing one part cement to three parts sand .
miami oolitic rock screenings may be substituted for the sand provided the screenings meet the requirements of num except for gradation requirements .
use materials passing the no .
num sieve that are well graded from coarse to fine .
submit documentation from a department approved mine or a department approved concrete plant confirming the sand or sand substitute meets the requirements of num .
preblended masonry cement mortar may be used in lieu of the abovespecified mortar .
deliver the product in original and unopened packages properly identified by brand name of manufacturer net weight of package and type .
store the material in full compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
material must be used within manufacturers recommended shelf life .
num materials .
num general meet the following requirements sand for mortarsection num portland cementsection num water section num reinforcing steel sections num and num liner repair systems section num brick and concrete masonry unitssection num castings for frames and gratings section num masonry cement type m or s astm cnum preblended dry masonry cement mortar type m or s astm cnum num gratings covers and frames use gratings and frames fabricated from structural steel or cast iron as designated in the appropriate standard plans index .
when alt .
g grates are specified in the plans provide structural steel grates that are galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm anum .
use rigid frames and covers either num inches or num inches or optional threepiece adjustable frames and covers as indicated in standard plans index num .
num return to table of contents for threepiece adjustable frames the inner frame may include replaceable resilient seats to support the cover .
in addition the inner frame shall indicate it is adjustable by clearly having the word adjustable imprinted into the exposed portion of the inner frame so adjustable is visible from the roadway after installation .
num forms .
design and construct wood or metal forms so that they may be removed without damaging the concrete .
build forms true to line and grade and brace them in a substantial and unyielding manner .
obtain the engineers approval before filling them with concrete .
num precast inlets manholes and junction boxes .
precast inlets manholes and junction boxes designed and fabricated in accordance with the plans the standard plans and section num may be substituted for castinplace units .
num construction methods .
num excavation excavate as specified in section num .
where unsuitable material for foundations is encountered excavate the unsuitable material and backfill with suitable material prior to constructing or setting inlets manholes and junction boxes .
as an option to the above and with the engineers approval the contractor may carry the walls down to a depth required for a satisfactory foundation backfill to num inches below the flowline with clean sand and cast a nonreinforced num inch floor .
num placing and curing concrete place the concrete in the forms to the depth shown in the plans and thoroughly vibrate it .
after the concrete has hardened sufficiently cover it with suitable material and keep it moist for a period of three days .
finish the traffic surface in accordance with num or with a simulated broom finish approved by the engineer .
num setting manhole castings after curing the concrete as specified above set the frame of the casting in a full mortar bed composed of one part portland cement to two parts of fine aggregate .
num standard castings set manhole frames in a mortar bed and adjust to grade using brick or concrete grade rings with a maximum num inch adjustment .
num optional adjustable castings when using a threepiece adjustable frame and cover install the frame and cover with brick or concrete grade rings to the base course height .
make adjustments using the inner frame in accordance with the manufacturers installation recommendations so the inner frame and cover meet the grade and slope of the pavement surface opened to traffic .
num reinforcing steel follow the construction methods for the steel reinforcement as specified in section num .
num laying brick brick masonry may be used if the structure is circular and constructed in place or for adjustments of rectangular risers up to a maximum num inches in height .
saturate all brick with water before laying .
bond the brick thoroughly into the mortar using the shovejoint method to lay the brick .
arrange headers and stretchers so as to bond the mass thoroughly .
finish the joints properly as the work progresses and ensure that they are not less than num inch or more than num inch in thickness .
do not use spalls or bats except for shaping around irregular openings or when unavoidable at corners .
num backfilling backfill as specified in section num meeting the specific requirements for backfilling and compaction around inlets manholes and junction boxes num return to table of contents detailed in num and num .
however for outfall lines beyond the sidewalk or future sidewalk area where no vehicular traffic will pass over the pipe inlets manholes and junction boxes compact backfill as required in num .
num adjusting structures adjust existing manholes catch basins inlets valve boxes etc .
within the limits of the proposed work to meet the finished grade of the proposed pavement or if outside of the proposed pavement area to the finished grade designated in the plans for such structures .
adjust structures prior to placement of final asphalt pavement surface layer .
adjust structures to match final pavement surface crossslope .
use materials and construction methods which meet the requirements specified above to adjust the existing structures .
the contractor may extend manholes needing to be raised using adjustable extension rings of the type which do not require the removal of the existing manhole frame .
use an extension device that provides positive locking action and permits adjustment in height as well as diameter and meets the approval of the engineer .
when adjusting structures in flexible pavement restore final road surface in accordance with standard plans index num .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be the number of inlets manholes junction boxes and yard drains completed and accepted and the number of structures of these types including also valve boxes satisfactorily adjusted .
num basis of payment .
num new structures price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials and completing all work described herein or shown in the plans including all clearing and grubbing outside the limits of clearing and grubbing as shown in the plans all excavation except the volume included in the measurement designated to be paid for under the items for the grading work on the project all backfilling around the structures the disposal of surplus material and the furnishing and placing of all gratings frames covers and any other necessary fittings .
num adjusted structures when an item of payment for adjusting manholes valve boxes or inlets is provided in the proposal price and payment will be full compensation for the number of such structures designated to be paid for under such separate items and which are satisfactorily adjusted at the contract unit prices each for adjusting inlets adjusting manholes and adjusting valve boxes .
for any of such types of these structures required to be adjusted but for which no separate item of payment is shown in the proposal for the specific type payment will be made under the item of adjusting miscellaneous structures .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num inlets each .
item no .
num num manholes each .
item no .
num num junction boxes each .
item no .
num num adjusting inlets each .
item no .
num num adjusting manholes each .
item no .
num num adjusting valve boxes each .
item no .
num num adjusting miscellaneous structures each .
item no .
num num yard drains each .
num return to table of contents section num pipe culverts num description .
furnish and install drainage pipe and end sections at the locations called for in the plans .
furnish and construct joints and connections to existing pipes catch basins inlets manholes walls etc .
as may be required to complete the work .
obtain pipe culverts and drainage products from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
at the beginning of each project submit a notarized certification statement to the engineer in accordance with section num .
the quality control managers stamp on each product indicates certification that the product was fabricated in conformance with the producer qc plan the contract and this section .
ensure that each shipment of drainage products to the project site is accompanied with a qc signed or stamped delivery ticket providing the description and the list of the products .
when the producer quality control program is suspended by the department accept responsibility of either obtaining products from a plant with an approved quality control program or await reapproval of the plant .
the engineer will not allow changes in contract time or completion dates as a result of the plants loss of qualification .
accept responsibility for all delay costs or other costs associated with the loss of the plants qualification .
construct structural plate pipe culverts or underdrains in accordance with sections num and num .
for pipe culverts installed by jack bore install in accordance with section num .
num materials .
num pipe meet the following requirements concrete pipe section num steel pipe num round rubber gaskets section num resilient connectors section num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch section num corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arch section num corrugated polyethylene pipe section num steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe section num corrugated polypropylene pipe section num corrugated polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe section num fiberglass reinforced polymer pipe section num liner repair systems section num use resilient connector products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num joint materials use joint materials specified in num through num according to type of pipe and conditions of usage .
num return to table of contents num mortar use mortar composed of one part portland cement and two parts of clean sharp sand to which mixture the contractor may add hydrated lime in an amount not to exceed num of the cement content .
use mortar within num minutes after its preparation .
num type of pipe to be used .
num general prior to the preconstruction conference submit to the engineer which optional pipe material from the optional materials tabulation sheet will be used .
once a pipe material is selected do not change pipe materials without approval of the engineer .
when the plans designate a type or types of pipe use only the type or choose from the types designated .
as an exception when the plans designate reinforced concrete pipe as class s class i class ii class iii and class iv the contractor may use nonreinforced concrete pipe up to and including num inch in diameter .
num side drain if the plans do not designate a type or types of pipe the contractor may use either a minimum class i concrete pipe corrugated steel pipe corrugated aluminum pipe corrugated highdensity polyethylene pipe steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe polypropylene pipe or pvc pipe .
if one of the metal types is chosen use the minimum gage specified in section num for steel pipe or section num for aluminum pipe .
alternatively when metal pipe is allowed and no future maintenance concerns exist the contractor may propose the pipe gage based on the departments drainage manual and culvert service life estimator for approval by the engineer .
when extending existing pipes construct the pipe extensions of the same size and kind as the existing pipe .
extensions of existing pipes whose materials are no longer produced shall be extended with the most similar pipe material available .
nonreinforced concrete pipe may also be substituted for concrete pipe in side drains subject to the provisions of num .
num laying pipe .
num general lay all pipe true to the lines and grades given with hubs upgrade and tongue end fully entered into the hub .
when pipe with quadrant reinforcement or circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement is used install the pipe in a position such that the manufacturers marks designating top and bottom of the pipe are not more than five degrees from the vertical plane through the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
do not allow departure from and return to plan alignment and grade to exceed num inch per foot of nominal pipe length with a total of not more than num inch departure from theoretical line and grade .
take up and relay any pipe that is not in true alignment or which shows any settlement after laying at no additional expense to the department .
do not use concrete pipe with lift holes except round pipe which has an inside diameter in excess of num inches or any elliptical pipe .
repair lift holes if present with handplaced stiff nonshrink numtonum mortar of cement and fine sand after first washing out the hole with water .
completely fill the void created by the lift hole with mortar .
cover the repaired area with a num by num inch piece of filter fabric secured to the pipe .
use a type dnum filter fabric meeting the requirements specified in section num .
secure the filter fabric to the pipe using a method that holds the fabric in place until the backfill is placed and compacted .
use grout mixtures mastics or strapping devices to secure the fabric to the pipe .
when installing pipes in structures construct inlet and outlet pipes of the same num return to table of contents size and kind as the connecting pipe shown in the plans .
use the same pipe material within each continuous run of pipe .
extend the pipes through the walls for a distance beyond the outside surface sufficient for the intended connections and construct the concrete around them neatly to prevent leakage along their outer surface as shown on standard plans index num .
keep the inlet and outlet pipes flush with the inside of the wall .
resilient connectors as specified in num may be used in lieu of a masonry seal .
furnish and install a filter fabric jacket around all pipe joints and the joint between the pipe and the structure in accordance with standard plans indexes num and num num .
use fabric meeting the physical requirements of type dnum specified in section num .
extend the fabric a minimum of num inches beyond each side of the joint or both edges of the coupling band if a coupling band is used .
the fabric must have a minimum width of num inches and a length sufficient to provide a minimum overlap of num inches .
secure the filter fabric jacket against the outside of the pipe by metal or plastic strapping or by other methods approved by the engineer .
meet the following minimum joint standards pipe application minimum standard storm and cross drains watertight gutter drain watertight side drains soiltight when rubber gaskets are to be installed in the pipe joint the gasket must be the sole element relied on to maintain a tight joint .
soil tight joints must be watertight to num psi .
watertight joints must be watertight to num psi unless a higher pressure rating is required in the plans .
when laying pipes that pass through mechanically stabilized earth mse reinforced fill connect the portion of the pipe within the wall to the external portion of the pipe run only after the full height of the wall supported embankment is in place .
when wall zone pipes are shown in the plans meet the following requirements num .
use resilient connectors on pipes entering and leaving drainage structures .
num .
provide a num to num inch pipe overhang beyond the drainage structure internal walls .
num .
for pipes without welded joints meet the following additional requirements a .
pipe joints must be watertight to num psi when pulled out num inches from the fully home joint alignment .
b .
do not allow the gap between sections of pipe to exceed num inch for all pipe diameters .
num trench excavation excavate the trench for storm and cross drains and side drains as specified in section num .
num foundation provide a suitable foundation where the foundation material is of inadequate supporting value as determined by the engineer .
remove the unsuitable material and replace it with suitable material as specified in num .
where in the engineers opinion the removal and replacement of unsuitable material is not practicable he may direct alternates in the num return to table of contents design of the pipe line as required to provide adequate support .
minor changes in the grade or alignment will not be considered as an adequate basis for extra compensation .
do not lay pipe on blocks or timbers or on other unyielding material except where the use of such devices is called for in the plans .
num backfilling backfill around the pipe as specified in num unless specific backfilling procedures are described in the contract documents .
num plugging pipe when existing pipe culverts are to be permanently placed out of service fill them with flowable fill that is nonexcavatable contains a minimum num pounds per cubic yard of cementitious material and meets the requirements of section num andor plug them with masonry plugs as shown in the plans .
install masonry plugs that are a minimum of num inches in thickness in accordance with standard plans index num .
when proposed or existing pipe culverts are to be temporarily placed out of service plug them with prefabricated plugs as shown in the plans .
install prefabricated plugs in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
do not fill or construct masonry plugs in any pipe culvert intended for current or future service .
num end treatment place an end treatment at each storm and cross drain and side drain as shown in the plans .
refer to the standard plans for types of end treatment details .
as an exception to the above when concrete mitered end sections are permitted the contractor may use reinforced concrete uendwalls if shop drawings are submitted to the engineer for approval prior to use .
provide end treatments for corrugated polyethylene pipe polypropylene pipe and pvc pipe as specified in section num or as detailed in the plans .
num metal pipe protection apply a bituminous coating to the surface area of the pipe within and num inches beyond the concrete or mortar seal prior to sealing to protect corrugated steel or aluminum pipe embedded in a concrete structure such as an inlet manhole junction box endwall or concrete jacket .
ensure that the surface preparation application methods dry film thickness and conditions during application and equipment used are in accordance with the coating manufacturers published specifications .
obtain the engineers approval of the coating products used .
num pipe inspection for pipes installed under the roadway inspection is to be conducted when backfill reaches num feet above the pipe crown or upon completion of placement of the stabilized subgrade .
for pipe installed within fills including embankments confined by walls inspection is to be conducted when compacted embankment reaches num feet above the pipe crown or the finished earthwork grade as specified in the plans .
prior to conducting the inspection submit to the engineer a video recording schedule for videoing dewater installed pipe and remove all silt debris and obstructions .
submit pipe videoing and reports to the department for review prior to the continuation of paving .
for pipe num inches or less in diameter submit to the engineer a video dvd and report using low barrel distortion video equipment with laser profile technology noncontact video micrometer and associated software .
for all pipe types provide a pipe observation summary report for each pipe run that includes num .
actual recorded length and width measurements of all cracks within the pipe .
num .
actual recorded separation measurement of all rigid pipe joints .
num return to table of contents num .
detailed written observations of leaks debris or other damage or defects .
for flexible pipe types submit a pipe ovality report for each pipe run that includes num .
representative diameter of the pipe .
num .
pipe deformationdeflections measurements with the num deflection limit clearly delineated .
laser profiling and measurement technology must be certified by the company performing the work to be in compliance with the calibration criteria posted at httpwww.fdot.govconstructioncontractorissueslaser.shtm .
reports submitted in electronic media are preferred .
the engineer may waive this requirement for side drains and cross drains which are short enough to inspect from each end of the pipe .
num video report provide a high quality dvd in a mpegnum format video with a standard resolution of num x num .
use a camera with lighting suitable to allow a clear picture of the entire periphery of the pipe .
center the camera in the pipe both vertically and horizontally and be able to pan and tilt to a num degree angle with the axis of the pipe and rotating num degrees .
use equipment to move the camera through the pipe that will not obstruct the cameras view or interfere with proper documentation of the pipes condition .
the video image shall be clear focused and relatively free from roll static or other image distortion qualities that would prevent the reviewer from evaluating the condition of the pipe .
the video will include identification before each section of pipe filmed .
the identification will include the project number the structure number corresponding to the structure number in the plans for the project size of pipe the date and time and indicate which pipe is being filmed if multiple pipes are connected to the structure .
notes should be taken during the video recording process .
submit these notes along with the video .
move the camera through the pipe at a speed not greater than num feet per minute .
mark the video with the distance down the pipe .
the distance shall have an accuracy of one foot per num feet .
film the entire circumference at each joint .
stop the camera and pan when necessary to document and measure defects .
position the camera head perpendicular to all defects requiring measurement by the video micrometer .
num reinspection at any time after reviewing the submitted pipe inspection reports the engineer may direct additional inspections .
if no defects are observed during the reinspection the department will pay for the cost of the reinspections in accordance with num .
if defects are observed the reinspection and all work performed to correct the defects will be done at no cost to the department .
acceptance of all replacements or repairs will be based on video documentation of the completed work prior to final acceptance .
num removing existing pipe .
if the plans indicate that existing pipe is to remain the property of the department collect and stack along the rightofway all existing pipe or pipe arch so indicated in the plans to be removed or that does not conform to the lines and grades of the proposed work and that is not to be relaid as directed by the engineer .
take care to prevent damage to salvageable pipe during removal and stacking operations .
num return to table of contents num placing pipe under railroad .
num general construct pipe culverts under railroad tracks in accordance with the requirements of the railroad company .
perform all the shoring under the tracks and sheeting and bracing of the trench required by the railroad company or deemed necessary by the engineer in order to ensure safe and uninterrupted movement of the railroad equipment at no expense to the department .
num requirements of the railroad company install pipe using methods required by the railroad company and shown in the contract documents .
when the general method of installation required by the railroad company is indicated in the plans do not alter such method or any other specific details of the installation which might be indicated in the plans without receiving approval or direction from the railroad followed by written approval from the engineer .
num notification to railroad company notify the railroad company and the engineer at least ten days prior to the date on which pipe is to be placed under the railroad tracks .
num placing pipe by jacking obtain the engineers and the railroad companys approval of the details of the jacking method to be used when placing pipe through the railroad embankment before the work is started .
num use of tunnel liner when the railroad company requires that a tunnel liner be used for placing the pipe in lieu of the jacking method the department will pay for the tunnel liner material separately in cases where the contract documents do not require the use of a tunnel liner .
for these cases the department will reimburse the contractor for the actual cost of the liner delivered at the site .
the department will base such cost on a liner having the minimum gage acceptable to the railroad .
num specific requirements for concrete pipe .
num sealing joints seal the pipe joints with round rubber or profile gaskets meeting the requirements of section num .
ensure that the gasket and the surface of the pipe joint including the gasket recess are clean and free from grit dirt and other foreign matter at the time the joints are made .
in order to facilitate closure of the joint application of a vegetable soap lubricant immediately before closing of the joint will be permitted .
prelubricated gaskets may be used in lieu of a vegetable soap lubricant when the lubricating material is certified to be inert with respect to the rubber material .
num laying requirements for concrete pipe with rubber gasket joints do not allow the gap between sections of pipe to exceed num inch for pipe diameters of num inches through num inches num inch for pipe diameters of num through num inches and num inch for pipe diameters num inches and larger .
where minor imperfections in the manufacture of the pipe create an apparent gap in excess of the tabulated gap the engineer will accept the joint provided that the imperfection does not exceed num the circumference of the pipe and the rubber gasket is num inch or more past the pipe joint entrance taper .
where concrete pipes are outside of these tolerances replace them at no expense to the department .
do not apply mortar joint compound or other filler to the gap which would restrict the flexibility of the joint .
num field joints for elliptical concrete pipe use either a preformed plastic gasket material or an approved rubber gasket to make a field joint .
num plastic gasket meet the following requirements when field joints are made from preformed plastic gasket material num return to table of contents num general install field joints in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the following num material meet the requirements of num .
num joint design ensure that the pipe manufacturer submits details to the engineer regarding configuration of the joint and the amount of gasket material required to affect a satisfactory seal .
do not brush or wipe joint surfaces which are to be in contact with the gasket material with a cement slurry .
fill minor voids with cement slurry .
num primer apply a primer of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the gasket material to all joint surfaces which are to be in contact with the gasket material prior to application of the gasket material .
thoroughly clean and dry the surface to be primed .
num application of gasket apply gasket material to form a continuous gasket around the entire circumference of the leading edge of the tongue and the groove joint in accordance with the detail shown on standard plans index num .
do not remove the paper wrapper on the exterior surface of the gasket material until immediately prior to joining of sections .
apply plastic gasket material only to surfaces which are dry .
when the atmospheric temperature is below numf either store plastic joint seal gaskets in an area above numf or artificially warm the gaskets to numf in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num installation of pipe remove and reposition or replace any displaced or contaminated gasket as directed by the engineer .
install the pipe in a dry trench .
carefully shape the bottom of the trench to minimize the need for realignment of sections of pipe after they are placed in the trench .
hold to a minimum any realignment of a joint after the gaskets come into contact .
prior to joining the pipes fill the entire joint with gasket material and ensure that when the pipes are joined there is evidence of squeezeout of gasket material for the entire internal and external circumference of the joint .
trim excess material on the interior of the pipe to provide a smooth interior surface .
if a joint is defective remove the leading section of pipe and reseal the joint .
num rubber gasket meet the following requirements when field joints are made with profile rubber gaskets num general install field joints in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the following num material meet the requirements of num .
num joint design ensure that the pipe manufacturer submits details to the engineer regarding configuration of the joint and gasket required to effect a satisfactory seal .
do not apply mortar joint compound or other filler which would restrict the flexibility of the gasket joint .
num requirements for concrete radius pipe num design construct concrete radius pipe in segments not longer than num feet along the pipe centerline except where another length is called for in the contract documents .
join each segment using round rubber gaskets .
ensure that the pipe manufacturer submits details of the proposed joint segment length and shape for approval by the engineer prior to manufacture .
num preassembly ensure that the manufacturer preassembles the entire radius section in his yard in the presence of the engineer to ensure a proper fit for all parts .
at the option of the manufacturer the contractor may assemble the pipe without gaskets .
num return to table of contents consecutively number the joints on both the interior and exterior surfaces of each joint and make match marks showing proper position of joints .
install the pipe at the project site in the same order as preassembly .
num specific requirements for corrugated metal pipe .
num field joints num general make a field joint with locking bands as specified in article num of aashto mnum and aashto mnumm for aluminum pipe .
for aluminum pipe fabricate bands from the same alloy as the culvert sheeting .
when existing pipe to be extended is helically fabricated make a field joint between the existing pipe and the new pipe using one of the following methods num .
cut the new pipe to remove one of the rerolled annular end sections required in sections num or num or fabricate the pipe so that the rerolled annular section is fabricated only on one end .
use either a spiral helical band with a gasket or a flat band with gaskets as required by num num to join the pipe sections .
num .
the contractor may construct a concrete jacket as shown on standard plans index num .
num side drain storm and cross drain and gutter drains where corrugated metal pipe is used as side drain storm and cross drain or gutter drain use a rubber or neoprene gasket of a design shown to provide a joint as specified in num .
use a gasket of one of the following dimensions num .
for annular joints with num inch depth corrugation either a single gasket a minimum of num inches by num inch or two gaskets a minimum of num inches by num inch and for annular joints with num inch depth corrugations either a single gasket a minimum of num inches by num inch or two gaskets a minimum of num inches by num inch .
num .
for helical joints with num inch depth corrugation either a single gasket a minimum of num inches by num inch or two gaskets a minimum of num inches by num inch and for helical joints with num inch depth corrugations either a single gasket a minimum of num inches by num inches or two gaskets a minimum of num inches by num inches .
num .
such other gasket designs as may be approved by the engineer .
if in lieu of a single gasket spanning the joint two gaskets are used place these individual gaskets approximately num inches from each pipe end at the joint .
when two gaskets are used seal the overlapping area on the coupling band between the gaskets consistent with the joint performance specified .
the contractor may tuck a strip of preformed gasket material over the bottom lip of the band for this purpose .
use coupling bands that provide a minimum circumferential overlap of num inches .
as the end connections on the coupling band are tightened ensure that there is no local bending of the band or the connection .
use precurved coupling bands on pipe diameters of num inches or less .
use flat gaskets meeting the requirements of astm dnum designation numcnum or numbnum .
in placing flat gaskets on pipe prior to placing the coupling band do not stretch the gasket more than num of its original circumference .
use circular gaskets meeting the requirements of astm cnum .
do not stretch the circular gasket more than num of its original circumference in placing the gasket on pipe .
use preformed plastic gasket material meeting the composition requirements of num .
num return to table of contents apply an approved vegetable soap lubricant as specified for concrete pipe in num .
num alternate joint in lieu of the abovespecified combination of locking bands and flat gaskets the contractor may make field joints for these pipe installations by the following combinations num .
use the metal bands as specified in article num of aashto mnumm that are at least num inches wide and consist of a flat central section with a corrugated section near each end designed to match the annular corrugation in the pipe with which they are to be used .
connect the bands in a manner approved by the engineer with a suitable fastening device such as the use of two galvanized num inch diameter bolts through a galvanized bar and galvanized strap suitably welded to the band .
use a strap that is the same gage as the band .
where helically corrugated pipe is to be jointed by this alternate combination ensure that at least the last two corrugations of each pipe section are annular and designed such that the band will engage each pipe end with the nexttooutside annular corrugation .
num .
for these bands use a rubber gasket with a circular crosssection of the oring type conforming to astm cnum .
use gaskets having the following crosssectional diameter for the given size of pipe nonsi units pipe size gasket diameter num inches through num inches with num inch depth corrugations num inch num inches through num inches with num inch depth corrugations num inch num inches through num inches with num inch depth corrugations num inches use preformed gasket material to seal the overlapping area on the coupling band between gaskets .
num .
use channel band couplers in helical pipe with ends which have been reformed and flanged specifically to receive these bands .
use channel band couplers that are of a two piece design are fabricated from galvanized steel stock conforming to aashto mnum have num inch by num inch by num inch angles fastened to the band ends to allow for proper tightening and meet the following non si units band thickness pipe wall thickness num inch num inch or lighter num inch num inch or heavier num inch wide num inch or lighter num inch wide num inch or heavier furnish two num inch diameter connection bolts with each band that conform to astm anum grade a and are electroplated in accordance with astm bnum .
use a gasket with the joint that is a hydrocarbon blend of butyl rubber meeting the chemical composition and physical properties of num .
use a num by num inch num return to table of contents gasket for pipe fabricated from num inch or lighter material and a num by num inch gasket for pipe fabricated from num inch and heavier material .
the contractor may use a flange band coupler without the gasket for all applications other than side drain storm and cross drain and gutter drain .
do not use the flange band coupler to join dissimilar types of pipe .
the contractor may join reformed flanged helical pipe to existing annular or reformed pipe having annular ends .
on nongasketed installations use either an annular band or an alternate joint described in num .
on gasketed installations use an annular band minimum of five corrugations in width in conjunction with two oring gaskets as specified in num .
use mastic material to seal the area of band overlap .
the minimum joint performance standards specified in num apply .
num laying and shape requirements for corrugated metal pipe install pipe using either a trench or open ditch procedure .
check pipe shape regularly during backfilling to verify acceptability of the construction method used .
pipe deflected num or more of the certified actual mean diameter of the pipe at final inspection shall be replaced at no cost to the department .
deflection measurements are taken at the point of smallest diameter on the corrugations .
num specific requirements for steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe corrugated highdensity polyethylene pipe polypropylene pipe and polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe .
num sampling requirements submit a sample of each pipe material and diameter used on each project to the engineer a minimum of two weeks prior to the installation provided that the pipe meets all of the following num .
pipe material is pvc hdpe steel reinforced polyethylene or polypropylene num .
pipe is corrugated or ribbed num .
pipe diameter is num or larger num .
pipe is not perforated unless the material is pvc or polypropylene num .
pipe is intended for applications requiring num year design service life as defined in the florida department of transportation drainage manual .
the length of each sample pipe section must comprise at least seven regular corrugations not including the first three corrugations of the pipe on the bell or spigot ends .
num field joints use gasketed joints to seal side drain and storm and cross drain .
use gaskets meeting the requirements of section num .
ensure that the pipe manufacturer provides a joint design approved by the engineer before use .
num installation requirements including trenching foundation and backfilling operations check structure shape regularly during backfilling to verify acceptability of the construction method used .
replace pipe deflected num or more of the certified actual mean diameter of the pipe at final inspection at no cost to the department .
num desilting pipe or concrete box culvert .
desilt pipe culvert and concrete box culvert as designated in the plans .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
num new pipe installed by excavation or trenching the quantity of storm and cross drain pipe storm drain trench side drain and gutter drain pipe installed by pipe culvert optional material excavation or trenching to be paid for will be plan quantity in place and accepted .
the plan quantity will be determined from the inside wall of the structure as shown in the plans along the centerline of the pipe .
adjustment to bid quantities prices and payment will not be allowed for increases decreases or changes in material or installation requirements due to the use of any optional pipe materials .
if adjustments are required due to plan errors or omissions or authorized field changes the plotted material and not the material elected would be used to establish new pay quantities .
pipe sizes other than round ellipticalarch are summarized and paid for using equivalent round pipe diameter .
num new pipe installed by jack bore the quantity of storm and cross drain pipe storm drain trench side drain and gutter drain pipe installed by pipe culvert optional material jack bore to be paid for will be the plan quantity in place and accepted .
the measurement and payment will be the plan quantity length of the casing or carrier pipe installed by jack bore .
carrier pipe installed throughinside the casing is paid for as pipe culvert optional material excavation or trenching .
num mitered end section the quantity of mitered end sections to be paid for will be the number completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
num general prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all excavation except the volume included in the items for the grading work on the project and except for other items specified for separate payment in section num all backfilling material and compaction disposal of surplus material and all clearing and grubbing outside of the required limits of clearing and grubbing as shown in the plans .
no payment will be made for failed bore paths injection of excavatable flowable fill products taken out of service or incomplete installations .
payment will include all work and materials necessary for jack bore including boring backfilling flowable fill and restoration materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
no payment will be made for jack bore until a bore path report has been submitted to the engineer .
num removing existing pipe when existing pipe is removed and replaced with new pipe approximately at the same location the cost of excavating and removing the old pipe and of its disposal will be included in the contract unit price for clearing and grubbing .
num site restoration the cost of restoring the site as specified in num that is disturbed solely for the purpose of constructing pipe culvert will be included in the contract unit price for the pipe culvert unless designated specifically to be paid for under other items .
num plugging pipes the cost of temporarily plugging a pipe culvert either proposed or existing will be incidental to the contract unit price for new pipe culvert .
num return to table of contents the cost of filling andor plugging an existing pipe culvert that is to be permanently placed out of service will be paid for at the contract unit price for filling and plugging pipe per cubic yard .
price and payment will be full compensation for flowable fill masonry concrete mortar and all labor and materials necessary to complete the work .
when the project includes no quantities for new pipe culverts and temporary plugs are required for existing pipe culverts the cost will be considered as extra work in accordance with num .
num desilting pipe desilting pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for each pipe desilted .
price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all equipment tools and labor disposal of silt and debris and all incidentals necessary for satisfactorily performing the work .
num desilting concrete box culverts price and payment will be full compensation for all work required .
num flared end sections price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials required .
num mitered end sections price and payment will be full compensation for all pipe grates when required fasteners reinforcing connectors anchors concrete sealants jackets and coupling bands and all work required .
num railroad requirements where pipe culvert is constructed under railroad tracks the contract unit price for the pipe culvert will include the costs of any jacking operations and the operation of placing the pipe by use of a tunnel liner except as specified for unanticipated tunnel liner in num where reimbursement is to be made for such unanticipated liner and all other work necessary to meet the requirements of the railroad company excluding the costs of watchman or flagman services provided by the railroad company except as provided below .
the department will reimburse the contractor for the actual costs of any trestle bridge work which is performed by the railroads forces as billed to him by the railroad less the value of any salvage materials derived there from whether such salvage materials are retained by the railroad company or by the contractor .
when the work of shoring and bracing is to be performed by the railroad such fact will be stipulated in the contract documents and the contractor will be required to pay to the railroad the amount of such costs which amount will be reimbursed to him by the department .
the contract unit price for the pipe culvert shall include the costs of all other work of shoring and bracing .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num pipe culvert optional material excavation or trenching per foot .
item no .
num num pipe culvert optional material jack bore per foot .
item no .
num num desilting pipe per foot .
item no .
num num polyvinyl chloride pipe per foot .
item no .
num num mitered end section each .
item no .
num flared end sections each .
item no .
num uendwall each .
item no .
num filling and plugging pipe cubic yard .
item no .
num desilting concrete box culvert per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num pipe liner num description .
rehabilitate drainage pipe by installing a pipe liner in accordance with the requirements of this section .
the plans will indicate the location of the pipe to be rehabilitated the material composition and the alternate liner types that may be used to rehabilitate the pipe and the method of liner installation .
num materials .
meet the requirements of section num .
num preinstallation requirements .
prior to installing the pipe liner inspect the host pipe and ensure that it is clean dry and stable .
inspect the host pipe by means of closed circuit television .
the closed circuit television inspection may be augmented by a visual inspection in which persons enter a host pipe to inspect it at no additional cost to the department .
obtain written approval from the engineer prior to allowing persons to enter a host pipe .
furnish all equipment necessary to inspect remove silt and other debris and dewater the host pipe to the satisfaction of the engineer .
seal cracks and joints using an approved chemical grout of either acrylamide base gel acrylic base gel urethane base gel or urethane base foam .
place flowable fill as directed by the engineer to maintain the stability of the host pipe .
num installation methods .
num general install the liner using one of or a combination of the following methods sliplining inverting pullingpushing spiral winding paneling coating or bursting .
seal or grout the annular space between the interior of the host pipe and the exterior of the liner according to the liner manufacturers written instructions .
num sliplining use either polyethylene high density polyethylene polyvinyl chloride fiberglass steel or aluminum pipe liner .
install the liner by joining discrete lengths panels or segments of the pipe liner in a manhole or other access point and inserting the liner into the host pipe .
num polyethylene install polyethylene pipe liner in accordance with astm fnum .
the manufacturers written instructions may be substituted for astm fnum with written permission from the engineer .
num high density polyethylene install high density polyethylene pipe liner in accordance with astm fnum .
the manufacturers written instructions may be substituted for astm fnum with written permission from the engineer .
num polyvinyl chloride install polyvinyl chloride pipe liner in accordance with astm fnum .
num fiberglass steel or aluminum install fiberglass steel or aluminum pipe liner in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe install reinforced pipe liner in accordance with astm fnum .
the manufacturers written instructions may be substituted for astm fnum with written permission from the engineer .
num inverting install a resin impregnated felt tube pipe liner into the host pipe and cure in place in accordance with astm fnum .
num return to table of contents num pullingpushing install the liner in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
protect the pipe liner end using a device that uniformly distributes the applied load around the perimeter of the liner .
continuously monitor the applied load and do not stretch the liner by more than num of its original length .
for liner lengths of num feet or less the end protection device may be omitted with written permission from the engineer .
do not seal the liner ends or begin grouting prior to num hours after liner installation .
num spiral winding install the pipe liner in accordance with astm fnum or astm fnum .
num paneling install the pipe liner in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
limit paneling to host pipes having num inch or greater internal diameters .
do not place panels where a liner joint will lie along or near the crown of the host pipe .
num coating use materials and install the pipe liner in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
num bursting install the pipe liner in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
limit bursting to vitrified clay or concrete crossdrain or sidedrain pipe having no lateral connections or risers .
further limit bursting to locations where no part of the host pipe passes within num feet of any buried utility or pavement base material .
num acceptance .
inspect the complete rehabilitation by means of closed circuit television .
obtain written approval from the engineer prior to allowing persons to enter a host pipe .
provide the engineer videos of all preliminary and final inspections .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of pipe liner to be paid for will be the length per foot of pipe liner installed and accepted measured along the centerline of the pipe from end to end .
num basis of payment .
price and payment for pipe liner will be full compensation for furnishing and installing the pipe liner in accordance with the requirements of this section including all materials labor and incidentals required to dewater and clean host pipe dispose of all silt and debris seal cracks and joints in the host pipe and seal and grout the annular space between the liner and interior of the host pipe .
price and payment for pipe liner will also be full compensation for all equipment materials and labor required for inspections and for furnishing videos of the inspections to the engineer .
payment will be made under item no .
num num pipe liner per foot .
num return to table of contents section num structural plate pipe and pipe arch culverts num description .
construct structural plate pipe and pipe arch culverts as shown in the plans .
obtain pipe culverts from a plant currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
at the beginning of each project submit a notarized certification statement to the engineer from a company designated representative certifying that the structural steel plant will manufacture the products in accordance with the requirements set forth in the contract documents and plants approved quality control qc plan .
the qc managers stamp on each product indicates certification that the product was fabricated in conformance with the contractors qc plan the contract and this section .
ensure that each shipment of structural plate products to the project site is accompanied with a qc signed or stamped delivery ticket providing the description and the list of the products .
when the producers quality control program is suspended by the department accept responsibility of either obtaining products from a plant with an approved quality control program or await reapproval of the plant .
the engineer will not allow changes in contract time or completion dates as a result of the plants loss of qualification .
accept responsibility for all delay costs or other costs associated with the loss of the plants qualification .
num materials .
meet the following requirements steel pipe section num aluminum pipe section num liner repair systems section num when the plans call for bituminous coated pipe or pipe arch meet the coating requirements of num .
when other types of coating material are shown in the plans use a coating that consists of at least two coats of the specified material applied at the job site .
apply the coating by brush or by spray .
num trench foundation laying and backfill .
perform this work as specified in section num and as follows .
provide a foundation for the bottom plates that is of uniform density and carefully shaped to fit the lower plate of the pipe or pipe arch .
thoroughly tamp the backfill material against the remaining plates .
num assembly .
assemble the plates to form the pipe or pipe arch structure in accordance with the diagram furnished by the manufacturer .
connect the plates by bolting tightly in all bolt holes provided .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be the plan quantity in feet of pipe or pipe arch installed in place completed and accepted .
the quantity will be measured along the centerline of the structure from end to end of metal for full section structures from average end to end at top and bottom for beveledend structures .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials backfilling and disposal of surplus material and all excavation except the volume included in the items for grading work and for other items specified for payment in section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num structural plate pipe culvert per foot .
num return to table of contents section num trench drain num description .
construct trench drain with one of the materials listed below for the purpose of collecting and removing surface runoff from paved areas .
furnish and install trench drain in accordance with the standard plans at the locations shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num materials .
provide preformed channels or pipe with sufficient strength to withstand construction handling and placement of concrete backfill without deforming or deviating from line and grade .
submit certification to the engineer from the manufacturer that the trench drain system meets the requirements of this section .
num channelspipe meet the following requirements steel pipe section num aluminum pipe section num polyethylene section num and astm dnum polymer concreteastm dnum fiberglass astm dnum num concrete backfill use concrete that meets the requirements of section num .
num grates provide steel grates and supporting frames that meet the requirements of section num .
ductile iron frames and grates must meet the requirements of astm anum .
ensure that ductile iron grates and frames are compatible and from the same manufacturer .
frames must be anchored into the concrete backfill with studs bolts or lugs .
grates must have at least num open area and fasten securely to frames to avoid rattling grates must be removable for the entire channel length and have vandal resistant locking devices .
ensure that frames have a minimum of num inch long studs bolts or lugs at all four corners .
num cleanout covers for type num drains install steel or ductile iron covers that meet the requirements of section num .
num outlet pipe connect outlet pipe to the trench drain with standard manufactured connectors .
unless a particular type is called for in the plans use any of the following types of pipe concrete section num steelsection num aluminum section num polyvinyl chloride num polyethylene num num installation .
submit to the engineer the proposed method of installation noting any deviation from the manufacturers recommendations .
place concrete backfill in the trench against undisturbed material at the sides and bottom of the trench in a manner that will prevent floating or shifting of the trench drain and will prevent voids in or segregation of the concrete .
tamp and spade to num return to table of contents prevent honeycombing .
form the top surface to the lines shown in the plans .
remove any foreign material that falls into the trench prior to or during placement of concrete .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in place and accepted .
the plan quantity will be measured from the inside wall of the structure as shown in the plans along the centerline of the pipechannel .
curb placed with trench drain will be paid in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials tools equipment concrete backfilling outlet pipe connections to new or existing structures and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num trench drain per foot .
num return to table of contents section num underdrains num description .
construct underdrains underdrain cleanout structures underdrain inspection boxes and underdrain outlet pipes .
use any one of the types of pipe listed in num unless a particular type is specifically required .
use only perforated pipe and do not use open joints .
num materials .
meet the following requirements concrete pipe section num filter aggregate section num corrugated steel pipe section num corrugated aluminum pipe section num polyvinylchloride pipesection num corrugated high density polyethylene pipe section num corrugated polypropylene pipe section num steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe section num filter fabric sock section num geotextile fabrics section num use bitumizedfiber pipe only when called for in the contract documents .
num excavating trench .
excavate the trench carefully to the depth required to permit the pipe to be laid to the grade required and to the dimensions shown in the plans .
num laying pipe .
num general bed the pipe firmly on the bottom of the trench with the perforations down and joints securely made .
num corrugated steel pipe protection of coating handle corrugated steel pipe in such a way that the zinc or aluminum coating will not be bruised or broken .
do not use pipe showing bruises or breakage of the zinc or aluminum coating .
num protection of drain inlet protect the influent end of the pipe in a manner which will prevent any soil from entering the drain .
num lateral connections make lateral connections with prefabricated wyes tees elbows etc .
as required .
num underdrain inspection box construct underdrain inspection boxes in accordance with standard plans index num and the plans .
num underdrain cleanout structures construct underdrain cleanout structures of inline wye fittings and stub for access where called for in the plans .
num placing filter material and backfilling .
num placing material after laying the pipe and obtaining the engineers approval backfill the trench with filter material to the lines shown in the plans .
num compaction of filter material and protection of pipe place and compact the filter material around the pipe and for the full width of the trench in layers not exceeding num inches in thickness .
take special care to avoid displacement or damage to the pipe .
num return to table of contents num backfill above filter material for all types of pipe backfill the portion of the trench above the filter material with suitable pervious material .
place and compact the material in layers not exceeding num inches in thickness .
num type v underdrain construction .
to prevent clogging of type v underdrain from construction sediments initially excavate the associated stormwater facilities to rough grade .
after the contributing drainage area is stabilized construct the underdrains and excavate the stormwater facilities to achieve the final elevation .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be the length in feet of underdrain which includes underdrain cleanout structures measured in place along the centerline and gradient of the underdrain completed and accepted .
the quantities to be paid for will be the length in feet of outlet pipe measured in place along the centerline and gradient of the outlet pipe completed and accepted .
the quantity of underdrain inspection boxes to be paid for will be the number completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all the work including all materials and all excavation except the volume included in the items for the grading work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num underdrain per foot .
item no .
num num underdrain inspection box each .
item no .
num num underdrain outlet pipe per foot .
num return to table of contents section num french drains num description .
construct french drains utilizing one of the authorized types of pipe with coarse aggregate or ballast rock when specified and filter fabric .
num materials .
num pipe unless a particular type is specified in the plans pipe furnished may be any of the following types num .
concrete pipe bell spigot slotted or perforated concrete pipe may be used .
meet the requirements of section num for concrete pipe .
do not use gaskets .
fully insert the spigot in the bell and bring home .
conform to standard plans index num for slotted pipe .
use perforated pipe having perforations equally located num degrees around the pipe .
use pipe having not less than num round perforations num inch each per square foot of inside pipe surface .
extend perforations to within num inches of the bell or spigot area .
the engineer will permit other perforations not less than num inch nor more than num inch in the least dimension if they provide an opening area not less than num innumftnum of pipe surface .
num .
corrugated aluminum alloy culvert perforated pipe meet the requirements of section num .
use perforated pipe having perforations equally located num degrees around the pipe .
locate perforations either on the inside crests or on the neutral axis of all corrugations except that perforations are not required within num inches of each end of each length of pipe or in a corrugation where seams are located .
provide pipe having not less than num round perforations num inch each per square foot of pipe surface .
the engineer will permit other perforations not less than num inch nor more than num inch in the least dimension if they provide an opening area not less than num innumftnum of pipe surface .
num .
corrugated steel perforated pipe meet the requirements of section num .
space the perforations and meet the requirements as specified in num above .
num .
bituminous coated corrugated steel perforated pipe meet the requirements of section num .
space the perforations and meet the requirements as specified in num above .
place the perforations prior to the bituminous coating .
the engineer will accept the minimum opening of not less than num innumftnum of pipe if num of the opening area is maintained after coating .
num .
corrugated highdensity polyethylene hdpe pipe meet the requirements of num .
space the perforations and meet the requirements as specified in num above .
num .
polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe meet the requirements of num .
space the perforations and meet the requirements as specified in num above .
num .
corrugated polypropylene pipe meet the requirements of section num .
space the perforations and meet the requirements as specified in num above .
num coarse aggregate meet the requirements of num for no .
num stone .
num select fill use select fill meeting the requirements of section num .
num excavating trench .
excavate the trench in accordance with section num unless specific trench excavation procedures are described in the plans .
num return to table of contents carefully excavate the trench to such depths as required to permit the filter fabric coarse aggregate and the pipe to be placed in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
num laying pipe .
lay all pipe conforming with the lines and grades specified in the plans and in accordance with these specifications .
unless otherwise specified in the plans set the pipe with a num inch minimum cover and a maximum cover of num inches .
num placing coarse aggregate and backfilling .
after placing the pipe and without disturbing the pipe carefully place the coarse aggregate around the pipe to a depth shown in the plans .
fold the filter fabric over the coarse aggregate .
backfill and compact as described below .
num french drains under pavement fill the area above the coarse aggregate with select fill material meeting the requirements of this section .
place and compact the select fill according to the requirements for pipe as specified in section num .
the department will allow use of additional coarse aggregate over the top of the pipe instead of select fill material .
in this case the filter fabric shall be extended to wrap the additional course aggregate .
the top of the coarse aggregate shall not be higher than the bottom of the base unless shown in the plans .
the department will not pay additional costs associated with substituting coarse aggregate for select fill .
num french drains not under pavement fill and compact the area above the coarse aggregate according to the requirements for pipe in section num unless specific procedures are described in the plans as specified in section num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of french drains to be paid for under this section will be the length in feet measured in place completed and accepted as specified on standard plans index num for french drains .
num basis of payment .
the quantities determined as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot for french drains .
such prices and payments will be full compensation for all the work specified in this section and will include all materials and all excavation and will also include sheeting or shoring if required the disposal of surplus material pavement restoration backfilling and tamping but will not include payment for items paid for elsewhere in the specifications .
payment shall be made under item no .
num num french drains per foot .
num return to table of contents section num edgedrain draincrete num description .
construct edgedrain draincrete and edgedrain outlet pipe as shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
use any one of the types of pipe listed in num unless a particular type is specifically required within the contract documents .
use only perforated pipe and do not use open joints .
num materials .
meet the following requirements portland cement concrete section num coarse aggregate section num portland cementsection num water section num polyvinylchloride pipe section num polyethylene pipe section num filter fabric section num for draincrete the concrete requirements of section num are modified as follows use type i or ii portland cement no fly ash or other pozzolans permitted .
composition grade of coarse aggregate stone num num or num maximum watercement ratio num minimum cement factor num lbydnum of draincrete maximum slump range not applicable fine aggregate none admixtures none do not use materials which contain hardened lumps crusts or frozen matter or are contaminated with dissimilar material .
num control of quality .
num concrete design mix submit the proposed design mix prior to production on the concrete mix design form for the engineers approval .
use only draincrete design mixes having prior approval of the engineer .
do not change the design mix component materials except as per num .
the department will verify the proposed mix design and may witness the trial batching .
meet the unit weight requirements as determined in accordance with fm num and the drain rate in accordance with fm num .
also provide one of the following with the design mix submittal num .
evidence from three sets of production data either from department acceptance tests or independently verifiable commercial mixes that draincrete produced in accordance with the proposed design mix meets the requirements of this section .
num return to table of contents num .
test data from a single trial batch of num ydnum minimum is required which demonstrates that the draincrete produced using the proposed mix designated ingredients and designated watercement ratio meets the requirements of this section .
num batch adjustment materials meet the theoretical yield requirements of the approved mix design .
inform the engineer of any adjustments to the approved mix design .
note any batch adjustments and record the actual quantities incorporated into the mix on the concrete delivery ticketcertification form .
num delivery certification furnish to the engineer a complete delivery ticketcertification form with each batch of draincrete prior to unloading at the site .
num construction .
num excavating trench meet the requirements of section num .
num laying pipe meet the requirements of section num .
num placement of draincrete obtain the engineers approval before placing the draincrete .
deliver the draincrete to the site of placement in a freshly mixed unhardened state .
deposit draincrete in the form or trench by a method approved by the engineer to ensure uniform distribution .
do not use vibrators .
avoid displacement or damage to the pipe or filter fabric .
num sampling and testing .
num general the engineer will take random samples of the draincrete at the point of placement to determine the drain rate in accordance with fm num to determine the drain rate .
a minimum of two test cylinders will be made for each lot .
a lot represents one days production of each mix design .
num acceptance of hardened draincrete meet the minimum drain rate of num ozsecond .
draincrete not meeting the drain rate requirement will be rejected .
remove and replace all rejected draincrete at no cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of edgedrain draincrete to be paid for will be the length in feet measured in place along the centerline and gradient of the edgedrain draincrete completed and accepted .
the quantity of edgedrain outlet pipe to be paid for will be the length in feet measured in place along the centerline and gradient of the outlet pipe completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work including all materials excavation equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num edgedrain draincrete per foot .
item no .
num num edgedrain outlet pipe per foot .
num return to table of contents section num precast concrete drainage products num description .
precast concrete drainage products hereinafter called products may include but are not limited to round concrete pipe elliptical concrete pipe underdrains manholes endwalls inlets junction boxes threesided precast concrete culverts and precast concrete box culverts .
ensure that all precast drainage products are designed and manufactured in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents .
obtain precast concrete pipes box culverts and drainage structures from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
at the beginning of each project submit a notarized certification statement to the engineer from a company designated representative certifying that the plant will manufacture the products in accordance with the requirements set forth in the contract documents and producer quality control qc plan .
the quality control managers stamp on each product indicates certification that the product was fabricated in conformance with the producer qc plan the contract and this section .
ensure that each shipment of precast concrete products to the project site is accompanied with a qc signed or stamped delivery ticket providing the description and the list of the products .
when the producer quality control program is suspended by the department accept responsibility of either obtaining products from a plant with an approved quality control program or await reapproval of the plant .
the engineer will not allow changes in contract time or completion dates as a result of the plants loss of qualification .
accept responsibility for all delay costs or other costs associated with the loss of the plants qualification .
num materials .
ensure that the materials used for the construction of the precast drainage products have a certification statement from the source showing that they meet the applicable requirements of the specifications with the following modifications reinforcing bar section num coarse aggregate section num fine aggregate section num portland cement and blended cementsection num water section num admixtures section num pozzolans and slag section num gasket material section num blended hydraulic cements aashto m num welded wire reinforcement section num wire for site cage machines section num liner repair systems section num for concrete pipes the gradation requirements of concrete aggregates as set forth in sections num and num are not applicable .
num return to table of contents num construction requirements .
unless otherwise stipulated within the contract documents meet the following requirements for concrete mix product design fabrication transportation and installation threesided precast culverts section num precast concrete box culvert section num pipe culverts and storm sewers section num french drains section num inlets manholes and junction boxes section num and astm c num underdrains section num and astm c num steel reinforced round concrete pipe astm c num reinforced elliptical concrete pipe astm c num nonreinforced concrete pipe astm c num meet the special requirements for the applicable pipes as described in num and num .
num concrete pipe .
num special requirements for steel reinforced concrete pipe use pipe meeting the requirements of astm cnum with the modifications as described in num .
use special designed pipe meeting the requirements of astm cnum .
use class s pipe meeting the requirements of astm cnum .
ensure all pipes are properly marked .
num modifications to astm c num and astm c num the following supersedes the provisions of astm cnum and astm cnum num .
ensure all materials used in concrete are certified from the source and conform to the requirements of num .
num .
ensure all joint reinforcement requirements are in accordance with the standard plans .
num .
when membrane curing compounds are used ensure that the requirements of num are met and the membrane curing compounds are applied in accordance with num immediately after the pipe has been removed from the form .
num .
ensure the manufacturer has a suitable apparatus for testing each product in accordance with astm cnum and performs all tests outlined in astm cnum when requested by the engineer .
num .
ensure that the variation of laying lengths of two opposite sides of pipe is not more than num of the diameter with a maximum of num inch in any length of pipe except where beveledend pipe for laying on curves is specified .
num .
ensure that the type of wall markings is included on all precast pipes .
num .
ensure all repairs are made in accordance with section num .
num special requirements for nonreinforced concrete pipe ensure the requirements of astm cnum are met with the following exception modify material requirements set forth in astm cnum with the material requirements set forth in num .
ensure all pipes are properly marked .
num special requirements for reinforced elliptical concrete pipe use elliptical concrete pipes conforming to the requirements of astm cnum except for the exceptions and modifications as specified in num .
ensure the requirements of table i of astm cnum for standard elliptical pipe the requirements of class heiii and class heiv of table i of astm cnum for standard elliptical pipe and special elliptical pipe respectively are met and the joint design requirements set forth in article num of astm cnum are met .
num return to table of contents num concrete underdrain pipe use perforated concrete pipe for underdrains meeting the requirements of astm cnum with the following modifications num .
strength of finished pipe underdrain pipe will not be required to be reinforced and will not be tested for strength of the finished pipe .
approval of the strength of the finished pipe will be based on visual inspection and check .
num .
perforations the perforations must be molded into the pipe at the time of fabrication and any undue chips fractures incurred thereby either in the interior of the pipe or on the periphery which are sufficient to significantly impair the strength or efficiency will be cause for rejection of the pipe .
ensure the perforations are circular and of the diameter called for below with a tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
furnish all pipe included in any single order or for any single installation operation such diameter is reasonably uniform .
schedule of perforations for concrete underdrain pipe internal diameter of pipe diameter of perforations design number of rows approximate distance between rows spacing within rows num inches num inch num num inches num inches num inches num inch num num inches num inches num inches num inch num num inches num inches num inches num inch num num inches num inches num inch fabrication tolerance over and under .
perforations to be staggered in alternate rows .
the spacing between rows must be uniform .
num rejection of concrete pipe specific causes for rejection of concrete pipe in addition to any failure to meet the general requirements specified in the contract documents are as follows num .
failure to meet the requirements listed in astm cnum for permissible variations in dimensions with the modifications outlined in num and num .
num .
occurrence of defects listed in astm cnum .
num requirements for pipe joints when rubber gaskets are to be used .
num design of joint use pipe joint of the bellandspigot type or the double spigot and sleeve type meeting the requirements called for in the standard plans .
ensure the joint is so proportioned that the spigot or spigots will readily enter the bell or sleeve of the pipe .
ensure the joint ring forms for forming the joint surface are made of either heavy steel cast iron or aluminum and accurately machined to the dimensions of the joint .
they must be a true circular form within a tolerance of num inch .
dimensional checks of joint ring form will indicate for each size pipe a length of spigot or tongue not more than num inch shorter than the bell or groove depth .
the pipe will be so manufactured that joint surfaces are concentric with the inside of the pipe within a tolerance of num inch .
the shape and dimensions of the joint must be such as to provide compliance with the following requirements num .
the joint must be so dimensioned that when the gasket is placed on the spigot it will not be stretched more than num of its original length or the maximum stretch length that is recommended by the manufacturer whichever is lower .
num return to table of contents num .
the space provided for the gasket must be a groove in the spigot end of the pipe and such space when the joint is made it can not be more than num of the volume of the gasket .
num .
the joint must be designed so that when the outer surface of the spigot and the inner surface of the bell come into contact at some point on the periphery the diametric deformation in the gasket at the point of contact can not be greater than num of the normal gasket diameter and the diametric deformation in the gasket at a point opposite the contact point can not be less than num of the normal gasket diameter .
num .
when the pipes are joined there must be parallel surfaces on both the bell and the spigot extending from the outside edge of the gasket toward the bell face for a distance of not less than num inch .
these parallel surfaces can not be farther apart than num inch when the spigot is centered in the bell .
the tapers on these surfaces can not exceed three degrees .
num .
the inside surface of the bell at the end of the bell must be flared to facilitate joining the pipe sections without damaging or displacing the gasket .
num when rubber gaskets are used ensure that the pipe joints have been tested at the plant hydrostatically and shown to meet the requirements of section num of the materials manual which is available at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
num when profile rubber gaskets are used ensure the joint design meets the requirements set forth in article num of astm cnum .
num tolerances in imperfections and permissible repairs for joint of concrete gasketed pipe ensure that all surfaces of nearcontact of the jointed pipes are free from air holes chipped or spalled concrete laitance and other such defects .
pipes showing minor manufacturing imperfections or handling injuries to the bell or spigot may be acceptable if such defects are acceptably repaired as prescribed below .
individual air holes trapped air or spalled areas with a length of up to onehalf the pipe radius or num inches whichever is less may be repaired by careful use of a handplaced stiff preshrunk numtonum mortar of cement and fine sand and with no additional preparation other than a thorough washing with water of the defect .
curing will be done either by moisture curing under wet burlap or by application of an approved membrane curing compound .
such repaired pipe which is sound properly finished and cured and which otherwise conforms to specification requirements will be acceptable .
exposed reinforcing and minor spalling in the spigot groove may be accepted if repaired in the following manner the spalled areas will be chipped back to solid concrete .
exposed reinforcing will be cleaned of all laitance and scale .
the entire area is to be coated with an approved epoxy at a thickness of num to num mils .
the coating must be smooth and conform to the shape of the groove .
the epoxy must be a type fnum as specified in section num .
num return to table of contents section num precast prestressed concrete construction num description .
fabricate store transport and erect precastprestressed concrete members prestressed by the pretensioning method .
pretensioned precast prestressed concrete products are products prestressed by the pretensioning method .
in this method steel or fiber reinforced polymer frp components are stressed and anchored the concrete for the product is then cast and cured and finally the stress in the steel or frp components is released from the anchorages to the concrete through bond after the concrete has attained its specified release strength .
a precast prestressed concrete plant hereinafter called plant is an independent operating facility capable of performing all the operations necessary to fabricate precastprestressed concrete products .
obtain precastprestressed products from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
when the producers quality control program is suspended accept responsibility of either obtaining precastprestressed products from a precastprestressed concrete plant with an accepted quality control program or await reapproval of the producer quality control program .
the engineer will not allow changes in contract time or completion dates as a result of the concrete plants quality control program suspension .
accept responsibility for all delay costs or other costs associated with the plants quality control program suspension .
num quality control program .
num general develop a producer quality control program as specified in section num .
meet the requirements of the accepted quality control program contract documents and precastprestressed concrete institute pci manual for quality control for plants and production of structural precast concrete products .
the requirements of the contract documents will govern when there is a discrepancy between the pci manual and the contract documents .
accept responsibility for performing daily quality control qc inspections of all phases of work ensuring all materials and workmanship incorporated into the product meet the requirements of the contract documents .
also maintain a daily activity report detailing the results of the daily quality control program activities .
ensure these daily reports and minutes of the weekly meetings with the engineer and the plants production personnel are maintained at the plant .
during the weekly meetings discuss the results of the qc inspections .
inspect the product for conformance with the product dimension tolerances shown in appendix b of pci manual mnlnum manual for quality control for plants and production of structural precast concrete products except as modified herein .
apply the tolerances with respect to the theoretical positions and dimensions shown in the plans .
apply the same tolerances for ubeams as those specified for igirders excluding sweep tolerance when inspecting the product for conformance with dimension tolerances .
for florida ubeam diaphragms the tolerance for the thickness of the intermediate and end diaphragms is plus num inch and minus num inch and the location of intermediate diaphragms relative to design plan num return to table of contents positions is plus or minus num inches .
the tolerance of the thickness of end diaphragms shall be plus num inches and minus num inch .
limit sweep to num inch for ubeams and invertedt beams .
the tolerance for beam strand sheathing is plus or minus num inches .
ensure the tolerance on all miscellaneous shaping including but not limited to chamfers miters bevels keys tapers radii holes inserts and block outs is within plus or minus num inch of the control dimension of the shape .
the tolerances represent the total allowable tolerance that will be accepted in the finished product .
do not apply tolerances shown for the overall dimensions of a member to violate the tolerances shown for positions of reinforcing and prestressing steel or frp .
apply the tolerances during and after the fabrication of prestressed products .
do not reduce the concrete cover for reinforcing steel frp reinforcing prestressing steel frp prestressing strands or any other metallic objects specified in the plans more than num inch .
do not reduce the concrete cover for reinforcing steel frp reinforcing prestressing steel frp prestressing strands or any other metallic or plastic objects when the cover specified in the plans is minimum cover .
ensure the qc inspector is present during concrete placements and performs inspection during all fabrication of precast prestressed concrete products including the inspection of the operations before during and after the placement of concrete .
ensure the plant qc manager or the qc inspectors under their direction examine all precast prestressed concrete products within five working days of detensioning to ensure their dimensions conform to the specified tolerances and to determine if there are any deficiencies .
this process control shall be listed on the producer quality control plan qc plan .
num plant ensure each plant has an onsite qc manager meeting the requirements of section num .
num product certification ensure the qc inspector inspects all completed products at the plant not less than num hours before shipment to verify that all contract documents requirements are met .
upon verification that all contract document requirements have been met and all necessary repairs have been satisfactorily completed the product will be stamped with the approved qc manager stamp identified in the producer qc plan .
with each monthly request submitted for payment attach a certification stating that the listed precast prestressed products have been produced under the producer qc plan and meet the contract document requirements .
ensure the certification is signed by a legally responsible person of the plant and is submitted on the plants letterhead .
num documentation ensure that a system of records is maintained in each plant which will provide all information regarding the certification and testing of prestressing steel frp prestressing strands reinforcing steel frp reinforcing concrete materials and concrete curing materials embedded items tensioning concrete proportioning preplacement placement postplacement inspections curing and disposition of products .
include in the record keeping the deficiencies found as a result of the inspection and testing .
keep certified test reports for all materials incorporated into the production of precast prestressed concrete products .
ensure that the record of tensioning operations is maintained and reflects the identification of the bed type of fabricated products the complete financial project identification number jack identification number date prestressing strands were stressed temperature at the time of stressing and signature of the qualified tensioning machine operator .
ensure the proposed method and format for documenting required information is included in the producer qc plan .
num return to table of contents maintain records until all the precast prestressed products for a project have been fabricated then submit all the records to the engineer .
ensure records are available at all times for the engineers inspection .
num quality assurance inspection and testing the engineer will perform periodic inspections sampling and testing to ensure of the quality and acceptability of the materials methods techniques procedures and processes being utilized by the contractor in the fabrication of precast prestressed concrete products .
num materials .
num general meet the following requirements concrete section num steel strandssection num carbon fiber reinforcing polymer cfrp strandssection num steel prestressing bars section num steel accessories section num steel spirals section num reinforcing steel and metal welded wire reinforcement sections num and num frp reinforcing sections num and num frp spirals section num embedded ducts section num membrane curing compounds section num epoxy resin compounds section num burlap section num curing blanket num penetrant sealer section num methacrylate section num epoxy injection of cracks section num do not use strands from more than one source in any individual prestressed element with the exception of the partially tensioned strands dormant strands .
the frp spirals can not be used in combination with steel prestressing strand .. use membrane curing compounds and sealers that are compatible with coating or other materials that are applied to concrete surface .
use inserts in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturers and within their certified capacities and application qualifications .
do not use aluminum inserts .
use draped strand devices of sufficient rigidity having adequate support to retain the position of the strand unchanged under the induced load .
do not allow the devices to induce friction to the tendons such that the required jacking force and elongation can not be attained .
num strand chucks and splice chucks for pretensioning use strand chucks that are capable of anchoring the strands without slippage after seating and ensure against strand failure within the grips at loads less than num of ultimate strength .
submit manufacturers certification that splice chucks used to transmit the prestressing force from one prestressing tendon to another are capable to hold at least num of the ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing strand .
num return to table of contents do not use wedges that become worn cracked deformed or that allow dead end seating in excess of num inch .
use components from the same manufacturer to make up chucks and to provide proper wedge fit .
use chucks as complete units .
clean inspect and lubricate the chucks between each use .
use wedges and housing that are compatible and made for the specific type and size of prestressing strand that are being used avoid improper fit and improper seating of wedges on the strands .
the engineer will allow one splice per strand subject to the following num .
splices are located outside the concrete products except for precast piling where up to two splices are permitted to be used in each pile so long as they are not located in the same vertical cross section perpendicular to longitudinal axis of the pile .
num .
strands which are being spliced have the lay or twist in the same direction .
num material acceptance and testing .
num concrete perform the qc sampling and testing of concrete in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num reinforcing welded wire reinforcement and prestressing steel for pretensioning num general identify all reinforcing steel welded wire reinforcement and prestressing strand for pretensioning by lots .
a lot of reinforcing steel or welded wire is a shipment of material from the same manufacturer and heat .
a lot of prestressing steel is a shipment of material of the same size production grade and heat from the same manufacturer .
a lot of frp reinforcing bars or prestressing strands is a shipment of material of the same size fiber lot and resin batch from the same manufacturer .
acceptance of reinforcing bars welded wire reinforcement and prestressing steel for pretensioning is based on manufacturers certification and the departments verification tests .
the sampling for verification testing will be performed by the department at each precast plant on at least two lots per year additional samples may be taken at the manufacturing source of reinforcing bars welded wire reinforcement and prestressing strands .
when products contain the material that has failed to meet the requirements of num reject the unused material of the failed lot .
the engineer may require the evaluation of the products which contain the failed material in accordance with num .
num steel reinforcing and welded wire reinforcement obtain and maintain for each lot a certified mill analysis physical property test report and the manufacturers assigned lot number with the heat of the material represented .
verify that the report represents the steel received and that the steel meets the contract documents requirements .
reject all unidentified reinforcing steel or welded wire reinforcement received at the plant or job site .
submit the manufacturers certified mill analysis and provide three num foot long randomly selected samples from the designated lot of reinforcing steel and three randomly selected samples from the designated lot of welded wire reinforcement when requested by engineer .
ensure each sample of welded wire reinforcement covers an area of four intersections of transverse and longitudinal bars .
ensure the transverse wires of each piece of welded wire reinforcement extend approximately num inches to both sides .
num fiber reinforced polymer frp reinforcing meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num steel prestressing strand for pretensioning obtain and maintain for each lot of material received the manufacturers assigned lot number certified test values for specified material properties together with a representative loadelongation curve and the modulus of elasticity value based upon strand nominal area .
submit and support by records maintained by the strand manufacturer production tolerances applied in selection of the reported strand modulus .
verify that documents submitted represent the shipment received and meets the contract documents requirements .
reject all unidentified prestressing steel received at the plant or job site .
submit the manufacturers certified mill analysis and provide three num foot long randomly selected samples from the designated lot of material when requested by the engineer .
num fiber reinforced polymer frp prestressing strand for pretensioning meet the requirements of num .
num strand chucks and splice chucks obtain and maintain certified test results certifying that the material meets the requirements of num .
num steel accessories use only steel accessories meeting the requirements of num .
num ducts obtain and maintain certified test results certifying that the material meets the requirements of num .
num shop drawings .
submit shop drawings for all pretensioned prestressed concrete products containing frp bars or strands .
submit shop drawings for all other pretensioned prestressed concrete products when the contract documents do not contain all the detailed information necessary to fabricate and erect the pretensioned prestressed concrete product .
ensure the submitted shop drawings meet the requirements of num and any additional contract document requirements .
shop drawings are not required to depict supplemental reinforcing steel used to facilitate fabrication of products .
in lieu of shop drawings submit the following to the engineer num .
the framing plan with product designations for all superstructure components .
num .
strand detensioning schedule .
num .
tensioning and elongation calculations .
num .
details of supplemental steel that remains as part of the finished product .
num .
drawings details and spacing for embedded items associated with fall protection systems used on beams .
num .
when proposing to use materials andor methods that differ from the requirements of the contract documents submit full plan details and specifications for the alternate materials and methods .
ensure the alternate materials and methods meet the following requirements a .
the provisions of the contract documents .
b .
the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications edition with interims as referenced in plans .
c. the recommendations of the material manufacturer .
d. any materials change proposed by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
e. net compressive stress in the concrete due to prestressing acting alone after all losses is not less than that provided by the stranding shown in the plans .
num return to table of contents f. ultimate strength of the structure with the proposed changes is not less than the ultimate strength of the original design .
g. the provisions of the departments structures design guidelines .
num forms .
num general use metal side and bottom forms unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
for members with special shapes such as corner sheet piles wood forms are permitted .
slab units and sheet piles may be cast on concrete surfaces meeting the profile dimensional tolerances of num .
apply release agents in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
liquid membrane curing compounds may be used to prevent bonding of slab products and sheet piles to the existing concrete surface when applied in two or more coating .
ensure the last application of liquid membrane is applied immediately before placement of the slab or sheet pile .
for all beam members use side forms designed to be removed without damaging the top flange of the beam .
remove the forms horizontally away from the beam by a method that prevents any contact of the form with the top flange after release of the form .
do not subject the top flange to any vertical force at any time .
include the form details and method of removal in the producer qc plan .
for all floridai beams use forms that do not have more than two horizontal joints .
use void forms of a type for which service adequacy has been demonstrated having sufficient strength to provide stability during handling and placing and to withstand hydrostatic pressures and other forces imposed upon them during concrete placement .
use form material that is neutral with respect to the generation of products harmful to the physical and structural properties of the concrete .
ensure that the presence of the form materials does not cause any detrimental effect to the concrete or other materials within the member .
positively vent all voids to the outside of the member .
for end headers and inside forms other materials capable of resisting the pressure from concrete are permitted except that end headers used with cfrp strands must be either timber headers or steel headers with rubber grommets to protect the cfrp strands from damage .
use end headers so designed that they can be placed and maintained in correct position between the side forms .
hold the headers in place with devices capable of being removed or loosened after the concrete has attained its initial set allowing free form expansion during curing methods that involve heat .
use end headers with openings conforming to the prestressing strand pattern to permit passage of the prestressing strand .
locate the openings accurately within num inch of planned location of prestressing strand elements .
construct circular openings for strands a maximum of num inch larger than the nominal strand diameter .
construct square or rectangular openings a maximum of num inch larger horizontally and vertically than the nominal strand diameter .
ensure that all headers are mortar tight .
num supports use forms of sufficient thickness with adequate external bracing and stiffeners which are anchored to withstand the forces due to placement and vibration of concrete .
ensure that joints in forms are mortar tight .
support bottom forms on concrete pallets with metal stiffeners wales or shims .
do not use timber elements between the bottom metal form and concrete pallets .
num return to table of contents num alignment make and maintain during their use forms and centering true to the shapes and dimensions for the product being produced .
plumb align and secure forms for each product in position before each reuse .
apply the following tolerances to form alignment and pallets or beds used in prestressed construction num .
horizontal alignment horizontal deviation of side forms either side of a vertical plane within the length of a product num inch num .
vertical alignment vertical deviation of the bed or pallet from a horizontal plane within the length of a product num inch num .
for vertical joints offset between adjacent form sections num inch .
num .
for horizontal joints offset between adjacent form sections num inch .
num end header locations num general provide a minimum of num inches of exposed strands from the end header to the stressing anchorage and between adjacent ends of all products except num inches square and smaller piles .
provide a minimum of num inches of exposed strands between adjacent ends of num inches square and smaller piles .
num cold weather provide a distance of at least num feet from the end header to the stressing anchorage when the ambient temperature is expected to be below numf between the time of tensioning and detensioning .
when the ambient temperature is expected to be below numf between the time of tensioning and detensioning and the products exposed strands between the stressing anchorages are not protected maintain a num foot minimum free length of stressed strands between the end header and the stressing anchorage at each end of a bed line .
when cold weather concrete conditions as specified in num are in effect protect all exposed strands between stressing anchorages regardless of length .
when the products and strands between stressing anchorages are protected provide protection adequate to maintain the ambient temperature of the air around the strands at or greater than numf until the products are detensioned or num hours after placing concrete whichever is less .
num surface conditions use clean rust free form surfaces against which concrete is to be cast .
inspect forms and if necessary recondition them .
num form ties ensure that no form wires or metal pieces are left within num inches of the surface of the finished concrete .
num corners angles and joints ensure corners and angles are chamfered mitered or rounded with a radius of num inch unless otherwise specified or shown in the plans .
provide smooth mortar tight joints between panel forms within the alignment tolerances .
num form release agent before placing concrete treat the facing of all forms with a form release agent in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
ensure the application of form release agents does not contaminate prestressing strands andor reinforcing steel .
num protection and placement of prestressing strand .
num protection of prestressing strand maintain and store prestressing steel above the ground surface on platforms skids or other supports to prevent contamination from below and protect them from mechanical injury .
do not use any packaging or wrapping material that retains moisture at the bottom of the reel .
clean contaminated prestressing strand before use or otherwise reject it .
handle prestressing strand carefully to prevent nicks or kinks .
do not expose steel prestressing strand to temperatures greater than numf at any time .
do not expose crfp prestressing strand to temperatures greater than numf at any time .
do not use arc welding num return to table of contents equipment including welding electrode lines within num feet of prestressing strand .
do not perform any welding on forms that have been set in place after the prestressing strand is placed in the bed .
reject prestressing strand that has sustained any physical damage at any time .
num placing prestressing strand use care during placement of prestressing strand to avoid physical damage and contamination .
reject damaged strands .
do not use prestressing steel containing nicks kinks or former chuck grip marks .
do not use prestressing strand showing evidence of scale formation or which has become pitted .
remove and replace any damaged prestressing strand in the bed .
num cleanliness of prestressing strand inspect the prestressing strand for any evidence of contamination .
use strand that is free of deleterious materials such as grease oil wax dirt paint except that used for marking identification or other similar contaminants .
remove any contaminants detected from the strand before proceeding with fabrication activities .
rust on prestressing steel that can be removed by light rubbing is acceptable .
streaks or spots which may remain after rust removal are acceptable if no pitting is present .
num debonded strands extend the tubular debonding material sheathing through the header for debonded prestressing strand .
tie and tape the debonding material at the terminus located at the inside of the member .
seal openings between strand and sheathing for debonded strands with num silicone sealant within seven calendar days of detensioning .
the sealing of openings between strand and sheathing is not required for beams with ends not be encased in permanent concrete diaphragms per num and strand protection per num .
use sheathing that is tubular nonslit highdensity plastic with a minimum wall thickness of num inch and an inside diameter exceeding the maximum outside diameter of the pretensioning strand by num inch to num inch which does not react with concrete coating steel or frp and prevents the intrusion of water or cement paste during concrete placement .
do not use strands debonded over the full length of a product .
num tensioning equipment and operations .
num equipment use a hydraulic jacking system that is adjustable to the automatic application and sustaining of a predetermined load together with a pressure transducer or load cell built into the hydraulic system .
connect such pressure gage or transducer to a dial or digital readout and printer manual recording of the tensioning operations is permitted which will provide an instantaneous readout and record of the applied load in pounds .
use a jacking system with the capacity to induce the required load .
base the use of this system on demonstrated accuracy and repeatability of plus or minus num of anticipated load verified through comparison with loads indicated by an independent load cell .
calibrate all jacking systems before using and repeat calibration at intervals not exceeding num months .
calibrate and recalibrate in accordance with the equipment manufacturers recommendations by qualified calibration agency or by plant personnel under the supervision of a specialty engineer .
calibrate gages jacks and pumps as a system in the same manner they are used in tensioning operations with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be in actual use at final jacking force .
in multistrand tensioning systems gages may be calibrated against a master gage of known accuracy provided that the other units of the system are calibrated against the same master gage .
ensure calibrations cover the load ranges that will be used during production .
verify the accuracy setting of the automatic cutoff valves by running the desired cutoff load .
ensure a certified calibration curve accompanies each tensioning system .
load readings can be used directly if the calibration determines a reading is within plus or minus num return to table of contents num tolerance of anticipated load .
ensure calibration of load cells or proving rings used to calibrate jacking systems are on compression force testing equipment that has been calibrated in accordance with astm enum .
when any jack or gage appears to be giving erratic results or if the jack force and elongation do not compare within specified limits and differences can not be justified while work is in progress recalibrate the equipment .
also verify the accuracy of the equipment after internal jacking system repairs or when gage and jacking units are switched .
calibrate or recalibrate in accordance with astm enum using equipment that is calibrated in accordance with astm enum .
after calibration or recalibration has been completed prepare a certificate and have it signed by the person in responsible charge of the verifications as outlined in astm enum and astm enum .
ensure that the calibration report includes the serial number of the equipment that is calibrated calibration chart in a graph or tabular form calibration date temperature full range of readings before and after calibration national institute of standards and technologys nists traceable number of calibration device method of calibration calibration agency and laboratory or engineer supervising the calibration .
verify the accuracy of the jacking and recording system a minimum of once each week during tensioning operations by either an independently calibrated load cell or by comparison with calculated strand elongation .
when weekly verification is to be performed by comparison with calculated strand elongation check a minimum of ten strands and the difference in the indicated load and the load determined from the elongation must agree within num of the computed theoretical load values .
if the differences are greater than num suspend the tensioning operation evaluate the tensioning operation by qualified personnel and correct any deficiencies before proceeding .
when weekly verification is done by load cell perform a minimum of five spot checks to the maximum anticipated load of strands .
use a load cell or proving ring that is calibrated in accordance with astm enum and the accuracy of the force must be traceable to nist .
maintain written records of readings obtained from the force recording system and verifying standard .
ensure the weekly verification record includes the serial number of the equipment verification date verification agency nist traceable number of calibration standard and name of the person making the spot checks .
the load reading from the recording system must agree within plus or minus num of the anticipated load indicated by the load cell or proving ring that are calibrated annually .
num operations num general the tensioning operations consist of the application of the final force or load which is the force required by the plans and with the adjustments for abutment rotation bed shortening anchorage header movement live end seating dead end seating splice chuck seating friction in the jacking system and any other elements as applicable for the type of bed and anchorage being used .
also adjust the force required by the plans when the temperature differential between the ambient temperature at time of stressing and the expected concrete temperature at time of placement is greater than numf .
increase the force at the rate of num for each numf increment that the ambient temperature at time of stressing is below the expected concrete temperature at time of placing .
decrease the force at the rate of num for each numf that the ambient temperature at time of stressing is above the expected concrete temperature at the time of placing .
do not allow the stress in the steel prestressing strand to exceed num of the specified tensile strength of the strand after seating .
do not allow the stress in the cfrp prestressing strand to exceed num of the specified tensile strength of the strand after seating .
num return to table of contents during each tensioning operation for the verification of the live and dead end seating check the seating of at least num strands or a minimum of num of the total number of strands whichever is greater .
maintain a record of the tensioning operation .
compensation for temperature differential and abutment rotation are not required for selfstressing beds .
however adjust the final load for the effects of bed shortening due to the load from all the strands .
if the placement of concrete is delayed for more than seven calendar days after the completion of the stressing operation check and adjust the final strand load as necessary before placement of concrete and maintain a record of the stressing operation .
accomplish tensioning by either single strand tensioning or multiple strand tensioning and ensure that it is symmetrical about the vertical axis of the product .
tensioning methods in general consist of tensioning to the required loads indicated by the jacking system or tensioning to the required load while monitoring the elongation of the prestressing strand .
num single straight strand tensioning apply an initial force of num to num of the final force to eliminate slack in the system .
when single straight strand tensioning is used tension the prestressing strand until the required final force is attained .
measure and record the force and elongation .
num multiple straight strand tensioning apply the initial uniform tensioning load to each individual strand before the application of full tensioning load to the group of strands .
the amount of the initial load will be influenced by the length of the casting bed and the size of strands in the group to be tensioned .
the minimum initial tensioning load will be num of the required final load .
increase the magnitude of this load if deemed necessary but do not allow it to exceed num of the required final load .
then tension the strands by multiple strand tensioning to final load by pulling to elongation and checking against the jack load .
allow the required elongation to control the tensioning .
the actual jack load must agree within num of the required load .
for uniform application of load to strands the face of anchorage at final load must be in a plane parallel to its position under initial load .
verify this by measurement of movement on opposite sides of the anchorage and check its plumb position before and after application of the final load .
during tensioning allow the anchorage to move without restraint .
num draped strand tensioning tension draped strands by either partial tensioning and subsequent strains or by final tensioning in draped position .
partial stressing and subsequent strains applies when the strands are tensioned through a combination of applied jack loads and strand uplift .
to verify the final force place a load cell between the tensioning anchorage and anchor chucks at the dead end on at least two draped strands .
other methods as approved by the engineer may be used to verify the final force in the dead end .
bring the partially draped strand to an initial tension using a force in the range of num to num of the required final tensioning force .
after application of the initial force establish reference marks for measuring elongation .
apply a precalculated jacking force and measure elongations on a minimum of four strands .
the average measured elongation must agree within num of the theoretical elongation for strand force measured by jack load or the factors contributing to the difference must be identified and corrected before proceeding .
allow the load indicated by the jacking system to control the tensioning for the precalculated load .
obtain the required final force by lifting or depressing the strand simultaneously at all pickup or hold down points or in an approved sequence as shown on the shop drawings .
on each different bed setup num return to table of contents after lifting or depressing the strands to their final position check the final force at the dead end of at least two strands on the bed .
if the load is below the required tensioning force by more than num adjust it to the final load .
when the final stressing is performed in the draped position apply the tensioning load in two increments with the tendons being held in their draped positions .
to verify the final force place a load cell between the tensioning anchorage and anchor chucks at the dead end on at least two draped strands .
other methods as approved by the engineer may be used to verify the final force in the dead end .
bring each strand to an initial tension of num to num of the final load before the application of the required final load .
after application of the initial load establish reference marks for measuring elongation .
then tension the strands to final load and measure the elongation .
allow the load indicated by the jacking system to control the tensioning for the initial and final loads .
the measured elongation must agree within num of the theoretical elongation for the strand force measured by jack load or the factors contributing to the difference must be identified and corrected before proceeding .
when the jacking is performed at one end of the bed check the applied load on two draped strands at the other end of the bed .
if the load on the end opposite the jacking end is below the required value by more than num adjust the load to the required final load .
num wire breakage num steel prestressing strand limit wire breakage to num of the total area of the strands in any product and verify that breakage is not indicative of a more extensive distress condition otherwise reject all stranding .
replace individual strands with more than one wire failure .
num fiber reinforced polymer frp prestressing strand replace individual strands with any wire failure .
num position of prestressing strand position prestressing strand as shown in the plans within the tolerances allowed in num .
fix the required vertical and horizontal position of each prestressing strand at the ends of each product and at intervals within each product not exceeding num feet .
use the method of fixing the prestressing strand shown in the producer qc plan .
when blocks are to be used for supporting prestressing strand use those cast from concrete of the same mix design as used in the prestressed product .
stagger the location of blocks with an offset of num inches or greater and do not stack them .
num placement of reinforcing bars and other embedded materials .
num reinforcing bars and supports tie andor support in position all reinforcing steel in each product with other reinforcing bars in a manner that will accurately position the reinforcing bars throughout the fabrication process .
use types of ties and methods of tying recommended by the crsi including lacing .
do not tie reinforcing bars to debonded prestressing strands within the limits of the sheathing material .
tie or lace beam stirrup bars at a minimum of three points .
tie reinforcing bars other than stirrup bars in beam ends as a minimum at every other intersection .
either tie or lace spirals in piling at all four corners in the num inch pitch area at the top corners and bottom center in the num inch pitch area and at the top corners in the center area .
tie the bottom center in the pile center area as necessary to maintain concrete cover .
bend all ties away from the form surface to provide maximum concrete cover .
when shown in the plans weld reinforcing steel in accordance with the requirements of aws structural welding code d num .
do not weld in the prestressing bed .
num other embedded materials num return to table of contents num inserts and lifting devices num placement locate inserts and lifting devices in accordance with the tolerances listed in num .
use only nonmetallic inserts and lifting devices with cfrp reinforced piling .
num corrosion protection provide corrosion protection for embedded metal lifting devices that would remain exposed after construction .
after lifting operations using recessed metallic or nonmetallic lifting devices are complete backfill blockouts with a type f epoxy compound meeting the requirements of section num for a minimum distance of num inches beyond the perimeter of the metal device as measured parallel to the exposed concrete surface .
if the blockout extends less than num inches beyond the perimeter of the metal device extend the epoxy compound beyond the blockout along the concrete surface .
if type num or num stainless steel lifting devices are used nonshrink grout meeting the requirements of section num may be used to backfill the blockout within its limits .
after lifting operations using flush or protruding metallic or non metallic lifting devices are complete cut the lifting devices back to a minimum depth of num inch below the concrete surface and patch with a type f epoxy compound meeting the requirements of section num .
for all square prestressed piling concrete sheet piling and concrete poles cut and patch lifting devices before transporting from the casting yard .
num placement of bearing assemblies set bearing assemblies designed to transmit reaction forces to the concrete in the position shown in the plans .
place bearing plate assemblies or shoes which are to be cast in a product within appropriate tolerances as provided in num .
check the assemblies for position after stripping from the forms .
num concrete operations .
num temperature restrictions num cold weather concreting when the temperature of the surrounding air is expected to be below numf within num hours after placing concrete the temperature of the plastic concrete as placed must be numf or greater .
maintain the temperature of the concrete after placement at or above numf for the first num hours or until detensioning whichever occurs first .
for piles and other members with a minimum section dimension of num inches or more maintain the temperature of the concrete after placement at or above numf for the first num hours or until detensioning whichever occurs first .
make arrangements for heating covering insulating or housing the concrete work in advance of placement and maintain the required temperature without injury due to concentration of heat .
do not use direct fired heaters during the first num hours after concrete placement unless actions are taken to prevent exposure of the concrete to exhaust gases which contain carbon dioxide .
continuously monitor the temperature of the concrete or the ambient air around the product until the product is detensioned .
monitor by the use of thermocouples located in the product crosssection or temperature recording devices located under the enclosure .
provide one thermocouple or temperature recording device for each num feet of bed length or part thereof .
locate the thermocouples within the products cross section as shown in the producer qc plan or as approved by the engineer .
record the monitored temperatures determined by each thermocouple .
review the recorded temperatures to ensure that they are within the specified limits .
initially calibrate recording devices or thermocouples and recalibrate them at least annually in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num hot weather concreting meet the requirements of section num for temperature requirements and special measures for mixing concrete in hot weather .
num return to table of contents apply fog mist spray of water to prestressing strands steel reinforcing frp reinforcing and steel forms just before placing the concrete when the hot weather concreting special measures are in effect and the temperature of steel forms or reinforcing steel is greater than numf .
num protection of concrete from weather have protection materials available before the concrete placement begins to cover the products in the event of rain during the placement of concrete .
protection materials may be tarps curing blankets or other impervious material that will not puncture when placed over protruding reinforcing andor form elements .
include the method and materials for protection in the producer qc plan .
num concrete placement num general check forms reinforcing bars prestressing strand vent pipes anchorages and other embedded items for compliance with the contract documents before placing concrete .
place concrete in accordance with num except as modified herein .
for concrete operations conducted at night provide enough lighting to allow visual inspection of the interior of the forms during the complete concrete placement operation .
convey concrete by the use of buckets conveyors pumps troughs or other equipment specifically designed for concrete conveyance provided the placement method consistently produces quality concrete with no segregation or separation of the mix .
locate the concrete conveyance equipment within num inches of the top of the forms or surface of the concrete to minimize the free fall of the concrete .
multiple placements may be used within a bedline provided compliance with num is maintained .
num requirements for successive layers except for selfconsolidating selfcompacting concrete place concrete as described in num through num as shown in the producer qc plan or as approved in writing by the engineer .
in any progressive concrete placement operation do not allow the time between successive placements onto previously placed concrete to exceed num minutes unless the previously placed concrete has not yet stiffened as evidenced by the continued effective use of vibration .
num aashto type ii floridai beam num and doublet beams piling and precast slab units except voided piling and slabs place concrete in one or more layers or lifts .
if more than one layer is used for doublet beams end the first layer such that the top of the concrete is slightly below the bottom of the flange .
num aashto type iii type iv and floridai beams num and num and voided units slabs and piling place concrete in a minimum of two horizontal layers .
the thickness of the first layer will be such that the top of the concrete is just above the top of the bottom flange .
in voided units end the first layer slightly above the middle height of the void .
fill the form by the last layer .
num all beams num inches or deeper place concrete in a minimum of three horizontal layers .
the thickness of the first layer will be such that the top of the concrete is slightly above the top of the bottom flange .
the thickness of the second layer will be such that the top of the concrete is slightly above the bottom of the top flange .
fill the beam forms by the last layer .
num pretensioned i beams containing longitudinal post tensioning ducts place concrete in one continuous lift beginning in the end block zone and num return to table of contents progressing to the other end .
do not allow the progression of the concrete placement to proceed until previously placed concrete has been properly consolidated and the rate of advancement equals the ability to fill the forms .
in progression of the placement deposit concrete within the forms on the surface of previously placed concrete .
num florida u beams place the concrete in florida u beams in a minimum of two horizontal layers .
the thickness of the first layer shall be such that the top of the concrete is above the top of the bottom flange .
num vibration of concrete except for selfconsolidating concrete consolidate concrete in steel reinforced piling by internal or external vibration or combination of these methods .
for cfrp strand reinforced piling use selfconsolidating concrete without the use of vibration .
if further consolidation is needed manual rodding is permitted .
design external form vibrators for the specific use .
design forms used in conjunction with external vibration and build them to effectively transmit vibration to the concrete mass .
mount and operate form vibrators in compliance with the vibrator manufacturers written recommendations a copy of which must be on file at the prestressed concrete plant .
secure vibrators to the form mounts by positive locking devices so that maximum vibration is transmitted into the form .
modify or replace external form vibrator systems that are demonstrated to be ineffective .
operate vibrators at each mount location for the time necessary for complete concrete consolidation .
do not allow progressive points of vibration to exceed twice the visually effective radius of vibration .
keep forms equipped with external vibrators clean and free of any buildup of hardened concrete .
ensure internal vibrators are available before concrete placement is started .
use an internal vibrator with a head of such size that proper vibration of the concrete will be secured without causing movement of the prestressing strand or reinforcing bars .
the vibrating frequency range must be num to num impulses per minute .
have at least one standby vibrator available onsite .
insert the vibrator in the concrete at points spaced to ensure uniform vibration of the entire mass of the concrete .
do not allow points of insertions to be further apart than the radius over which the vibrator is visibly effective .
allow the vibrator to sink into the concrete by its own weight and allow it to penetrate into the underlying layers sufficiently so that the two layers are thoroughly consolidated together .
after the concrete is thoroughly consolidated slowly withdraw the vibrator to avoid formation of holes .
revise the existing placement and consolidation procedure to improve the consolidation of the concrete if the existing placement and consolidation procedure have produced unacceptable surface defects such as honeycombing aggregate or mortar pockets and excessive air bubbles .
num finishing num general when concrete incorporating silica fume is used screed and finish with a continuous water fog mist maintained above the concrete .
do not apply the fog directly toward the concrete .
the contractor may apply a monomolecular finishing aid approved by the engineer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
num beams rough float the top surface of the beam and then scrub it transversely with a coarse brush or metal tine to produce a roughened surface for bonding .
for the other external surfaces of prestressed beams unless otherwise specified apply a general surface finish in accordance with num .
remove mortar leakage and stains to produce beams with a uniform appearance .
num return to table of contents num piling unless a class num applied finish coating is otherwise specified apply a general surface finish as specified in section num to pile surfaces except that pointing with mortar will not be required for cosmetic chips and bug holes with a depth less than num inch and a diameter of less than num inch .
all other general surface finish requirements will apply including the pointing of material form tie cavities with mortar .
surface finish deficiencies that meet the definition of noncomplying prestressed products must be corrected in accordance with num .
miter or round the top corners similar to the corner radius of the pile forms .
surfaces exposed during casting must have a steel trowel finish .
num slabs and doublet beams when the plans show the top surface of prestress slab or doublet beams units to be the riding surface apply a class num floor finish in accordance with section num .
when the plans show the surface to be overlaid with asphalt or concrete rough float the top surface and then scrub it transversely with a coarse brush to remove all laitance and to produce a roughened surface for bonding .
for the other external surfaces of slabs and doublet beams unless otherwise specified apply a general surface finish in accordance with num .
num curing cure prestressed concrete as required for a minimum duration of num hours .
if forms are loosened upon setting of concrete andor removed before the num hour curing period is complete expand the curing to cover the newly exposed surfaces by either coating with curing compound or extending the continuous moist cure area .
maintain concrete surface moisture at all times until curing is begun .
if a water sheen is not present apply supplemental moisture by fog misting or prevent water sheen loss on flat work by use of an evaporation retarder .
after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit the application of curing material without marring the exposed surface cover the exposed surfaces of all prestressed concrete products by one of the following procedures or other alternate curing methods .
alternate curing methods and details proposed by the contractor must be approved by the engineer .
base alternate curing methods upon a demonstrated ability to retain surface moisture of the concrete and to control curing temperatures within acceptable limits .
discontinue use of any alternate curing method other than those included herein upon any indication of noncompliance with this specification .
num continuous moisture place burlap on the surface and keep it continuously saturated for the curing period by means of soil soakers leaking pipes or automatic sprinklers .
do not apply moisture manually .
if side forms are removed during the curing period extend the burlap to completely shield the sides of the product .
water flow may be metered to cycle repetitively for five minutes on and five minutes off during the num hour curing period .
when it is not practical to apply moisture or curing compound inside the voided piles cover their ends with wet burlap to prevent moisture loss .
num membrane curing compound apply a white type num curing compound to all surfaces in a singlecoat continuous operation at a uniform coverage as recommended by the manufacturer but not less than num gallon per num square feet .
apply the curing compound on the concrete surfaces that are still damp but no free standing water .
allow surfaces covered by the membrane curing compound to remain undisturbed for the curing period .
recoat any cracks checks or other defects in the membrane seal which are detected during the curing period within one hour .
if side forms are loosened during the curing period remove them at that time and immediately coat the formed surfaces with a clear membrane curing compound and maintain the surface seal for the remainder of the curing period .
bottom surfaces must be num return to table of contents similarly coated after removal of the forms .
remove membrane curing compound to applied surfaces of concrete products to which other concrete is to be bonded by sandblasting or water blasting until all traces of membrane curing compound are removed .
when the curing compound is applied by spraying use a compressor driven sprayer of sufficient size to provide uniform spray at the nozzle .
keep all nozzles clean to ensure a uniform application of compound .
for compressor driven sprayers provide a calibrated reservoir which will allow the quantity of applied materials to be accurately determined .
maintain standby equipment in case of mechanical failure .
if a mechanical failure occurs a hand held pumpup sprayer may be used to apply curing compound to the remainder of the products cast in the days production .
suspend additional concrete placements until the mechanical sprayer is functioning properly .
num curing blankets curing blankets may be used for curing the top surfaces of products .
do not use curing blankets which have been torn or punctured .
securely fasten edges to provide as tight a seal as practical .
allow curing blankets to remain in place for the curing period .
should the system fail to maintain a moist condition on the concrete surface discontinue the use of curing blankets and take immediate corrective action to prevent further loss of concrete moisture .
num accelerated curing num general use lowpressure steam curing radiant heat curing or continuous moisture and heat curing .
do not use lowpressure steam or radiant heat curing with cfrp piling .
if accelerated curing is completed before the curing period has elapsed continue curing for the remaining part of the curing period in accordance with one of the curing methods above .
if accelerated curing is used furnish and use temperature recording devices that will provide accurate continuous and permanent records of the time and temperature relationship of the enclosure and concrete throughout the entire curing period .
place the temperature recording sensors at a minimum of two locations spaced approximately at or near the third point of bed length to measure the temperatures of the enclosure and concrete .
initially calibrate recording thermometers and recalibrate them at least annually in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
place the sensors at the center of gravity of the bottom flanges for beams .
place the sensors at the center of gravity of the cross sections normal to pile length for solid piles and at the midpoint of the wall thickness of the pile for voided piles .
when the ambient air temperature is equal to or higher than numf start the accelerated curing by supplying or retaining moisture and the application of the heat following the initial set period of concrete .
determine the initial set time in accordance with astm cnum .
during the application of heat do not allow the temperature rise in the concrete product to exceed numf per hour .
the maximum curing temperature of the enclosure or concrete must not exceed numf .
maintain the maximum curing temperature uniform throughout the enclosure with variation of not more than numf from the maximum peak temperature until concrete reaches the required release strength .
allow the concrete element to cool gradually at the maximum cooling rate of numf per hour and continue the cooling at this rate until the concrete temperature is numf or less above the ambient temperature outside the curing enclosure .
when the ambient air temperature is below numf cure the concrete in two stages .
start the accelerated curing of the first stage during the preset period by applying heat to increase the temperature of concrete at the maximum rate of numf per hour .
the total temperature gain of concrete during the initial set period can not exceed numf higher than the placement num return to table of contents temperature or numf whichever is less .
upon obtaining the initial set continue curing as stated above for ambient temperature of numf or higher .
to prevent moisture loss on exposed surfaces during the preheating period cover products as soon as possible after casting or keep the exposed surfaces wet by fog spray or wet blankets .
use enclosures for heat curing that allow free circulation of heat about the product and that are constructed to contain the heat with a minimum moisture loss .
the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers may be used provided they are kept in good repair and secured in such a manner to prevent the loss of heat and moisture .
use enclosures that cover the entire bed from stressing abutment to stressing abutment including all exposed stranding .
num lowpressure steam the steam must be in a saturated condition .
do not allow steam jets to impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
cover control cylinders to prevent moisture loss and place them in a location where the temperature is representative of the average temperature of the enclosure .
num curing with radiant heat apply radiant heat by means of pipe circulating steam hot oil or hot water or by electric heating elements .
to prevent moisture loss during curing keep the exposed surfaces wet by fog spray or wet blankets .
num continuous moisture and heat this method consists of heating the casting beds in combination with the continuous moisture method described above .
do not allow the heating elements to come in direct contact with the concrete or the forms .
the initial covering of burlap and the continuous application of moisture will be as described in num .
an auxiliary cover in addition to the burlap for retention of the heat will be required over the entire casting bed .
support this cover a sufficient distance above the product being cured to allow circulation of the heat .
num curing requirements for silica fume concrete use either a num hour continuous moisture curing or a num hour lowpressure steam curing in accordance with num .
upon completion of the lowpressure steam curing continue curing for the remaining part of the num hour curing period by application of the curing compound continuous moisture curing or use of the curing blankets .
if num hour continuous moisture is used begin curing silica fume concrete immediately after the finishing operation is complete and keep a film of water on the surface by fogging until the curing blankets are in place .
no substitution of alternative methods nor reduction in the time period is allowed .
after completion of the num hour curing period apply a membrane curing compound to all concrete surfaces .
apply curing compound according to num .
num form removal do not remove forms sooner than six hours after casting and not until the concrete strength is sufficient to avoid structural damage .
for aashto type v type vi floridai beams and bulbt beams do not remove the forms supporting the top flange concrete sooner than num hours after casting unless the release strength has been reached .
num detensioning .
num general the required concrete strength at which the prestressing force may be transferred to the concrete in a product will be a minimum of num psi unless specified otherwise in the plans .
verify the release strength by compressive strength cylinder tests or other approved means no later than num hours after casting and every num hours thereafter until release strength is developed .
in lieu of every num hour testing the contractor is permitted to estimate the strength development of concrete by the maturity method in accordance with astm cnum the pulse velocity method in accordance with astm cnum or any other nondestructive test method num return to table of contents acceptable to the engineer until the time of the detensioning .
before detensioning verify the concrete release strength by testing the compressive strength test cylinders .
make a minimum of two compressive strength release test cylinders daily for each individual mix or for each lot or fraction thereof of given concrete mix design where the daily consumption exceeds this volume or when noncontinuous batching or dissimilar curing is used .
the release strength test representing the lot is the average compressive strength of two test cylinders which are cured under conditions similar to the product or matchcured test specimens which are match cured until the time of release .
for products cured using accelerated curing release the prestressing force immediately after terminating the accelerated curing process .
after the detensioning operation is completed continue to num hour curing period using one of the methods listed in num num .
for products cured using methods other than accelerated curing release the prestressing force within a detensioning time limit not to exceed five calendar days after the verification of release strength by compressive strength cylinder test or other approved strength gain monitoring system .
for all products in a casting line use the same test method for determining their release strengths .
ensure the detensioning time limit is included in the producer qc plan .
cure concrete cylinders used for detensioning strength tests in the same manner and location as the prestressed concrete products .
for igirders where side forms are loosened upon setting of concrete or removed before the num hour curing period is complete the top flange dormant strands may be released after the concrete reaches a compressive strength of num psi .
num method of stress transfer in all detensioning operations keep the prestressing forces nearly symmetrical about the vertical axis of the product and apply them in a manner that will minimize sudden shock or loading .
remove or loosen forms ties inserts or other devices that would restrict longitudinal movement of the products along the bed .
release holddowns for products with draped strands in a sequence as shown in the plans or producer qc plan .
cut dormant strands partially tensioned strands in top of beams before releasing any fully tensioned strands .
release fully bonded strands next beginning with the lowest row and moving upwards followed progressively by strands having the minimum length of tubular sheathing through to those strands having the maximum length of tubular sheathing .
the contractor may propose alternative detensioning patterns to suit the plants particular operation .
specify the method of the stress transfer to be used either in the producer qc plan or the construction submittal .
transfer prestressing forces to the concrete by either single strand release or multiple strand release .
num single strand detensioning detension the strand by using a lowoxygen flame in accordance with a pattern and schedule provided in the approved shop drawings or producer qc plan or described in num .
heat with a lowoxygen flame played along the strand for a minimum of num inches .
heat strands in such a manner that the failure of the first wire in each strand will occur after the torch has been applied for a minimum of five seconds .
release strands in all prestressed products simultaneously and symmetrically about the vertical axis at both ends of the bed and at all intermediate points between products to minimize sliding of products .
as an alternate strands in piles sheet piles slabs and aashto type ii girders may be released simultaneously and symmetrically about the vertical axis at both ends of the bed until all the strands are released then proceeding in order to intermediate points nearest the bed ends or to the single remaining point at the center and release strands at these points in the same manner until all strands are released .
for cfrp strands coupled with steel strands detension the steel num return to table of contents strands first using the flame cutting process described above .
at intermediate locations where cfrp strands are continuous between adjacent precast components flame or shear cutting of the strands is not allowed .
num multiple strand detensioning in this method detension all strands simultaneously by hydraulic dejacking .
the total force is taken from the header by the jack then released gradually .
do not allow the overstress required to loosen the anchoring devices at the header to exceed the force in the strand by num .
after detensioning strands at all points may be cut progressively from one end of the bed to the other using equipment and methods described above .
num cutting strands and bars upon completion of the detensioning operation cut steel strands to required length using an oxygen flame or mechanical cutting device .
do not use electric arc welders to cut bars or steel strands .
upon completion of the detensioning operation cut cfrp strands to the required length using a mechanical cutting device .
do not use flame or shear cutting to cut cfrp strands .
num beams for beam ends that will be permanently encased in concrete diaphragms cut strands to num inches plus or minus num inch beyond the end of the product or as specified in the plans .
for beams with ends that will not be encased in permanent concrete diaphragms mechanically cut strands a minimum of num inch below the concrete surface .
num piles mechanically cut strands flush with the concrete surface .
for top head of fender piles and pile ends not embedded under final conditions burn the strands a minimum of num inch below the concrete surface and clearly mark the pile to identify the top head end .
num poles mechanically cut strands to a minimum of num inch below the concrete surface .
num protecting ends of strands prepare the concrete surfaces and apply type fnum epoxy in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num beams for beam ends that will not be permanently encased in concrete diaphragms apply two layers of epoxy to the exposed beam ends including clipped and chamfered surfaces within seven calendar days of detensioning and prior to development of any corrosion at the ends of strands .
the finished thickness of the epoxy coating must be a minimum of num inch and form a vertical flat plane without deviations or localized depressions from recessed strands or other defects .
num piles apply epoxy patches to all recessed strands .
num poles coat entire face of tip top and butt bottom ends with epoxy .
num noncomplying prestressed products .
num general when a precast prestressed concrete product does not comply with the requirements of this section or is damaged use the following provisions for evaluating and disposing of deficiencies .
however when precast prestressed concrete products have been installed the disposition of concrete cracks shall be in accordance with num .
apply these provisions in all cases that clearly fall under the circumstances described .
consider situations not covered by these specific circumstances on their individual merits .
consider and apply the following where practical .
the qc manager or qc inspectors under direction of the qc manager will examine all deficiencies within the time limit specified in num and num to determine the applicable provisions and requirements of this article and which course of action is appropriate .
if the qc manager determines that a deficiency is a cosmetic or minor defect appropriate repairs num return to table of contents may be executed immediately in accordance with num .
perform and complete cosmetic and minor defect repairs to the satisfaction of the qc manager .
if the qc manager determines that a deficiency is a major deficiency requiring an engineering evaluation submit a repair proposal to the engineer in accordance with num .
make all repairs that require a repair proposal under the observation of and to the satisfaction of the qc manager .
the disposition of deficiencies and repair methods provided herein must at no time and under no circumstances be used as an excuse for or applied in such a manner so as to relieve the contractor of his responsibility for qc .
the number and type of deficiencies evaluated under this specification will however be used in evaluating the contractors qc .
the engineer will require a credit on any product with deficiencies that require engineering evaluation and are attributable to the contractor accepted for use in the structure .
bear the costs of repairs and any actions taken to rectify deficiencies at no expense to the department .
num surface deficiencies surface deficiencies are defined below .
regardless of the types of deficiencies when the total surface area of all deficiencies within a single product exceeds num of the products length times its depth the product will require engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num .
surface deficiencies include spalls chips bug holes surface porosities and honeycombs .
num bug hole a bug hole is a void caused by air that is entrapped against the form and that has an area up to num square inches and a depth up to num inches .
treat any bug hole with a dimension exceeding either of these dimensions as a honeycomb .
the engineer will not require the contractor to repair any bug hole with a depth less than num inch and less than num inch in diameter unless otherwise indicated in the plans or specifications .
consider all other bug holes cosmetic and repair them in accordance with num .
num spall a spall is a depression resulting when a fragment is detached from a larger mass by impact action of weather by pressure or by expansion within the larger mass .
a cosmetic spall is a circular or oval depression not greater than num inch in depth nor greater than num square inches in area and must be repaired in accordance with num .
with the exception of spalls in the bearing areas and edge of the top flange a minor spall is defined as a spall not larger than num square feet and no deeper than one inch plus the sum of the concrete cover and the diameter of the bar in the first layer of reinforcing .
repair minor spalls in accordance with num .
spalls located at the edges of the top flange are considered minor spalls as follows num .
a spall on one edge of the top flange without a coincident spall on the other edge of the top flange is considered a minor spall if the total longitudinal length of the defect does not exceed num feet and any lateral dimensions of the spall measured perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the beam are not greater than num of the width of the top flange .
num .
coincident spalls on opposite edges of the top flange are considered minor spalls if the total length of the defects within both spalls does not exceed num feet and any lateral dimensions of the spalls at a given location measured perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the beam are not greater than num of the width of the top flange .
num return to table of contents spalls located in the bearing area that extend back into the concrete within the limits above the bearing plate are considered major spalls .
a major spall is a spall that any of its dimensions exceeds the dimensions that are described for minor spalls .
a major spall requires engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num .
num chip a chip is the local breaking of the corners or edges of the concrete with the resulting void containing angular surfaces .
cosmetic chips are chips where the sum of the two lateral dimensions perpendicular to the length does not exceed num inches .
regardless of length it is not necessary to repair cosmetic chips except for visually exposed reinforcing steel prestressing strand insert or weldments surfaces which may require repair in accordance with num .
minor chips are chips where the sum of the two lateral dimensions perpendicular to the length exceeds num inches but does not exceed num inches and with a length of no more than num inches .
repair minor chips in accordance with num .
major chips are any chips larger than minor chips .
major chips require engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num .
num surface porosity surface porosity is considered a minor defect and is the localized porosity of a formed surface due to medium scaling .
medium scaling is defined as the loss of surface mortar up to num inch in depth and exposure of concrete aggregate .
repair surface porosity in accordance with num .
num honeycombing honeycombing is voids in the concrete loss of fines or other material from between the aggregate particles the inclusion of air pockets between aggregate particles or larger volumes of lost material .
remove honeycombing in its entirety to sound concrete before establishing the classification of the defect .
minor honeycombing is a void no deeper than concrete cover and no larger than num square feet in area that results after the removal of unsound material .
repair minor honeycombing in accordance with num .
major honeycombing is a void deeper than concrete cover regardless of the surface area or shallower but with a surface area greater than num square feet that results after the removal of unsound material .
major honeycombing requires engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num .
num formed surface misshaping formed surface misshaping is the visual and measurable deficiency or excess of material from the specified tolerance on any surface of a product .
num pile ends make square pile ends which are outside this sections tolerances by grinding in accordance with num or any other means of removal as approved by the engineer .
reshape the chamfer if more than num inch from the cast pile end is removed and such removal affects the chamfer dimension .
num pile chamfers reshape chamfers outside of this sections tolerances to within the tolerances in accordance with num .
num other surfaces any deficiency exceeding the plan dimensions for size length squareness designated skew plumbness and the like by up to twice the specified plus tolerance may be corrected by grinding to within the allowable tolerance in accordance with num .
any deficiency exceeding the specified minus tolerance or twice the specified plus tolerance requires an engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents num bearing areas consider the bearing area to extend from the end of the product to num inches beyond the edge of the bearing contact area for the full product width .
do not allow the bearing plate or bearing area plane of precast prestressed concrete beam and slab units to deviate from a true plane by more than num inch when tested in all directions with a steel straightedge .
in the event that a num true plane is not achieved the engineer will accept a surface having not less than num of its area in a true plane provided the deviations are evenly distributed .
remove minor convex projections by grinding with an abrasive stone .
the engineer will accept minor depressions provided that they amount to not more than num of the bearing area are evenly distributed over the entire bearing area and are not deeper than num inch .
num cracks a crack is the separation of a product or portion thereof which may appear before or after detensioning and may or may not cause separation throughout the product thickness or depth .
identify cracks by the classifications and locations described below and subject them to the disposition required by the identified crack .
if the total surface length of all cracks within a single product regardless of width located between the end zones exceeds one quarter of the products length an engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num is required .
establish crack sizes subsequent to release of all pretensioning forces .
the engineer will reject any pile that is cracked to the point that a transverse or longitudinal crack extends through the pile shows failure of the concrete as indicated by spalling of concrete on the main body of the pile adjacent to the crack or which in the opinion of the engineer will not withstand driving stresses .
occasional hairline surface cracking caused by shrinkage or tensile stress in the concrete from handling will not be cause for rejection .
num classification and treatment of cracks regardless of cause and for the purposes of section num cracks in precast prestressed components excluding piling will be identified according to their surface appearance in accordance with the following classifications cosmetic cracks are any cracks which are less than num inch wide and are located in noncritical locations on the product .
based on the environmental classification of the site where the product will be located treat cosmetic cracks as follows num .
slightly or moderately aggressive environment do not treat cracks .
num .
extremely aggressive environment after detensioning apply penetrant sealer in accordance with section num .
minor cracks are any cracks which are between num and num inch wide inclusive and are located in noncritical locations on products .
based on the environmental classification of the site where the product will be located and the final elevation of the product on the site treat minor cracks as follows num .
slightly aggressive environment do not treat the cracks .
num .
moderately aggressive environment a .
for products that will be located at an elevation of more than num feet above the existing ground level or above mean high water elevation do not treat cracks .
b .
for products that will be located at an elevation within num feet above the existing ground level or above mean high water elevation apply a penetrant sealer on the cracks after detensioning in accordance with section num .
num .
extremely aggressive environment num return to table of contents a .
for products that will be located at an elevation of more than num feet above the existing ground level or above mean high water elevation apply a penetrant sealer on the cracks after detensioning in accordance with section num. b .
for products that will be located at an elevation within num feet above the existing ground level or above mean high water elevation inject epoxy into the cracks after detensioning in accordance with section num .
major cracks are any cracks of any width which are located in critical locations on products or cracks in noncritical locations of the product that are greater than num inch wide .
major cracks require an engineering evaluation including crack depth measurement and disposition in accordance with num .
cracks in the riding surface repair cracks in the top surface of components which will become the riding surface with no overlays once in service regardless of the environmental classification as follows num .
epoxy inject cracks wider than num inch in accordance with section num unless the engineer approves the sealing of cracks with high molecular weight methacrylate in accordance with section num .
num .
seal cracks that are num inch wide or less by applying a penetrant sealer in accordance with section num .
num locations of cracks regardless of cause and for the purposes of this specification cracks will be identified as occurring in either critical or noncritical locations of the product in accordance with the following criteria and conditions critical locations of cracks are any locations in which a crack would tend to open under stresses occurring at any time during the service life of the structure or which may reduce the ultimate capacity or fatigue life of the product .
specifically critical locations of cracks are any locations in a product not defined and not included in num as noncritical .
cracks in critical locations require engineering evaluation and disposition in accordance with num .
noncritical locations of cracks are defined by the position within a products length the position within a products depth and the orientation of the crack .
num noncritical locations of cracks by product type num piles surface cracks in any direction and of a length not exceeding twice the width of the pile .
num all types of simple span pretensioned concrete beams end zones within a distance of three times the depth of the product from the end num .
horizontal or diagonal cracks at either or both ends in the top flange and web of the product not in the plane of nor intersecting any row of prestressing strands and extending from the end of the product for a length not to exceed the products depth .
num .
vertical cracks extending through the top flange not to exceed onehalf of the products depth after detensioning .
midspan region between end zones vertical cracks extending through the top flange and web of the product .
any location horizontal crack at the interface of the web and top flange which is not longer than the products depth .
intermediate diaphragms of florida ubeams cracks at any location .
num return to table of contents num simple span doublet beams end zones within a distance of twice the depth of the product from the end one horizontal crack at either or both ends and in the top flange of the product not in the plane of nor intersecting any row of prestressing strands and extending from the end of the product for a length not to exceed half the products depth .
midspan region between end zones vertical cracks extending through the top flange and not exceeding half the web depth of the product .
any location horizontal crack at the interface of the web and top flange which is not longer than the products depth .
num pretensioned ibeams containing longitudinal post tensioning ducts end zones within a distance of twice the depth of the beam from the end vertical cracks in the bottom half of the beam within an end zone with no post tensioning anchorages and where the posttensioning ducts are located in the top of the beam at the location of a permanent substructure support .
horizontal or diagonal cracks at either or both ends in the top flange and web of the product where no posttensioning anchorage zone is present .
midspan region between quarter points vertical cracks in the web and top flange of the beam provided the beam is to be supported at each end in its final position in the structure .
any location horizontal cracks not longer than the beams depth and only at the interface of the web and top flange provided the beam is to be supported at each end in its final position in the structure .
num posttensioned beams for dropin spans pier sections horizontal or diagonal cracks at either or both ends in the top flange and web of the product .
dropin sections same as simple span pretensioned concrete beams .
end sections at end of beam with posttensioning anchorages same as pretensioned ibeams containing longitudinal posttensioning ducts .
at end of beam adjacent to pier sections same as for simple span pretensioned concrete beams .
num simple span prestressed slab units end zones within a distance of twice the depth of the product from the end one horizontal crack at either or both ends in the top half of the product which is not in the plane of nor intersecting any row of prestressing strands and extending from the end of the product for a length not to exceed half the products depth .
any location after detensioning vertical cracks in the top half of the products depth .
num pretensioned concrete poles longitudinal cracks the length of each crack must be less than twice the base width of the pole .
transverse or diagonal cracks cracks perpendicular to or at an inclined angle to the longitudinal direction of the pole .
the length of each crack must be less than twothirds of the base width of the pole .
num return to table of contents edge cracks cracks exhibiting at the edge and extending across one or two adjacent planes of a square pole .
the total length of each crack must be less than num inches .
num repair methods and materials .
num general before beginning the repair of bug holes spalls chips surface porosity and honeycomb remove all laitance loose material form oil curing compound and any other deleterious matter from repair area .
repair cosmetic and minor deficiencies by methods specified herein .
the contractor is permitted to elect an alternate repair method .
submit the alternative repair methods in writing to the engineer for approval prior to performing repairs .
for each project maintain the record of deficiencies and their repair methods .
ensure the record includes information about product description unit serial number date cast defect description including dimensions repair method and materials defect discovery date and signature of producers qc manager indicating concurrence with the information .
cure repaired surfaces for the full num hour curing time or for the curing time as recommended by written recommendations from the manufacturer of the repair material .
ensure the repaired surfaces have a surface texture finish and color which matches the appearance of the unaffected surrounding area of the product .
num product acceptance on the project use only nonshrink grout that is listed on the approved product list apl .
num cosmetic surface filling repair areas to be filled with an approved high strength nonmetallic nonshrink grout meeting the requirements of section num .
mix apply and cure the grout in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
coating of the prepared surface with epoxy bonding agent before grout placement is not required .
num surface restoration maintain the surface continuously wet for a minimum of three hours before application of repair material .
repair areas to be restored with a mortar mix consisting by volume of one part cement num parts sand that will pass a no .
num sieve and sufficient water to produce a viscous slurry mix or repair areas to be restored with an approved highstrength nonmetallic nonshrink grout meeting the requirements of section num .
mix apply and cure the grout in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
cure areas repaired with a mortar mix in accordance with num .
coating of the prepared surface with epoxy bonding agent before grout placement is not required .
num cutting and filling carefully cut all feathered edges of the area to be repaired back perpendicular to or slightly undercut from the surface to the depth of sound concrete or to a minimum depth of num inch whichever is deeper .
coat the prepared surface with an approved epoxy bonding agent applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
fill the cutout area with an approved highstrength nonmetallic nonshrink grout mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
firmly consolidate the grout mix in the cutout area .
num restoration of surfaces and edges when reinforcing steel or prestressing strand is exposed remove concrete from around the items to provide a num inch clearance all around .
form surfaces and edges to the original dimensions and shape of the product .
coat the prepared surface with an approved epoxy bonding agent applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
restore surfaces and edges with an approved highstrength nonmetallic nonshrink grout mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
firmly consolidate the grout mix in the area to be repaired .
restore surfaces and edges to the original dimensions and shape of the product .
num return to table of contents num removal and restoration of unsound concrete carefully cut the area of unsound concrete to be repaired back perpendicular to or slightly undercut from the surface and to the depth of sound concrete or to a minimum depth of num inch whichever is deeper .
when reinforcing bars prestressing strand inserts or weldments are exposed remove the concrete from around the items to provide a num inch clearance all around .
coat the prepared surface with an approved epoxy bonding agent applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and then filled with an approved highstrength nonmetallic nonshrink grout mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
firmly consolidate the grout mix in the area to be repaired .
restore surfaces and edges to the original dimensions and shape of the product .
num surface grinding grind off misshaped formed surfaces with an abrasive stone .
apply two coats of penetrant sealer in accordance with the requirements of section num to any surfaces which are not subsequently encased in concrete immediately after grinding has been accepted .
do not apply a penetrant sealer to any surfaces to be subsequently encased in concrete .
num num treatment of cracks treat cracks in accordance with num .
num submittal of proposal to accept or repair deficiencies .
num general when a product has deficiencies unacceptable to the engineer the contractor may propose repairs .
deficiencies discovered in the casting yard must be repaired before shipment .
do not ship products which require repairs from the casting yard to the project site until such repairs are complete and the engineer has determined the product to be acceptable .
deficiencies discovered at the project site may be repaired at the site subject to the engineers approval .
all proposed repairs must be submitted for engineering evaluation and credit in accordance with num unless the specific repair methods have been submitted and approved .
the plant may use the repair method that is previously approved in the producer qc plan without submittal of the proposal for engineering evaluation or credit .
the use of the previously approved repair method is only applicable to the same type of single deficiency that is exhibited in a product .
num submittal of repair proposal the repair proposal must be completed by the contractors engineer of record and shall consist of the following num .
a cover letter prepared on the contractors letterhead addressed to the engineer describing the product .
num .
information in a format acceptable to the engineer describing the details of the noncompliance and the proposed repairs .
num .
an engineering evaluation a structural performance and durability evaluation which explains why the performance and durability of the repaired deficient product is acceptable as compared to that of an undamaged comparable product .
the evaluation must be supported by one or more of the following types of information a .
written evidence of a previously approved comparable deficiency and its repair .
b. documented research that demonstrates the proposed repair to be effective .
c. if applicable engineering calculations providing support for recommendations .
num return to table of contents num .
a proposed credit to the contract proportionate to the products deficiency .
the credit is in addition to the cost for review and evaluation of the proposal .
num .
any other supportive information pictures and drawings .
for cracked elements show on a drawing the location average width depth length and termination points of each crack along the surfaces .
provide the distance from each termination point to a fixed reference point on the component such as beam end or edge of flange .
the description of the proposed repair and the structural and durability evaluation of the product must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of the contractors engineer of record and must bear their signature and seal .
if the proposal is accepted by the engineer all department costs associated with review of the proposal including the cost of any and all engineering evaluation and testing services required will be deducted from payment to the contractor but not to exceed num of the product value based on unit bid prices .
include in the proposed credit consideration of the departments added costs which may include but are not necessarily limited to reinspection testing reduced durability or increased maintenance cost .
the engineer will review and evaluate the contractors proposal and will notify the contractor of its disposition .
the engineers review of the contractors proposal does not amend or delete code requirements unless such changes are specifically brought to the engineers attention and accepted by the engineer .
the engineers acceptance of a proposal does not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to provide products that are structurally adequate to resist the loads specified in the contract drawings and that maintain the intended aesthetic durability and maintenance aspects of the product .
the engineer will not accept repaired products unless repairs are made as proposed or described the resulting repairs are sound in all aspects and the repairs are aesthetically acceptable .
replace a rejected product with a product meeting the requirements of the contract documents at no additional expense to the department .
num repairs before approval .
if repairs to precast products are initiated in advance of the engineers approval the affected product will only be considered for acceptability and use when the following conditions have been satisfied num .
before beginning the repairs submit to the engineer a repair proposal in accordance with the requirements of num .
num .
all repair materials must meet the requirements of section num and be selected from the apl or otherwise be subsequently evaluated tested by the contractor as required by the department and approved by the department for the specific use made of the material .
num .
repairs have been performed under the observation of the qc manager .
accept responsibility for actions taken and perform these actions at your own risk .
it is intended that repairs be made only after the proposed methods have been accepted to ensure that the proposal will not be modified or rejected and the work will be accepted if the repair proves to be adequate .
num handling storage shipping and erection .
num handling all products which are pretensioned may only be handled after transfer of the prestressing force .
for products that are prestressed by a combination of pretensioning and posttensioning do not handle before sufficient prestress has been applied to num return to table of contents sustain all forces and bending moments due to handling .
exercise care in handling to prevent damage to products .
lift and move products so as to minimize stresses due to sudden changes in momentum .
calculate pick up and dunnage points .
pick up products only at points designated as pickup points as shown on the contract plans or shop drawings .
maintain all beams in an upright position at all times .
evaluate the temporary stresses and stability of beams during their handling .
the temporary stresses induced into the products during handling must be within the acceptable stresses at release listed in the departments structures design guidelines .
take appropriate action to increase the stability of products during handling when the factor of safety against lateral buckling instability is below num .
include the expected fabrication tolerance for sweep in the analysis .
the analysis procedure provided by the precastprestressed concrete institute or similar procedures may be used for the stability evaluation .
verify lifting devices for capacity in lifting and handling products taking into account various positions during handling .
keep multiple component lifting devices matched to avoid noncompatible use .
when a product has multiple lifting devices use lifting equipment capable of distributing the load at each device uniformly to maintain the stability of the product .
when the lifting devices are grouped in multiples at one location align them for equal lifting .
take appropriate steps to prevent the occurrence of cracking .
when cracking occurs during handling and transportation revise handling and transporting equipment and procedures as necessary to prevent cracking for subsequent products .
num storage store precast prestressed beams doublet beams and slab units on only two points of support located within num inches of the end of the product or as calculated .
support skewed beams doublet beams or slab units within num inches of the end of the full product section or as calculated .
support other products on an adequate number of supports so as to keep stresses in the products within the allowable stresses at release listed in the departments structures design guidelines .
locate multiple supports more than two within num inch of a horizontal plane through the top surface of the supports .
adequately brace beams as necessary to maintain stability .
all supports must be level and on adequate foundation material that will prevent shifting or differential settlement which may cause twisting or rotation of products .
immediately pick up products in storage that have rotated or twisted and adjust the supports to provide level and uniform support for the product .
support prestressed products that are stacked by dunnage placed across the full width of each bearing point and aligned vertically over lower supports .
do not use stored products as a storage area for either shorter or longer products or heavy equipment .
where feasible base the selection of storage sites storage conditions and orientation upon consideration of minimizing the thermal and timedependent creep and shrinkage effects on the camber andor sweep of the precast pretensioned products .
continuous application of water during the initial num hour moist curing period may be interrupted for a maximum of one hour to allow relocation of precast prestressed concrete elements within the manufacturing facility .
keep the moist burlap in place during relocation of the element .
measure and record the sweep and camber of beams monthly .
keep the measurement records on file for review at any time by the engineer and upon request submit these measurements to the engineer .
if the camber exceeds by num inch the design camber shown num return to table of contents in the plans take appropriate actions in accordance with num to accommodate the product in the structure .
if the sweep exceeds the tolerance specified take immediate measures to bring the sweep of the product back to within tolerance .
notify the engineer immediately when the sweep or camber exceeds the specified tolerances .
special storage conditions for the purpose of removing excessive sweep will not be restricted by requirements of this subarticle nor contained in num .
if the sweep of the product exceeds the tolerance specified and can not be removed the disposition of the product will be in accordance with num and num .
num shipping do not ship precast prestressed concrete products to the project site prior to the completion of the num hour curing period and attainment of the required numday strength .
the contractor is permitted to verify the shipping strength test before num days by testing compressive strength cylinders that are cured under the conditions similar to the product or by testing temperature match cured cylinders .
the use of maturity method astm cnum pulse velocity method in accordance with astm cnum or any other nondestructive test method acceptable to engineer is permitted to estimate the strength before its verification by test cylinders .
the shipping strength test is the average compressive strength of two test cylinders .
do not ship products until accepted and stamped by the qc manager or the inspectors under the direct observation of the qc manager .
at the beginning of each project provide a notarized statement to the engineer from a responsible company representative certifying that the plant will manufacture the products in accordance with the requirements set forth in the contract documents and producer qc plan .
the qc managers stamp on each product indicates certification that the product was fabricated in conformance with the producer qc plan the contract and this section .
ensure that each shipment of prestressed concrete products to the project site is accompanied with a signed or stamped delivery ticket providing the description and the list of the products .
evaluate the temporary stresses and stability of all products during shipping and locate supports generally within num inches from the beam end in such a manner as to maintain stresses within acceptable levels .
include impact loadings in the evaluation .
num erection erect precast prestressed products without damage .
meet the handling and storage requirements of num and num for field operations .
before casting diaphragms and the deck slab do not allow the horizontal alignment of prestressed concrete beams to deviate from a straight line connecting similar points of beam ends by more than the sweep tolerances specified in num .
adequately brace beams as necessary to maintain stability .
num measurement and payment .
num general the work specified in this section will be measured and paid for as shown below for the particular item involved .
precast prestressed concrete members are acceptable to the department for full payment when all requirements of the contract documents have been met .
no partial payments will be made for precast prestressed concrete members until the numday strength requirement along with other applicable specification requirements have been met .
num prestressed concrete piling payment will be made at the contract unit price per foot for the particular type of piling measured and paid for as specified in section num including the provisions for cutoffs and splices .
num return to table of contents num prestressed concrete beams payment will be made at the contract unit price per foot for prestressed beams complete in place and accepted .
final pay lengths will be plan quantity based on casting lengths as detailed in the plans subject to the provisions of num .
num prestressed concrete slab units payment will be made at the contract unit price per foot for the units complete in place and accepted .
final pay lengths will be plan quantity based on casting lengths as detailed in the plans subject to the provisions of num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section including reinforcement pretensioning strand embedded ducts hardware inserts and other materials as required to fabricate transport and place the product into its permanent position in the structure .
payment for the items will be made under the following item no .
num num prestressed beams per foot .
item no .
num num prestressed beams floridai beams per foot .
item no .
num num prestressed slab units per foot .
item no .
num num prestressed beam ubeams per foot .
item no .
num num prestressed slab units transversely posttensioned square foot .
num return to table of contents section num prestressed soil anchors num description .
construct prestressed soil anchors consisting of a high strength steel tendon anchored to the retaining wall on one end and to the soil on the other end through a bulb of pressure injected portland cement concrete grout .
test each anchor by prestressing to the load indicated in the contract documents before locking off to the retaining wall .
select the prestressed soil anchor type and the installation method and determine the bond length and anchor diameter .
assume responsibility for installing prestressed soil anchors that develop the loadcarrying capacity indicated in the plans in accordance with num .
provide corrosion protection for permanent prestressed soil anchors .
the engineer will not require corrosion protection for temporary prestressed soil anchors .
protect anchor tendons from corrosion as shown in the plans in accordance with num .
num definitions .
num .
anchorage devices the anchor head wedges or nuts which grip the prestressing steel .
num .
bearing plate the steel plate which distributes the prestressed soil anchor force to the structure .
num .
bond length the length of the prestressed soil anchor which is bonded to the ground and transmits the tensile force to the soil or rock .
for a compression prestressed soil anchor the bond length will be different from the tendon bond length .
num .
factored design load the maximum anticipated load that will be applied to the prestressed soil anchor during its service life after completing stressing and testing .
the factored design load includes appropriate load factors to ensure that the overall structure has adequate strength for its intended use .
num .
finegrained soils soils with at least num of the material smaller than the no .
num sieve size .
num .
tendon the complete anchor assembly excluding grout consisting of anchorage and prestressing steel with sheathing and coating when required .
num .
coupling the means by which the prestressing force may be transmitted from one partiallength of prestressing tendon to another .
num .
sheathing enclosure around the prestressing steel to avoid temporary or permanent bond between the prestressing steel and the surrounding grout or to provide corrosion protection .
num .
coating material used to protect against corrosion or lubricate the prestressing steel .
num .
anchor grout portland cement grout that is injected into the anchor hole to provide anchorage at the bond length of the tendon .
num .
proof load temporary loading of an anchor to its factored design load for testing purposes .
num .
transfer lockoff load prestressing force in an anchor after proof loading immediately after the force has been transferred from the jack to the stressing anchorage .
num .
stressing anchorage that portion of assembly not within the earth fill .
num .
alignment load a small load maintained on an anchor during testing sufficient to keep the testing equipment positioned .
num return to table of contents num .
performance test incremental test loading and unloading of a prestressed anchor recording the movement of the tendon at each increment .
num .
proof test incremental loading of a prestressed anchor recording the movement of the tendon at each increment .
num .
creep test a test to determine the movement of the tendon at constant load during a certain period of time .
num .
liftoff reading a check made to determine that the actual transfer load is within num of the desired transfer load .
this check is made immediately after transferring the load to the stressing anchorage .
num .
residual movement the nonelastic nonrecoverable movement of an anchor measured during soil anchor testing .
num .
elastic movement the recoverable movement of an anchor measured during soil anchor testing .
num .
prestressed soil anchor a system referred to as a tieback or a ground anchor used to transfer tensile loads to soil or rock .
a prestressed soil anchor includes all prestressing steel anchorage devices bearing plates grout coatings corrosion protection sheathings and couplers if used .
num .
minimum specified ultimate tensile strength the minimum breaking strength of the prestressing steel as defined by the specified standard .
num .
tendon bond length the length of the tendon which is bonded to the anchor grout .
num .
total anchor length the unbonded length plus the tendon bond length .
num .
unbonded length the length of the tendon which is not bonded to the grout .
the grout surrounding the unbonded length is a void filler and provides corrosion protection .
num .
service load the load anticipated to be applied to the prestressed soil anchor during its service life after completing stressing and testing in order to limit deflection .
the service load does not include load factors .
num .
test stressing length the unbonded length plus the length extending through the jack up to the anchorage devices during any anchor acceptance test i.e .
performance test proof test or creep test .
num qualifications .
the contractor or subcontractor performing the work described in this section shall have installed prestressed soil anchors for a minimum of five years .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit a list containing at least five projects completed within the last five years where the contractor has installed prestressed soil anchors .
include a brief description of each project and a reference for each project listed .
as a minimum include with the reference an individuals name and current phone number .
prior to the start of work the contractor shall submit a list identifying his engineer drill operators and onsite supervisors who will be assigned to the project .
include in the list a summary of each individuals experience .
assign a specialty engineer to supervise the work with at least five years of experience in the design and construction of permanentlyanchored structures .
do not use manufacturers representatives in order to meet the requirements of this section .
provide drill operators and on site supervisors that have a minimum of one year experience installing permanent prestressed soil anchors with the contractors organization .
num return to table of contents the engineer will approve or reject the contractors qualifications and staff within num working days after receipt of the submission .
do not start work on any prestressed soil anchor wall system or order materials until receiving approval of the qualifications .
the engineer may suspend the prestressed soil anchor work if the contractor or subcontractor substitutes unqualified personnel for approved personnel during construction .
if work is suspended due to the substitution of unqualified personnel the contractor is fully liable for additional costs resulting from the suspension of work and the department will not allow any adjustment in contract time resulting from the suspension of work .
num materials .
num general meet the following requirements concrete section num prestressed construction section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals section num num prestressing steel use prestressed soil anchor tendons fabricated from single or multiple elements of one of the following prestressing steels unless otherwise shown in the plans num .
steel bars meeting the requirements of aashto mnum .
num .
numwire lowrelaxation strands meeting the requirements of aashto mnum .
num .
compact numwire lowrelaxation strands meeting the requirements of astm anum .
num anchorage covers include for temporary anchors only when shown in the plans use exposed anchorage covers fabricated from steel or ductile cast iron with a minimum thickness of num inches .
ensure that the cover is securely attached to the anchorage device or bearing plate .
if the cover is to be grease filled ensure the cover forms a permanent watertight enclosure for the anchorage device .
num anchorage devices use anchorage devices capable of developing num of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel tendon .
use anchorage devices that meet the static strength requirements of section num and section num of the post tensioning institute guide specification for posttensioning materials .
use couplers for tendon sections capable of developing num of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength .
num cement grout use grout for anchorage consisting of a pumpable mixture of type i ii or iii portland cement meeting the requirements of aashto mnum sand water and admixtures .
the contractor may use admixtures which control bleed improve flowability reduce water content and retard set in the grout subject to the approval of the engineer .
the contractor may only add expansive admixtures to the grout used for filling sealed encapsulations trumpets and anchorage covers .
do not use accelerators .
use admixtures compatible with the prestressing steels and mixed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
do not perform strength testing as system performance will be measured by proof testing each anchor .
the department may require grout cube testing if the contractor uses admixtures or irregularities occur in anchor testing .
use grout that attains a minimum cube strength of num psi within seven days .
num bearing plate use bearing plates fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of aashto mnum or astm anum .
num return to table of contents num bondbreaker use bondbreaker fabricated from a smooth plastic tube or pipe having the following properties num .
resistant to chemical attack from aggressive environments grout or grease num .
resistant to aging by ultraviolet light num .
fabricated from material nondetrimental to the tendon num .
capable of withstanding abrasion impact and bending during handling and installation num .
enable the tendon to elongate during testing and stressing num .
allow the tendon to remain unbonded after lockoff .
num centralizers use centralizers fabricated from plastic steel or material that is nondetrimental to the prestressing steel .
do not use wood .
ensure that the centralizer is able to support the tendon in the drill hole and position the tendon so a minimum of num inches of grout cover is provided over the tendon bond length .
in addition locate the upper centralizer a maximum of num feet from the top of the tendon bond length and locate the lower centralizer a maximum of num inches from the bottom of the tendon bond length .
the engineer will not require centralizers on pressure injected tendons if the contractor installs the anchor in coarse grained soils using grouting pressures greater than num psi .
the engineer will not require centralizers if the contractor installs the anchors and grouts them through a hollow stem auger and maintains the hole full of stiff grout slump less than num inches during extraction of the auger .
num corrosion inhibiting grease include for temporary anchors only when shown in the plans for corrosion inhibiting grease meet the requirements of section num of the post tensioning institute specification for unbonded single strand tendons .
num heat shrinkable tubes use heat shrinkable tubes fabricated from a radiation crosslinked polyolefin tube internally coated with an adhesive sealant .
prior to shrinking ensure that the tube has a nominal wall thickness of num mils .
ensure that the adhesive sealant inside the tube has a nominal thickness of num mils .
num sheath include for temporary anchors only when shown in the plans use a sheath as part of the corrosion protection system for the unbonded length portion of the tendon fabricated from one of the following num .
a polyethylene tube pulled or pushed over the prestressing steel .
use polyethylene type ii iii or iv as defined by astm dnum or approved equal with a minimum wall thickness of num mils plus or minus num mils .
num .
a hotmelt extruded polypropylene tube .
use polypropylene cell classification pp num bnum as defined by astm dnum or approved equal with a minimum wall thickness of num mils plus or minus num mils .
num .
a hotmelt extruded polyethylene tube .
use polyethylene high density type iii as defined by astm dnum and astm dnum or approved equal with a minimum wall thickness of num mils plus or minus num mils .
num .
steel tubing meeting the requirements of astm anum with a minimum wall thickness of num inches .
num .
steel pipe meeting the requirements of astm anum schedule num minimum .
num .
plastic pipe meeting the requirements of astm dnum schedule num minimum .
num .
a corrugated tube meeting the requirement of the tendon bond length encapsulation .
num return to table of contents num spacers use spacers to separate elements of a multielement tendon and which permit grout to flow freely up the drill hole .
use spacers fabricated from plastic steel or material which is nondetrimental to the prestressing steel .
do not use wood .
the contractor may use a combination centralizerspacer .
num tendon bond length encapsulations include for temporary anchors only when shown in the plans when the contract drawings require the tendon bond length to be encapsulated to provide additional corrosion protection use encapsulation fabricated from one of the following num .
high density corrugated polyethylene tubing meeting the requirements of aashto mnum with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num .
deformed steel tubing or pipes with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num .
corrugated pvc tubes manufactured from rigid pvc compounds meeting the requirements of astm dnum class numb .
num trumpet include for temporary anchors only when shown in the plans use a trumpet to provide a transition from the anchorage to the unbonded length corrosion protection fabricated from a steel pipe or tube meeting the requirements of astm anum for pipe or astm anum for tubing .
use a trumpet that has a minimum wall thickness of num inches for diameters up to num inches and num inches for larger diameters .
num water use potable water for mixing grout .
num grout tube use a grout tube fabricated from a high density polyethylene tube or a pvc pipe or a steel pipe with a num inches minimum inside diameter .
num tendon fabrication .
provide tendons that are either shop or field fabricated .
fabricate the tendon as shown on the approved shop drawings .
ensure that tendons are free of dirt rust or any other deleterious substance .
degrease the bond length .
handle and protect tendons prior to installation in a manner to avoid corrosion and physical damage .
the engineer will consider damage such as abrasion kinks welds and weld splatters cuts and nicks which impair the proper performance of the tendon cause for rejection .
sheath tendons in the stressing length to prevent contact of the anchor tendon with the drill hole wall .
the contractor may use sheathing that consists of tubes surrounding individual tendon elements or a single tube surrounding the elements altogether .
the contractor may use sheathing material of either steel plastic or any other material nondetrimental to the high strength prestressing steel .
the contractor may use tape to prevent grout from entering under the sheath on individually sheathed elements .
select the type of tendon to be used .
unless otherwise shown in the plans size the tendon so the factored design load does not exceed num of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
increase the tendon size by the sacrificial steel thickness shown in the plans .
in addition size the tendon so the maximum test load does not exceed num of the minimum yield strength of the tendon .
assume responsibility for determining the bond length necessary to develop the design load indicated in the plans or the shop drawings .
use a minimum bond length of num feet in rock and num feet in soil .
ensure that the minimum tendon bond length is num feet .
num return to table of contents num installation .
num general num drilling core drilling rotary drilling percussion drilling auger drilling or driven casing may be used .
at the ground surface locate the drill hole within num inches of the location shown in the plans or the approved shop drawings .
locate the drill hole so that the longitudinal axis of the drill hole and the longitudinal axis of the tendon are parallel .
in particular do not drill the prestressed soil anchor hole in a location that requires the tendon to be bent in order to connect the bearing plate to the supported structure .
at the point of entry install the prestressed soil anchor within plus or minus num degrees of the inclination from horizontal shown in the plans or the approved shop drawings .
at the point of entry make the horizontal angle formed by the prestressed soil anchor and the structure to within plus or minus num degrees of a line drawn perpendicular to the plane of the structure unless otherwise shown in the plans or approved shop drawings .
do not allow the prestressed soil anchors to extend beyond the rightofway or easement limits shown in the plans .
num tendon insertion insert the tendon into the drill hole to the desired depth .
when the tendon can not be completely inserted remove the tendon from the drill hole and then clean or redrill the hole to permit insertion .
do not drive or force partially inserted tendons into the hole .
num installation of trumpet and anchorage when corrosion protection is required extend that portion of the corrosion protection surrounding the unbonded length of the tendon up beyond the bottom seal of the trumpet or num inches into the trumpet if no trumpet seal is provided .
if the protection does not extend beyond the seal or sufficiently far enough into the trumpet extend the corrosion protection or lengthen the trumpet .
when required ensure that the corrosion protection surrounding the unbonded length of the tendon does not contact the bearing plate or the anchor head during testing and stressing .
if the protection is too long trim the corrosion protection to prevent contact .
place the bearing plate and anchor head so the axis of the tendon is perpendicular to the bearing plate within plus or minus num degrees and the axis of the tendon passes through the center of the bearing plate .
if using grout protected tendons electrically isolate the bearing plate anchor head and trumpet from the surrounding concrete soldier pile or any metallic element embedded in the structure .
completely fill the trumpet with corrosion inhibiting grease or grout .
trumpet grease may be placed any time during construction .
place trumpet grout after the prestressed soil anchor has been tested and stressed .
demonstrate to the engineer that the procedures selected for placement of either grease or grout will produce a completely filled trumpet .
for permanent soil anchors cover all anchorages permanently exposed to the atmosphere with a corrosion inhibiting greasefilled or groutfilled cover .
demonstrate to the engineer that the procedures selected for placement of either grease or grout will produce a completely filled cover .
if the plans require restressable anchorages use corrosion inhibiting grease to fill the anchorage cover .
num anchor grouting provide grouting equipment that produces a grout free of lumps and undispersed cement .
use a positive displacement grout pump equipped with a num return to table of contents pressure gauge to monitor grout pressures .
ensure that the pressure gauge is capable of measuring pressures of at least num psi or twice the actual grout pressures used whichever is greater .
size the grouting equipment to enable the grout to be pumped in one continuous operation .
ensure that the mixer is capable of continuously agitating the grout .
inject the grout from the lowest point of the drill hole .
grout may be pumped through grout tubes casing hollowstemaugers or drill rods .
the grout may be placed before or after insertion of the tendon .
record the quantity of the grout and the grout pressures .
control the grout pressures and grout takes to prevent excessive heave or fracturing .
except where indicated below the grout may be placed above the top of the bond length at the same time as the bond length grout but may not be placed under pressure .
ensure that the grout at the top of the drill hole does not contact the back of the structure or the bottom of the trumpet .
if the prestressed soil anchor is installed in a finegrained soil using drill holes larger than num inches in diameter place the grout above the top of the bond length after testing and stressing the prestressed soil anchor .
the engineer will allow the entire drill hole to be grouted at the same time if it can be demonstrated that the particular prestressed soil anchor system does not derive a significant portion of its loadcarrying capacity from the soil above the bond length portion of the prestressed soil anchor .
if using grout protected tendons for prestressed soil anchors anchored in rock use pressure grouting techniques .
for pressure grouting seal the drill hole and inject grout until a num psi grout pressure measured at the top of the drill hole can be maintained on the grout for five minutes .
upon completion of grouting the grout tube may remain in the hole but it must be filled with grout .
after grouting do not load the tendon for at least three days .
record the following data concerning the grouting operation num .
type of mixer num .
watercement ratio num .
types of additives if any num .
grout pressure num .
type of cement num .
strength test samples if any num .
volume of first and second stage grout num prestressed soil anchor testing and stressing .
num general test each prestressed soil anchor .
the engineer will select the prestressed soil anchors to be performance tested and those to be creep tested and at his discretion may increase or decrease the number of tests . .
perform creep testing and performance testing at the beginning of the anchor installation prior to installation of the remaining soil anchors unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
in projects with multiple anchor row levels the engineer may request performance and creep testing at the beginning of the installation of soil anchors for subsequent levels .
the purpose of these initial tests is to verify the contractors installation procedures the performance of the bond length and the calibration of testing equipment .
perform creep testing as follows num return to table of contents num. as shown in the plans num. on num of the prestressed soil anchors .
perform performance testing as follows num. as shown in the plans num. on num of the prestressed soil anchors or a minimum of three whichever is greater .
perform proof tests on all prestressed soil anchors not subjected to a performance test or a creep test .
record the results of each test on form num soil anchor forms .
submit a separate form for each test .
submit the test results to the engineer on a weekly basis within one week of testing .
do not apply a load greater than num of the factored design load to the prestressed soil anchor prior to testing .
for the maximum test load do not exceed num of the minimum yield strength of the tendon .
simultaneously apply the test load to the entire tendon .
do not perform stressing of single elements of multielement tendons .
provide testing equipment that consists of num. a dial gauge or vernier scale capable of measuring to num inch to measure the ground anchor movement .
use a movementmeasuring device that has a minimum travel equal to the theoretical elastic elongation of the total anchor length at the maximum test load and that has adequate travel so the prestressed soil anchor movement can be measured without resetting the device .
num. a hydraulic jack and pump to apply the test load .
use the jack with a minimum ram travel of not less than the theoretical elastic elongation of the total anchor length at the maximum test load and a calibrated pressure gauge graduated in num psi increments or less or calibrated load cell with readout box to measure the applied load .
ensure that the jack and pressure gauge are calibrated by an independent firm as a unit and that the calibration is performed within num calendar days of the date submitted .
num .
provide an electrical resistance load cell and readout to be used when performing a creep test .
load cell may also be used in performance and proof tests at the contractors discretion .
ensure that the load cell is calibrated by an independent firm and that the calibration is performed within num calendar days of the date submitted .
obtain the engineers approval of the calibration before testing commences .
num .
keep a calibrated reference pressure gauge at the site in possession of the engineer .
ensure that the reference gauge is calibrated with the test jack and pressure gauge .
num .
place the reference pressure gauge in series with the pressure gauge during each performance test and creep test .
num .
place the stressing equipment over the prestressed soil anchor tendon in such a manner that the jack bearing plates load cells and stressing anchorage are axially aligned with the tendon and the tendon is centered within the equipment .
if during the performance of any load test proof performance or creep the load determined by the load cell or the load determined by the reference gauge differs by more than num from the load determined by the pressure gauge when the pressure gauge measures num of the factored design load num dl suspend the test unload the anchor being tested recalibrate the load cell jack pressure gauge and reference pressure gauge and repeat the test at no expense to the department .
obtain the engineers approval of the recalibration data prior to resuming testing .
num return to table of contents if at any time a pressure gauge reference pressure gauge or load cell is repaired or replaced obtain the engineers written approval of calibration data of the repaired or the new measuring device load cell or pressure gauge or reference gauge prior to resuming testing .
perform additional performance tests at no expense to the department on the first two soil anchors using the repaired or new measuring device to verify the calibration of the equipment .
num criteria for performing a performance test and a proof test raise the load from one increment to another immediately after recording the prestressed soil anchor movement .
measure and record the prestressed soil anchor movement to the nearest num inch with respect to an independent fixed reference point at the alignment load and at each increment of load .
monitor the load with a pressure gauge or load cell .
at load increments other than the maximum test load hold the load just long enough to obtain the movement reading .
hold the maximum test load for at least num minutes .
pump the jack as necessary in order to maintain a constant load .
start the loadhold period as soon as the maximum test load is applied and measure and record the prestressed soil anchor movement with respect to an independent fixed reference at num num num num num num and num minutes .
if the prestressed soil anchor movement between num minute and num minutes exceeds num inches hold the maximum test load for an additional num minutes .
if extending the loadhold record the prestressed soil anchor movements at num minutes num num num num num and num minutes .
num performance test perform the performance test by incrementally loading and unloading the prestressed soil anchor in accordance with the following schedule performance test schedule load load al al num dl num dl al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl al num dl num dl al num dl num dl num dl num dl al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl reduce to lockoff load al is the alignment load .
dl is the prestressed soil anchor factored design load .
plot the prestressed soil anchor movement versus load for each load increment marked with an asterisk in the performance test schedule and plot the residual movement of the tendon at each alignment load versus the highest previously applied load .
num proof test perform the proof test by incrementally loading the prestressed soil anchor in accordance with the following schedule num return to table of contents proof test schedule load load al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl reduce to lockoff load compare the proof test results to the performance test results .
if there is any significant variation from the performance test results perform a performance test on the next anchor .
plot the prestressed soil anchor movement versus load for each load increment in the proof test .
num criteria for performing a creep test perform the creep test by incrementally loading and unloading the prestressed soil anchor in accordance with the performance test schedule given above .
at the end of each loading cycle hold the load constant for the observation period indicated in the creep test schedule below .
use the following times for reading and recording the prestressed soil anchor movement during each observation period num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and num minutes as appropriate .
start each loadhold period as soon as applying the test load .
pump the jack as necessary in order to maintain a constant load .
plot the prestressed soil anchor movement and the residual movement measured in a creep test as described for the performance test above and plot the creep movement for each loadhold as a function of the logarithm of time .
creep test schedule load observation period minutes .
al num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num lockoff upon satisfactory completion of all testing reduce the load to the lockoff load and transfer the load to the anchorage device .
use a lockoff load that is num of the prestressed soil anchor service load .
the contractor may completely unload the prestressed soil anchor prior to lockoff .
after transferring the load and prior to removing the jack take a liftoff reading .
use a liftoff reading that is within num of the specified lockoff load .
if the load is not within num of the specified lockoff load reset the anchorage and take another liftoff reading .
repeat this process until obtaining the desired lockoff load .
num return to table of contents num cutting of tendon protrusions after an anchor has been accepted by the engineer saw cut the portion of the anchor tendon extending beyond the anchorage .
take care not to damage the tendon or the tendon anchorage .
num prestressed soil anchor load test acceptance criteria the engineer will accept a performance or prooftested prestressed soil anchor with a num minute load hold if the num .
prestressed soil anchor carries the maximum test load with less than num inches of movement between num minute and num minutes and num .
for performance tests net movement at the maximum test load cycle movement between alignment load after num dl and the final movement reading at num dl exceeds num of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test stressing length .
for proof tests net movement at the maximum test load movement between alignment load and the final movement reading at num dl exceeds num of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test stressing length .
the engineer will accept a performance or prooftested prestressed soil anchor with a num minute load hold if the num .
prestressed soil anchor carries the maximum test load with a deformation rate that does not exceed num inches in the last log cycle of time and num .
for performance tests net movement at the maximum test load cycle movement between alignment load after num dl and the final movement reading at num dl exceeds num of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test stressing length .
for proof tests net movement at the maximum test load movement between alignment load and the final movement reading at num dl exceeds num of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test stressing length .
the engineer will accept a creep tested prestressed soil anchor if the num .
prestressed soil anchor carries the maximum test load with a creep rate that does not exceed num incheslog cycle of time and num .
net movement at the maximum test load cycle movement between alignment load after num dl and the final movement reading at num dl exceeds num of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test stressing length .
if the total movement of the prestressed soil anchors at the maximum test load does not exceed num of the theoretical elastic elongation of the test stressing length replace the prestressed soil anchor at no cost to the department .
stop the creep test as soon as the creep rate exceeds num incheslog cycle of time .
incorporate prestressed soil anchors which have a creep rate greater than num incheslog cycle of time in the finished work at a load equal to onehalf its failure load .
the failure load is the load carried by the prestressed soil anchor after the load has been allowed to stabilize for num minutes without exceeding num inches of movement between num and num minutes .
when a prestressed soil anchor does not satisfy the load test acceptance criteria the contractor may modify the design andor the construction procedures .
these modifications may include but are not limited to installing replacement prestressed soil anchors reducing the factored design load by increasing the number of prestressed soil anchors modifying the installation methods increasing the bond length or changing the prestressed soil anchor type .
obtain the engineers approval prior to making any modification which requires changes to the structure .
perform any modifications at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not allow additional contract time for modifications .
the engineer will not allow retesting of the failed prestressed soil anchor except to determine the anchor failure load .
num return to table of contents num corrosion protection include for temporary anchors only when shown in the plans .
num general protect prestressed soil anchors against corrosion using materials and procedures described herein .
the following materials may be used independently or in various combinations num .
portland cement grout num .
plastic pipe or tubing num .
steel pipe or tubing num .
greases specially compounded for posttensioning num .
bitumens num .
heat shrinkable polyethylene tubing use corrosion protection materials with properties that are not detrimental to the prestressing steel and that prevent the intrusion of corrosive environments .
use coating materials that also have the following properties num .
free from cracks and not brittle or fluid over the entire anticipated range of temperature num .
chemically stable for the life of the tendon num .
nonreactive with the surrounding materials such as concrete tendons or sheathing num .
corrosioninhibiting num .
impervious to moisture when acidic water can enter the bore hole during the period subsequent to the drilling and flushing operation and prior to tendon insertion and grouting introduce chemical additives for neutralizing purposes .
maintain a minimum ph of num when the prestressing steel is in contact with this water .
during prolonged periods monitor the ph at regular intervals and add additional neutralization as required .
concentrated sodium hydroxide and calcium hydroxide have proven effective for this purpose .
num protection systems num bond length num .
when the plans require grout protected prestressed soil anchor tendons meet the following requirements a .
provide corrosion protection of the tendon bond length by the cement grout cover .
b .
use spacers along the tendon bond length of multielement tendons to separate each of the individual elements of the tendon so the prestressing steel will bond to the grout .
position spacers so their center to center spacing does not exceed num feet .
in addition locate the upper spacer a maximum of num feet from the top of the tendon bond length and locate the lower spacer a maximum of num feet from the bottom of the tendon bond length .
c. use centralizers to ensure a minimum of num inches of grout cover over the tendon bond length .
position centralizers so their center to center spacing does not exceed num feet .
in addition locate the upper centralizer a maximum of num feet from the top of the tendon bond length and locate the lower centralizer a maximum of num inches from the bottom of the tendon bond length .
d. the engineer will not require centralizers on pressureinjected prestressed soil anchor tendons if the prestressed soil anchor is installed in coarsegrained soils using grouting pressures greater than num psi .
num return to table of contents e. the engineer will not require centralizers on hollowstem augured prestressed soil anchor tendons if the prestressed soil anchor is grouted through the auger and the hole is maintained full of a stiff grout num inches slump or less during extraction of the auger .
num .
when the plans require the tendon bond length to be encapsulated a .
protect the tendon bond length portion of the tendon against corrosion by encapsulating the tendon in a groutfilled corrugated plastic or deformed steel tube .
grout the tendon inside the encapsulation prior to inserting the tendon in the drill hole or after the tendon has been placed in the drill hole .
mix expansive admixtures with the encapsulation grout if the tendon is grouted inside the encapsulation prior to inserting it in the drill hole .
centralize the tendon within the tendon bond length encapsulation with a minimum of num inches of grout cover .
use spacers along the tendon bond length of multielement tendons to separate the elements of the tendon so the prestressing steel will bond to the encapsulation grout .
b .
use centralizers to provide a minimum of num inches of grout cover over the tendon bond length encapsulation .
position centralizers so their center to center spacing does not exceed num feet .
in addition locate the upper centralizer a maximum of num feet from the top of the tendon bond length and locate the lower centralizer a maximum of num inches from the bottom of the tendon bond length .
c. the engineer will not require centralizers on encapsulated pressureinjected prestressed soil anchor tendons if the prestressed soil anchor is installed in coarsegrained soils using grouting pressures greater than num psi .
d. the engineer will not require centralizers on encapsulated hollowstemaugured prestressed soil anchor tendons if the prestressed soil anchor is grouted through the auger and the hole is maintained full of a stiff grout num inches slump or less during extraction of the auger .
num unbonded length for the minimum unbonded length of the tendon use num feet or as indicated in the plans or the approved shop drawings whichever is greater .
if grouting the entire drill hole tendon bond length and unbonded length in one operation provide the corrosion protection of the unbonded length by a sheath completely filled with corrosion inhibiting grease or grout or a heat shrinkable tube internally coated with an elastic adhesive .
if using grease under the sheath make provisions to prevent the grease from escaping at the ends of the sheath .
with grease completely coat the tendon fill the void between the tendon and the sheath and fill the interstices between the wires of the numwire strands .
ensure that the shop drawings show how to provide a transition between the bond length and the unbonded length corrosion protection .
if the sheath is grout filled provide a separate bondbreaker that prevents the tendon from bonding to the grout surrounding the unbonded length .
if providing greasefilled sheath corrosion protection and the drill hole above the bond length is grouted after locking off the prestressed soil anchor grout the tendon inside a second sheath .
num anchorage and trumpet use nonrestressable anchorage devices except where indicated in the plans .
provide restressable anchorages on those prestressed soil anchors designated as restressable in the plans .
ensure that the posttensioning supplier provides a restressable anchorage compatible with the posttensioning system provided along with written recommendations concerning the restressing of the tendons .
num return to table of contents if using strand tendons submit written recommendations from the post tensioning supplier for seating the wedges .
include with the recommendations the minimum load required to properly seat the wedges in the anchor head .
size the bearing plates so that num. the bending stresses in the plate do not exceed the yield strength of the steel when applying a load equal to num of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength of the tendon and num. the average bearing stress on the concrete does not exceed that recommended in section num of the post tensioning institute guide specification for post tensioning materials .
weld the trumpet to the bearing plate .
provide a trumpet that has an inside diameter equal to or larger than the hole in the bearing plate .
ensure that the trumpet is long enough to accommodate movements of the structure during testing and stressing .
for strand tendons with encapsulation over the unbonded length provide a trumpet that is long enough to enable the tendon to make a transition from the diameter of the tendon in the unbonded length to the diameter of the tendon at the anchor head without damaging the encapsulation .
ensure that trumpets filled with corrosioninhibiting grease have a permanent bunan synthetic rubber or approved equal seal provided between the trumpet and the unbonded length corrosion protection .
ensure that trumpets filled with grout have a temporary seal provided between the trumpet and the unbonded length corrosion protection or that the trumpet overlaps the unbonded length corrosion protection by a minimum of num inches and fits tightly over the unbonded length corrosion protection .
num submittals .
prepare and submit shop drawings and a design submission describing the prestressed soil anchor system or systems intended for use to the engineer for review and approval num working days prior to the commencement of the prestressed soil anchor work .
include the following in the shop drawings and design submission num .
a prestressed soil anchor schedule providing the following a. prestressed soil anchor number b. prestressed soil anchor factored design load c. type and size of tendon d. minimum total anchor length e. minimum bond length f. minimum tendon bond length g. minimum unbonded length num .
a drawing of the prestressed soil anchor tendon and the corrosion protection system .
include details for the following a. spacers and their location b. centralizers and their location c. unbonded length corrosion protection system d. bond length corrosion protection system e. anchorage and trumpet f. anchorage corrosion protection system num return to table of contents num .
certificates of compliance for the following materials if used stating that the material or assemblies to be provided will fully comply with the requirements of the contract .
a. prestressing steel strand or bar b. portland cement c. prestressing hardware d. bearing plates e. corrosion protection system the engineer will approve or reject the shop drawings and design submission within num working days after receipt of the submission .
submit to the engineer for review and approval or rejection mill test reports for the prestressing steel and the bearing plate steel .
the engineer may require the contractor to provide samples of any prestressed soil anchor material intended for use on the project .
the engineer will approve or reject the prestressing steel and bearing plate steel within five working days after receipt of the test reports .
do not incorporate the prestressing steel and bearing plates in the work without the engineers approval .
submit to the engineer for review and approval or rejection calibration data for each test jack pressure gauge and reference pressure gauge to be used .
the engineer will approve or reject the calibration data within five working days after receipt of the data .
do not commence testing until the engineer has approved the jack pressure gauge and reference pressure gauge calibrations .
submit to the engineer within num calendar days after completion of the prestressed soil anchor work a report containing num. prestressing steel manufacturers mill test reports for the tendons incorporated in the installation num. grouting records indicating the cement type quantity injected and the grout pressures num. prestressed soil anchors test results and graphs .
num tendon storage and handling .
handle and store tendons in a manner to avoid damage or corrosion .
the engineer will consider damage to the prestressing steel as a result of abrasions cuts nicks welds and weld splatter cause for rejection .
protect the prestressing steel if performing welding in the vicinity .
do not ground welding leads to the prestressing steel .
protect prestressing steel from dirt rust or deleterious substances .
the engineer will allow a light coating of rust on the steel .
if heavy corrosion or pitting is noted the engineer will reject the affected tendons .
use care in handling and storing the tendons at the site .
prior to inserting a tendon in the drill hole examine the tendon for damage to the encapsulation and the sheathing .
if in the opinion of the engineer the encapsulation is damaged repair the encapsulation in accordance with the tendon suppliers recommendations .
if in the opinion of the engineer the smooth sheathing has been damaged repair it with ultra high molecular weight polyethylene tape .
spiral wind the tape around the tendon to completely seal the damaged area at a pitch that ensures a double thickness at all points .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
unless otherwise shown in the plans the quantity to be paid for will be the number of prestressed soil anchors based on the maximum anchor spacing shown in the plans installed and accepted .
for prestressed soil anchors that do not meet the acceptance criteria the original prestressed soil anchor and any required additional work or prestressed soil anchors will be in sum considered to be one prestressed soil anchor for payment purposes .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing the materials necessary to complete the anchors in place and accepted .
the quantity of performance and creep tests to be paid for will be the number of tests performed on accepted anchors .
the cost of proof testing will be included in item no .
num .
no payment will be made for tests performed on unaccepted anchors .
payment will be made under item no .
num num prestressed soil anchors each .
item no .
num num prestressed soil anchor performance tests each .
item no .
num num prestressed soil anchors creep tests each .
num return to table of contents section num precast segmental bridge construction num description .
fabricate store transport and erect precast structural concrete superstructure andor substructure segments on a prepared foundation to the established lines and grades in accordance with the design dimensions and details shown on the plans and in accordance with this section .
reinforcing steel embedded items and all appurtenant items are included .
base the bid on the design shown in the plans .
the work in this section does not include longitudinally posttensioned beams upon which a concrete slab is castinplace .
num qualification of contractors personnel .
meet the requirements of section num .
when mixing handling and applying an epoxy bonding agent provide direct supervision by a person with knowledge and experience or trained by a technical representative of the manufacturer in the use of this material .
arrange for a technical representative of the manufacturer to be at the site as an advisor at the beginning of this work .
ensure that all personnel who will be working with an epoxy bonding agent are thoroughly familiar with the safety precautions necessary for use of this material .
num definitions .
the following definitions apply to segmental bridge construction num segment a modular section of the superstructure andor substructure consisting of a certain crosssection shape and length as detailed in the plans .
num match cast a precast concrete fabrication process whereby a segment is cast against the preceding segment producing a matching interface which permits the reestablishment of the cast geometry at erection time .
match casting is accomplished by either the short line or long line casting method .
num short line casting casting segments one at a time in a casting cell between a bulkhead at one end and a previously cast segment at the other .
the first segment is cast between the bulkhead and another temporary bulkhead .
num long line casting casting segments on a casting bed of sufficient length to permit the cumulative casting of segments for the entire length of a span or cantilever between field closure pours without repositioning the segments on the casting bed .
with this method the first segment is cast between bulkheads and successive segments are cast between a movable bulkhead on one end and the previously cast segment on the other .
num casting cell a special formwork arrangement usually consisting of a fixed vertical bulkhead of the cross section shape at one end and adjustable soffit side and core forms all designed and assembled into a machine for making a single superstructure segment .
a casting cell for a substructure pier shaft segment consists of exterior and interior side forms and a soffit form of the cross section shape .
num wet joint system where segments are made in a casting cell between two bulkheads and are not match cast .
the segments are then erected in the superstructure with a narrow castinplace joint between each segment .
during erection all the segments of a span or num return to table of contents multiple spans are supported by falsework truss or other technique until the joints have gained strength and the longitudinal posttensioning installed to make them self supporting .
num span by span erection placing a specified number of segments on a temporary support system aligned and posttensioned longitudinally forming a completed span of the superstructure .
num balanced cantilever erection the segments are sequentially erected alternately on either side of the pier in cantilever to a point where a closure is castinplace .
num progressive cantilever erection the segments are erected progressively in cantilever in one direction from one pier to the next using temporary intermediate piers or other systems as required to support the advancing cantilever between piers .
num casting curve the curve of casting geometry that has to be followed in the casting cell or bed for achieving the theoretical bridge profile and alignment after all the final structural and time dependent creep and shrinkage deformations have taken place .
the casting curve is a combination of the theoretical bridge geometrical profile grade alignment and the camber .
num camber the amount by which the concrete profile at casting time must differ from the theoretical geometric profile grade to compensate for all structural dead load posttensioning all long term and time dependent deformations creep and shrinkage including all the intermediate erection stages and effects .
the opposite of deflections .
num erection elevation the elevation at which a segment is set in the structure at the time it is erected .
this is profile grade corrected by the amount of deflection calculated to occur from that stage onwards .
num shop drawings calculations and manuals .
num general use methods and procedures providing adequate safety to the general public from constructionerection activities andor falsework placed over or adjacent to traveled roadways navigational or recreational waterways or any existing commercial industrial or other facility .
num information required submit detailed shop drawings calculations manuals and other information including but not limited to the following num segment shop drawings num .
a schedule of materials for segment fabrication including concrete reinforcing steel prestressing steel duct filler and other similar items .
num .
each segment number and the direction of erection .
num .
segment dimensions including widths lengths thicknesses tapers fillets radii working points posttensioning clearances rebar dimensions and spacing embedded items holes anchorage positions and other similar items .
num .
posttensioning requirements as outlined in section num .
check post tensioning for consistency with preapproved posttensioning hardware and provide part numbers for department preapproved systems on the shop drawings .
substitution of parts or materials is not allowed .
num .
the volume of concrete weight of reinforcement and weight of post tensioning in each precast segment and the total weight for reinforcement and posttensioning for both the superstructure and substructure summarized and tabulated on the shop drawings .
num return to table of contents num .
details and calculations for any localized strengthening for concentrated supports and loads or reactions from any special erection equipment placed in locations not already allowed for in the plans .
num .
details and supporting calculations for any modifications to segment geometry cross section dimensions or segment length including any required changes to reinforcing and posttensioning .
num .
details of permanent and temporary embedded items including inserts blockouts temporary openings holes and other similar items and any localized required strengthening and the materials and methods to fill and finish the holes .
num casting yard num .
procedures for segment fabrication including layout of the casting yard set up and operation of the casting cells movable rain and sun shades geometry control stations the storage and handling of rebar cages .
the preparation of as built geometry data placing and finishing concrete curing of concrete form stripping bond breaking and other similar items .
num .
calculations and details for lifting storage and stacking of segments .
additional strengthening of the segments to accommodate stacking will be at no expense to the department .
num .
equipment for segments fabrication including details of the forms and casting cells for the manufacture of the segments surveying the segment lifting and transportation of the segment in the yard and other similar items .
num .
segment storage including layout of the storage area method of supporting the segments single or double stacking placing erection marks and segment identification and other similar items .
num .
segment transportation from the casting yard to the site .
num erection manual meet the requirements in num .
num manual for geometry control and casting curves meet the requirements in num .
num materials .
num general use materials which conform to this section and the requirements prescribed in division iii materials for the particular kind and type of material specified .
num concrete use concrete as specified in section num except as specifically modified herein .
use no .
num coarse aggregate in the concrete for segments .
screenings are not allowed as a substitute for silica sand for use in concrete for precast superstructure segments .
num reinforcing steel use astm anum grade num reinforcing steel which meets the requirements of section num .
when welding reinforcing steel meet the requirements of the american welding societys structural welding code dnum .
the engineer may allow shop prepared welded reinforcing grillages .
field welding of reinforcing steel is not allowed .
num posttensioning systems use posttensioning hardware components meeting the requirements of section num .
components are not interchangeable and must comply with the details of the approved shop drawings .
num epoxy bonding systems use only epoxy systems comprised of two components a resin and a hardener with each component distinctly pigmented so that mixing produces a third color similar to the color of the precast segments and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products must submit an application conforming to the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents in its workable state or open time the epoxy bonding agent must function as a lubricant for joining the segments .
in its hardened state the epoxy bonding agent must provide a watertight seal between the precast concrete segments .
the hardened epoxy bonding agent must provide intimate contact for stress transfer by completely filling all interstitial space between the match cast segment faces .
do not use resin or hardeners from containers which are damaged or have been previously opened .
combining of resin and hardener from bulk containers will not be permitted use only preproportioned full containers of components .
submit instructions from the manufacturer for the safe storage handling mixing and application of the materials .
num casting requirements .
num general ensure that all materials details and procedures are as specified herein as noted in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
do not begin casting segments until the engineer approves the relevant shop drawings calculations casting manuals concrete forms and concreting operations and the post tensioning system components and layout if different from that on the contract plans .
approval of posttensioning stressing elongations and forces for field erection operations is not required at this stage but is required prior to erection .
to use wet joints to join cantilevers or for corrective measures obtain the engineers written approval .
give each segment an erection mark indicating its location orientation and order in the erection sequence .
match mark abutting edges of adjacent segments .
show erection marks on the erection plans or in the erection manual .
num forms take responsibility for the design and engineering of the forms as well as their construction .
form all exposed formed surfaces of each element of the structure with the same material to produce similar concrete surface textures color and appearance .
obtain the engineers approval of forms prior to initiating casting operations .
build the details shown on the contract plans or as amended by approved shop drawings into the forms .
repair worn damaged or otherwise unacceptable forms and obtain the engineers approval before casting any segment .
where sections of forms are joined ensure that offsets in flat surfaces do not exceed num inches and that offsets with corners and bends do not exceed num inches .
ensure that all joints in the forms and contact points with bulkheads and existing segments have good fitting seals to prevent loss of fine material and cement grout .
check and inspect forms on a regular weekly basis to ensure proper alignment and geometric accuracy .
do not use forms which fail to meet the specified casting tolerances until such corrections are made to produce segments within the specified tolerances .
use a small blockout at all locations where an external tendon enters or exits the face of the concrete at deviation blocks and diaphragms except at anchorage locations .
the blockout will be approximately num inches larger in diameter or overall dimensions than the tendon duct and have a depth equal to at least the minimum prescribed concrete cover dimension shown in the plans .
num casting control geometry before commencing the casting operation submit the proposed method of geometry control for all segment casting operations to the engineer for approval .
this submittal must be in the form of a casting manual and include but not necessarily be limited to num return to table of contents num .
all measuring equipment procedures and the location of control points to be established on each segment .
num .
the location and values of all permanent benchmarks and reference points in the precasting yard .
num .
a geometry control procedure for the vertical and horizontal alignment control for the precasting of segments including survey controls and procedures observations checks computational andor graphical methods and correction techniques .
num .
the casting curves which include the theoretical geometric horizontal alignment profile grade and superelevation appropriately combined with the camber .
ensure that the casting manual covers all geometry control operations necessary and is compatible with the chosen methods of casting and erection including erection survey elevation and alignment control .
prepare the manual in accordance with submittal requirements of this section .
do not begin casting without the engineers approval of the geometry control method .
in the precasting yard use instruments for the geometry control which are mounted on a permanent platform of sufficient height to sight on all control points .
in addition establish and maintain permanent benchmarks and reference points throughout the casting operations .
during casting make all corrections required in the geometry of the segments from the control points established on each segment .
with a match cast system after casting and before bond breaking to separate the segments check the position of the new cast and match cast segments again .
if positions are not as desired make corrections in the next segment .
in general and unless otherwise approved by the engineer make observations on the geometry control reference hardware cast into the segments i.e .
elevation bolts alignment offsets and lengths to a precision of plus or minus num foot .
during casting operations produce and maintain on a daily basis a graphical plot of the vertical and horizontal as cast alignments along each vertical and horizontal control line to an exaggerated scale in order to clearly highlight variations .
depict these against both the theoretical geometric vertical and horizontal alignment casting curves on a continuous layout of an entire unit of the bridge between expansion joints .
maintain this plot in good condition so that it may be used and referenced during erection .
keep all geometry control hardware cast into any segments such as elevation bolts and alignment hairpins in place during erection for reference and checking purposes .
remove the hardware after completion of erection of the unit in the bridge between expansion joints .
use experienced personnel to operate the instruments and supervise the casting operation .
prior to the commencement of casting obtain the engineers approval of the experience andor qualifications of the supervisory and instrument operating personnel particularly with regard to the observational precision required .
num preparation for match casting when match casting is used take great care in positioning of the match cast previously cast segment in relation to the segment to be cast .
ensure that the match cast segment is not twisted .
ensure that all materials to be embedded in the concrete of the new cast segment are properly positioned and supported in order to maintain their position and withstand concrete num return to table of contents placement and consolidation without damage .
make provisions for all projections recesses notches openings blockouts and the like in accordance with the plans and approved shop drawings .
cover the abutting surface of the match cast segment with a thin film of a bond breaker consisting of flax soap and talc or other material approved by the engineer .
use a soap and talc mixture consisting of five parts flax soap to one part talc .
the engineer will base acceptance of a material other than soap and talc prior to casting any segments by demonstration on a large specimen consisting of a precast piece and a new cast piece with a contact facial area of at least num square feet .
num embedded items num general embedded items must be in accordance with specifications for prestressed and posttensioned construction and the requirements herein .
num embedded posttensioning ducts ensure that embedded ducts for posttensioning tendons and bars are positioned accurately to their required alignment .
properly fabricate and identify all ducts so that proper positioning is assured and can be verified after casting .
utilize positive methods to ensure that ducts will not be displaced or damaged during concrete placement and consolidation .
adequately secure all embedded post tensioning ducts to the reinforcement cage at intervals not exceeding num inches for steel pipes and num inches for plastic ducts small ducts and very flexible ducts may require closer supports .
any auxiliary ties and support bars needed for these purposes will be considered incidental and at no extra cost to the project .
prevent the concrete cover requirements from being violated by any auxiliary ties and support bars .
after installation in the forms ensure that the ends of the ducts are sealed at all times to prevent entry of water debris and fine material .
following each pour of concrete demonstrate that all empty ducts are free of water and are unobstructed and undamaged .
immediately prior to installation of the prestressing steel again demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer that all ducts are unobstructed and free of water and debris .
num anchorage plates and castings prior to placing concrete in the forms fix all tendon anchorage plates and anchorage castings in their respective position in the forms connected to their duct and sealed to prevent mortar intrusion .
ensure that anchorage plates and castings are rigidly fixed in the forms to maintain their correct alignment and position during concrete placement and consolidation .
num reinforcing steel fabricate and place reinforcing steel in accordance with the contract plans or as superseded by the approved shop drawings and as required herein .
do not cut out or remove reinforcing steel to permit proper alignment of posttensioning ducts .
replace any bar that can not be fabricated to clear the ducts by additional bars with adequate lap lengths and submit the details to the engineer for approval .
in the plane of the reinforcement parallel to the nearest surface of the concrete ensure that bars do not vary from plan placement by more than num inch nor by more than oneeighth of the spacing between bars whichever is less .
in the direction perpendicular to this plane of reinforcement ensure that bars do not vary from plan placement by more than num inches .
the top and bottom cover of reinforcing steel must be within num inches of the cover dimensioned in the plans .
the edge cover of the reinforcing steel must be within num inch of the cover dimensioned in the plans .
num return to table of contents num concrete placement consolidation and finishing num general do not deposit concrete into the forms until the entire setup of the forms reinforcement ducts anchorages and embedded items have been thoroughly inspected and checked .
do not place concrete until the engineer is satisfied that all the above items have been properly inspected and checked and the rate of producing and placing the concrete will be sufficient to complete the casting and finishing operations within the scheduled time that experienced concrete finishers are available where required for finish work and that all necessary finishing tools and equipment are on hand at the site of the work and are in satisfactory condition for use .
during conveying and placement protect concrete against undue drying or rise in temperature and inclement weather .
num concrete placement equipment use concrete placement equipment of a size and design which permits placing concrete within the specified time .
clean all equipment at the end of each operation or workday and just prior to reuse check the equipment again and clean off hardened concrete and foreign materials .
place concrete by belt conveyors and by pumping in accordance with num and num respectively .
num concrete placement sequence num .
superstructure box segments first place concrete in the central portion of the bottom slab between the inside edges of the internal web forms leaving a narrow gap of num inches to num inches for inspection and consolidation of the bottom corners when the next load is placed in the webs .
then place the concrete in the bottom corners of each web to connect and consolidate with that already placed in the bottom slab .
then place concrete in the remainder of the webs in lifts not exceeding num inches at a time up to the top of the webs but not into the slab over the webs .
place concrete in the top slab in the outer wing and mid slab regions between webs before placing completing and consolidating zones over the top of the webs .
num .
substructure and pier shaft segments cast precast pier shaft segments vertically .
place the concrete in uniform lifts of approximately num inches to num inches and consolidate well .
num .
obtain the engineers approval on any alternative sequences to the above or for any other precast components .
num concrete placement and consolidation discharge individual loads of concrete into the forms and place and consolidate in the required locations .
after discharge into the forms do not bodily move concrete from place to place within the forms by mechanical vibrators or other similar equipment .
place and consolidate concrete with care so that posttensioning ducts anchorages and any other embedded items are maintained in their proper positions and are not damaged .
consolidate all concrete using approved vibrators together with any other equipment necessary to perform the work as specified .
use internal vibrators having a minimum frequency of num vibrations per minute and sufficient amplitude to consolidate the concrete effectively .
provide at least two standby vibrators in working condition for emergency use in case of malfunction .
use of external vibrators for consolidating concrete when the concrete is inaccessible for adequate consolidation by internal means .
when external vibration is used construct the forms sufficiently rigid to resist displacement or damage .
num return to table of contents vibrate concrete in a manner which avoids displacement or damage to reinforcement posttensioning ducts anchorages and other embedded items .
no construction joints are allowed within a segment except as detailed in the plans .
num finishing strike off the roadway surface of the segment with an approved mechanical screed operated by a self contained power source .
furnish and use a straightedge at least num inches longer than the segment while finishing the concrete deck surface of superstructure box girder segments .
use the straightedge approximately parallel to the centerline of the segment to strike an accurate surface between the bulkhead and the top of the match cast segment at all positions across the segment width .
give all other surfaces of segments and precast components a class num finish at the precast site in accordance with num .
num curing num general where casting cells are intended to operate on a short daily cycle and it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the required initial concrete strengths for the removal of the forms application of prestress moving and handling of the segments and that the final concrete strength can be achieved in a timely and consistent manner then steam curing will not be required .
however take precautions to promote proper curing by methods approved by the engineer and in accordance with section num .
such precautions must meet or exceed the following num .
to prevent moisture loss cover all exposed surfaces those not in contact with a form or match cast segment as soon as possible after casting with a moisture tight covering wet curing blankets or other approved equal systems .
avoid spoiling the deck surface finish .
keep the cover on or within num inches of the deck surface .
num .
keep the moisturetight covering substantially in place throughout succeeding operations such as geometry control survey stripping of internal forms wing forms and shifting of and working with a segment in a match cast position .
keep the concrete surface wet throughout these operations .
num .
after stripping of the side and core forms continue curing of the precast concrete by the application of a type num white pigmented membrane curing compound as specified in num to all exposed surfaces including segment exterior once exposed by removal from the form .
apply an approved debonding compound to match cast surfaces to serve both as a bond breaker and seal for curing .
num .
maintain the moisture tight covering for at least num hours .
as an alternative steam curing may be used .
num .
while the new cast segment is in contact with the match cast segment cover the match cast segment with curing blankets or other approved equal system to minimize the effects of differential temperature between the segments .
num steam curing meet the requirements of section num modified by the following requirements when steam curing is used .
num .
provide a device or devices for simultaneously recording the temperature of three widely separated locations per casting cell .
locate the three temperature sensors near the top middle and bottom of the enclosure or as otherwise approved by the engineer .
identify the charts with the hours dates and segment number and submit to the engineer immediately after steam curing is completed unless otherwise approved .
num return to table of contents num .
apply an approved debonding compound to match cast surfaces to serve both as a bond breaker and seal for curing .
num .
expose match cast segments to the same curing environment temperature and humidity as the new cast segment until the new segment reaches the required strength to allow the removal of the forms .
num removal of forms prior to removing the forms protect the plastic concrete from adverse weather effects .
keep supporting forms in place until the concrete has reached the required strength for form removal as specified in the plans in this section or as approved by the engineer .
test cylinders made and cured in the same manner as the segment to confirm the form release strength prior to removing form .
with the engineers approval a strength curve chart may be established to determine the time necessary for achieving the required form release strength in accordance with the specifications for form removal .
avoid cracking or damaging the segment when removing the forms especially match cast surfaces and shear keys .
notify the engineer of any damage which occurs and repair in an approved manner .
num test samples provide additional test samples and testing for compressive strength on precast segments and field closure joints to control the construction activities and to ensure adequate strength of these components at various stages of their manufacture and assembly .
make test cylinders in accordance with section num cured in the same manner as the structural components to ensure adequate compressive strength has been achieved in accordance with the plan requirements for the following conditions num .
prior to release of prestressing for components which are to be pretensioned .
num .
prior to form release andor moving the components to storage .
num .
prior to posttensioning transverse tendons if the component is less than num days old .
num .
prior to placing a component into position in the structure andor stressing of longitudinal posttensioning tendons if the component is less than num days old .
determine the number of cylinders in accordance with the proposed method for casting transporting and erecting the various components .
submit the results of the compression testing of one or more test cylinders for controlling the time of execution of the various construction operations .
obtain the engineers approval for meeting the specification requirements on casting curing and testing of concrete test cylinders .
no direct payment will be made for the concrete testing .
all costs for such testing will be included in the bid items for the various precast structural components .
num age at erection unless otherwise approved by the engineer precast components must be at least num days old prior to incorporating into the structure .
num tolerances num general the following tolerances apply to the fabrication of precast components num superstructure box segments num return to table of contents width of web num inch depth of bottom slab num inch depth of top slab num inch overall depth of segment num inch overall width of segment num inch length of segment num inch diaphragm dimensions num inch num precast box pier segments height individual element num inch width and breadth individual element num inch thickness wall num inch num all fabricated segments ends deviation from a plane per num ft width or depth num inch per num ft not to exceed num inch .
flat surface deviation from a plane at any location num inft not to exceed a total of num in .
num corrections control dimensions from segment to segment including castinplace segments and compensate for any deviations within a single segment or series of segments so that the overall dimensions of the completed structure meet the dimensions and overall erection tolerances shown in the plans and allowed by this section .
num repairs repair minor breakage spalling or honeycomb not over num inch deep by a method approved by the engineer .
major breakage spalling or honeycomb in excess of num inch deep is subject to the engineers structural review .
if found to be satisfactory repair these areas using a method approved by the engineer .
do not perform surface finishing or repairs on the matching joint surfaces of precast segments until after final erection of the segment except as herein noted .
if more than num but less than num of the total contact surface of all shear keys in any single web is broken spalled or honeycombed grind the damaged areas to produce a cylindrical depression into sound concrete to a depth and width approximately equal to the shear key dimensions .
complete necessary repairs to shear keys damaged at the casting site prior to shipping the segment to the erection site .
after erection of the segments adjacent to the damaged keys and prior to erection of additional segments carefully pack the voids left by the depressions with an epoxy mortar as approved by the engineer .
with the engineers approval an alternate method of repair may be used .
the engineer will consider the segment unsatisfactory for use if more than num of the total contact surface of all shear keys in any single web is broken spalled or honeycombed .
use an engineer approved method for repairing damaged alignment keys located in the top and bottom slabs .
the engineer will consider a segment unsatisfactory for use if more than num of the total contact surface of all alignment keys in any element of the slab wing overhang central portion between webs etc .
is broken spalled or honeycombed .
remove and dispose segments found to be unsatisfactory and not repairable after structural review and cast a new segment at no expense to the department .
num precast segment handling storage and shipment .
handle segments with care to prevent damage .
handle segments using only the devices shown on the shop drawings for this purpose .
store all precast segments level in the upright num return to table of contents position .
firmly support all precast segments for storage and shipment on an approved three point bearing system which does not introduce a twist under self weight .
do not stack superstructure segments one upon another unless approved by the engineer .
prior to shipment the engineer will thoroughly inspect each segment for damage .
thoroughly clean the faces of all joints of laitance bond breaking compound and any other foreign material by light sand blasting prior to shipment .
make no repairs of minor spalls or chipped areas on the joint surfaces until after erection of the segment .
upon arrival at the bridge site the engineer will inspect each segment again .
if in the engineers opinion any damage has occurred during shipment that will impair the function of the segment structurally aesthetically etc .
the segment will be rejected .
replace any rejected segment with an approved segment at no cost to the department .
provide firm support at bearing locations noted above .
fully secure the segments against shifting during transport .
provide a storage area of suitable stability for the segments to prevent differential settlement of the segment supports during the entire period of storage .
num erection .
num erection manual before commencing erection operations submit proposals for all segment erection operations to the engineer for approval .
this submittal must be in the form of an erection manual and include but not necessarily be limited to num .
a detailed stepbystep sequence for the erection of each segment including all intermediate procedures relating to erection equipment temporary and permanent post tensioning and making of closures between spans andor cantilevers and other required sequencing .
num .
positioning use and sequencing of falsework jacking andor releasing of falsework temporary towers supports tiedowns counterweights closure devices and the like .
num .
positioning use and sequencing of erection equipment such as cranes beam and winch devices gantries trusses and the like both on and off the structure including the movement introduction andor removal of any supports onto or connections with the structure .
include drawings and calculations for the structural effects of erection equipment on the structure .
num .
detailed scheduling of all temporary and permanent posttensioning operations and sequences in accordance with the segment erection and closure operations and other required scheduling .
num .
stressing forces and elongations for posttensioning .
num .
sequencing of filler injection operations .
num .
a method for the field survey control for establishing and checking the erected geometry elevations and alignments with particular attention to the setting of critical segments such as for example pier segments for balanced cantilever erection .
this information may be included in the erection manual or may be submitted later as a supplementary or separate document .
num .
any other relevant operations as required and applicable to the structure type and construction method .
do not start erection without the engineers approval of the erection manual .
num erection geometry control num general numerical or graphical methods may be used for alignment control and checking during erection .
establish the key stages for checking of the erection in the erection manual and obtain the engineers review and approval .
key stages would include for num return to table of contents example setting a pier segment during cantilever erection and various intermediate points during subsequent segment erection at span closure and upon completion .
prepare a table of elevations and alignments required at each key stage of erection in accordance with the plans as cast geometry camber and erection elevations for establishing erection controls and submit to the engineer for approval .
carefully check elevations and alignments at each stage of erection and correct as required to avoid any possible accumulation of errors .
if geometric corrective measures are necessary the engineer will require the specialty engineer to develop the means and methods to ensure the epoxy joint remains watertight and free from localized stress concentrations .
the specialty engineer will be required to submit the corrective measures to the engineer for approval .
use shims made of astm anum type num wire cloth roving with a maximum of num inch thickness .
num spanbyspan and wet joint erection position each span segment according to the final longitudinal alignment grade camber and crossslope .
keep the horizontal and vertical alignment of the pier segment within num inches of that required by the approved erection plans .
correct any deviation more than the tolerance allowed above using a method approved by the engineer .
num balanced cantilever and progressive cantilever erection check the alignment and elevations of the cantilevers using two independent surveys within one hour of sunrise on each day that segments are to be erected .
check the measurements made by each survey and ensure they agree to within num inches .
when measurements do not agree discontinue erection of segments until discrepancies in measurements are resolved to the satisfaction of the engineer .
accurate positioning of the pier segments is very important as it will establish the line and grade for cantilevers in each direction .
position each pier segment according to the final longitudinal alignment grade and crossslope and ensure no further erection continues until and unless these segments are properly located on the piers by the means provided .
keep the horizontal and vertical alignments of the pier segment within num inch of the alignment values required to control points as established by the approved erection plans .
check at each key stage of erection in accordance with approved erection procedures the ends of cantilevers for required elevations and alignment .
correct any deviation from the required alignment by a method approved by the engineer .
num erection tolerances num .
ensure that maximum differential between outside faces of adjacent segments in the erected position does not exceed num inches .
num .
ensure that transversely the angular deviation from the theoretical slope difference between two successive segment joints not exceed num rad .
num .
ensure that longitudinally the angular deviation from the theoretical slope change between two successive segments does not exceed num rad .
num .
dimensions from segment to segment will compensate for any deviations within a single segment so that the overall dimensions of the completed structure meets the dimensions shown in the plans such that the accumulated maximum error does not exceed num of the span length for either vertical profile andor horizontal alignment .
carefully check elevations and alignments at each stage of erection and correct as required to avoid any possible accumulation of errors .
num return to table of contents num other miscellaneous erection requirements num spanbyspan and wet joint erection num .num closure joints use concrete meeting the same specifications and criteria as the concrete in the segments .
ensure that concrete reaches the minimum required strength as shown in the plans or in the specifications prior to stressing the continuity post tensioning .
ensure that the closure joint forms provide tolerances as specified under num tolerances .
num wet joints where forming joints between segments using castinplace concrete the above conditions for closure joints also apply to wet joints .
in addition the castinplace wet joints can not be less than num inches wide nor greater than num inches wide unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num formwork adequately support formwork at all wet joints and closure joints to take all loads applied and do not remove them until the concrete in the joints has reached its required strength and the longitudinal tendons have been tensioned .
num balanced cantilever and progressive cantilever erection num deformations for computing deformations due to time dependent stress variations the erection time assumptions are shown in the plans .
deformations due to creep and shrinkage and the concrete modulus of elasticity have been computed using the fdots structures manual edition noted in the plans .
obtain the engineers approval for method of calculating the above parameters .
num temperature restrictions meet the requirements of section num for substrate temperatures epoxy formulation and thermal controls where precast segments are jointed with epoxy .
measure the substrate temperature at the middepth of the top slab for box girder sections or num inches from the top surface for slabs and other sections .
num permissible loads on cantilever during balanced cantilever erection unbalance the cantilever by only one segment at any time .
in addition to the unbalanced load due to one segment the cantilevers are designed for loads applied by the erection equipment as listed in the plans .
use alternate erection methods which comply with the assumptions in the plans or otherwise approved by the engineer .
num span closure joints use concrete for closure joints which comply with the same specifications and criteria as the concrete in the segments .
ensure that concrete reaches the minimum required strength as shown in the plans or in the specifications prior to stressing the transverse or continuity posttensioning .
ensure that the closure joint forms provide tolerances as specified for precast segments .
num falsework and formwork support falsework and formwork at closure pours by the cantilever ends or terminating segments of each series of segments to be joined .
secure cantilever together vertically longitudinally and transversely so that the applied loads will yield equal deflections to both cantilevers .
do not remove securing devices until the closure pour concrete has reached its required strength and longitudinal continuity tendons are tensioned .
submit calculations and details to verify that the devices and methods have adequate rigidity and do not impose excessive loads and stresses on the structure .
num precast box pier construction erection tolerances num .
ensure that maximum differential between outside faces of adjacent segments in the erected position does not exceed num inches .
num .
ensure that the rotational angular deviation measured about a vertical line between two successive segment joints does not exceed num rad .
num return to table of contents num .
ensure that the maximum angular deviation of a segment from a vertical line does not exceed num rad .
and that the maximum overall deviation from the vertical measured in any direction does not exceed num inches per foot of height .
num .
ensure the base precast segment is within num inch of the plan location .
num epoxy jointing of precast segmentsfurnish mix and apply a twocomponent epoxy bonding system meeting the requirements of this section to the match cast faces of joints between precast concrete superstructure andor substructure segments in accordance with the contract documents prior to the use of epoxy on the project conduct a site meeting with the engineer and epoxy manufacturer to determine the proper formulations storage and handling mixing and application of the epoxy .
have the necessary materials immediately available at the location of the segment joining in the event that the segments must be separated and cleaned or epoxy reapplied .
include in the erection manual required by this section details of erection and posttensioning operations which assure that the time elapsing between mixing components of the first batch of epoxy bonding agent applied to the joining surfaces of precast concrete segments and the application of a compressive contact pressure across the joint do not exceed num of the open time for the particular formulation of epoxy bonding agent used .
also include details of how the minimum closing contact pressure of approximately num psi will be applied uniformly to each joint to which epoxy is applied during the epoxy curing period .
contact pressure may be attained through combinations of weight and temporary andor permanent post tensioning .
num cleanliness of surfaces to be joined ensure that the application surfaces are free from oil form release agent laitance or any other deleterious material that would prevent the epoxy bonding agent from bonding to the concrete surface .
remove laitance by light sandblasting wire brushing .
do not destroy the surface shape and profile of the mating surfaces .
ensure that the surfaces have no free moisture on them at the time the epoxy bonding agent is applied .
free moisture will be considered present if a dry rag after being wiped over the surface becomes damp .
num substrate temperatures and epoxy formulation apply the epoxy bonding agent only when the substrate temperature of both surfaces to be joined is between numf and numf .
the formulation of the epoxy bonding agent must have an application temperature range that conforms to the substrate temperature of the surfaces being joined .
if the mating surfaces have different substrate temperatures then use the formulation for the higher temperature in hot weather periods .
in cold weather periods use the formulation for the lower temperature .
thermal control precautions may be taken in accordance with num .
num mixing of epoxy bonding agent mix the two components of the epoxy bonding agent in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions using only full and undamaged containers .
only open the containers immediately before being combined and do not use any which have an expired shelf life .
thoroughly stir each container of component before combining the components .
combine the two components and thoroughly mix until a uniform color is achieved .
mix with a properly sized mechanical mixer operating at no more than num rpm or in accordance with the recommendations of the epoxy manufacturer .
do not mix until the segments to be joined are within approximately num inches of their final position .
schedule mixing of the epoxy bonding agent so that the material num return to table of contents in a batch is applied to the face of a joint within a maximum of num minutes after combining the components .
the engineer at his discretion may require a dry run to check the fit of two surfaces before applying the epoxy .
num mating of segments immediately after each mating surface is covered with epoxy bonding agent bring the segments together and apply the specified compressive contact pressure in accordance with the approved erection procedures .
the contact pressure may be increased at any time after the epoxy has taken an initial set .
do not reduce the contact pressure until the epoxy in the joint has properly hardened and cured .
if the contact pressure is reduced do not subject the joint to tensile stress .
a discernable bead line of extruded epoxy bonding agent must be apparent along the exposed edges of the joint .
fill all areas of the joint which do not show a bead of epoxy by dispensing additional epoxy meeting the requirements of this specification into the joint using a pneumatic gun with epoxy cartridges .
inject epoxy to a minimum depth of num inch .
catch and retain epoxy which is squeezed out of the joint in areas over waterways roadways buildings etc .
clean all extruded epoxy bonding agent from external visible surfaces in a way not to damage or stain the concrete surface .
do not smear surplus extruded epoxy bonding agent over large areas areas more than num inch from each side of the joint visible surfaces or surfaces to which a cover coat class num applied finish coat or similar or texturing is to be applied later .
immediately after the segments are joined swab all embedded internal posttensioning ducts or conduits passing through the joints to smooth out any extruded epoxy bonding agent .
if the time between combining the components of the epoxy bonding agent and applying the compressive contact pressure exceeds num of the minimum open time immediately separate the segments and clean in accordance with num .
num thermal controls num cooling in hot weather if the substrate temperature exceeds numf do not proceed with epoxy jointing .
the contractor may take precautions to keep the mating substrate surfaces cool by shading or wetting with clean water except that the above requirements for no moisture at the time of application must be strictly adhered to .
num artificial heating in cold weather if electing to erect segments in cold weather when the substrate temperature of the mating concrete surfaces is below numf an artificial environment may be used to increase the substrate temperature subject to the following num .
make the artificial environment by an enclosure surrounding the joint through which warm air is circulated or heating is provided by radiant heaters .
num .
raise the temperature of the concrete substrate across the entire joint surface to at least numf .
num .
prevent localized heating and the temperature of the substrate exceeding numf at any point on the surface .
direct flame heating of the concrete is not allowed .
num .
maintain the temperature of the substrate surfaces between numf and numf for at least num hours after joining the surfaces .
num return to table of contents num .
the contractor may propose for review by the engineer an optional method of raising and maintaining the substrate temperature of the mating surfaces .
any optional method must meet the thermal restrictions above .
epoxy jointing operations may proceed if the air temperature is above numf and rising and the limitations above are met .
num failure to comply with time limits or incomplete jointing if the time limit between mixing of the epoxybonding agent and the application of the contact pressure is exceeded or if the joint is incompletely filled and sealed separate the segments and remove all epoxy from the faces using spatulas and approved solvent .
do not reapply epoxy until the faces have been properly cleaned and solvents dispersed for a period of num hours .
num removal of support to segments num spanbyspan erection ensure that precast concrete segments remain fully supported by the erection truss or system until at least num hours after mixing of the last batch of epoxy bonding agent applied to any joint in the span .
num cantilever erection independent support to a newly erected cantilever segment may be removed when the epoxy bonding agent in the third previous mating joint has set .
it is not necessary for the epoxy bonding agent in the new joint or the immediately previous joint to be set prior to removing the independent support of the new segment provided that the temporary andor permanent posttensioning has been installed to carry the load of the new and previous segment along with any applied construction loading as per the requirements of the erection system .
num record of jointing record and submit to the engineer on a weekly basis the following information num .
general a .
date and time of jointing b .
segment numbers or spans jointed c. weather conditions num .
for each joint identified by location or segment numbers a. manufacturers lot number of epoxy bonding agent components .
b .
temperature of the concrete on the joint surface at the middle of each segment when application of the epoxy bonding agent began .
c. time of mixing first batch of epoxy bonding agent applied to the joint and completion of application .
d. time of applying the required compressive contact pressure .
num .
details of any repairs performed including reason for repair joint location volume of epoxy used method of application etc .
num packed mortar joints for joints or bearings where designated on the plans place packed mortar after the joint or bearing has been set at the proper final elevation .
pressure grouting may be allowed with the engineers approval of the materials and method to be used .
mortar for packing consists of one part cement and one part fine aggregate by volume mixed with a nonshrink admixture as recommended by the manufacturer .
mix the dry elements thoroughly to a uniform mixture .
add water to produce a mealy slightly adhesive mixture .
pack the mortar until a water sheen is produced on the surface of the mortar .
build a form around the joint leaving one side open .
secure the form to withstand the required packing forces .
insert a small amount of mortar into the open joint to form a num return to table of contents num inches thick bead on the opposite side of the form .
pack this bead by striking a special tool made of num inch by num inch steel having a length approximately num inches longer than the largest dimension of the joint being packed with a num pound hammer .
continue compaction until water begins to bleed out of the mortar .
when bleeding has occurred insert another bead of mortar and pack as described above .
continue this process until the joint is filled to the limits shown in the plans .
num traffic railing and median setting .
prior to forming the concrete traffic railings accurately establish the asconstructed gutter line elevations at intervals not exceeding num feet .
then form the base of the traffic railing and median to provide an inside vertical face which extends from the surface of the concrete structure to an elevation located num inches or as shown in the plans above the theoretical gutter line elevations .
maintain the plan vertical height of the traffic railings as a minimum when variations exist between the plan profile and the actual profile of the gutter .
num bridge deck surface .
provide a class num floor finish in accordance with section num for long bridges upon completion of superstructure segment erection and prior to opening to traffic .
install expansion joints in accordance with section num .
num watertight decks .
check all segment joints closure joints and deck hole repairs to assure every location is watertight upon completion of all milling and grinding activities on the riding surface .
repair all locations showing evidence of leaks by cutting a num inches wide x num inches deep groove along the leak interface .
clean and completely fill the groove with epoxy meeting the requirements of section num .
dispense the epoxy into the groove using a pneumatic gun and epoxy cartridges .
clean all excess epoxy bonding agent from external visible surfaces in a way not to damage or stain the concrete surface .
do not smear epoxy over areas located more than num inch from each side of the groove .
num method of measurement .
precast superstructure and substructure segment concrete including castinplace concrete for closure and wet joint pours will be measured by volume according to the quantities represented by the dimensions of the segments and castinplace pours on the contract plans or approved shop drawings whichever is the lesser .
all reinforcement in precast superstructure and substructure segments castinplace closures and wetjoints will be measured by weight according to the quantities represented by the reinforcement details in the plans or approved shop drawings whichever is the lesser .
all permanent posttensioning in the superstructure and substructure will be measured by weight according to the quantities represented by the details in the plans or approved shop drawings whichever is the lesser .
num basis of payment .
num general payment will be in accordance with the following num precast segmentsconcrete payment for precast superstructure and substructure segment concrete will be at the contract bid prices per cubic yard for the various classes of concrete called for .
num return to table of contents such prices and payments will be full compensation for manufacture storage transport assembly and erection of the segments complete and in place including filling all concrete blockouts and similar miscellaneous details .
these prices and payments will also include the furnishing and the application of epoxy bonding agent and class num applied finish coating when specified in the plans providing temporary and permanent segment access details material testing special erection equipment temporary posttensioning tools labor and incidental items necessary for completing the work in accordance with the plans specifications and approved shop drawings .
castinplace concrete for closure and wet joint pours will be paid for under these items which also include the cost of all formwork closure devices and other temporary construction needed to make these closures and joints and castinplace segments or portions thereof as designated in the plans .
include the cost of providing a class num floor finish on the bridge deck and approach slab surfaces in the cost of superstructure and approach slab concrete .
the bridge floor grooving will be measured and paid for separately .
no additional payment will be made for extra concrete necessitated by approved modifications to the segments or structure needed to accommodate the contractors construction methods .
num precast segmentsreinforcement payment for reinforcement in precast segments closure pours wet joints and other castinplace concrete joints and details will be at the contract bid price per pound for reinforcing steel superstructure and for reinforcing steel substructure .
no additional payment will be made for extra reinforcement necessitated by approved modifications to the segments or structure for the purposes of the contractors construction methods .
num precast segmentsposttensioning payment for permanent posttensioning will be in accordance with section num .
no additional payment will be made for extra permanent or temporary post tensioning necessitated by approved modifications to the segments or structure for the purposes of the contractors construction methods nor will payment be made for temporary tendons which are approved to be left in the structure either stressed or unstressed for the convenience of the contractors operations .
num precast segmentspartial payment partial payment for precast segments will be made at num of the bid price per cubic yard of concrete and per pound of reinforcement when the segment has been cast and accepted .
remaining payment will be made when the segment has been erected and accepted for incorporation into the structure .
payment for posttensioning will be in accordance with section num .
num precast segmentnoncompliance any penalties or deductions for non compliance with regard to concrete reinforcement or posttensioning will be applied to the work affected in accordance with the requirements of the respective specifications .
num precast segment production preparatory operations for superstructure segment casting will be paid for separately at the contract lump sum price for precast segment production .
this item consists of the work necessary for establishing and putting into operation segment casting facilities .
it includes preparatory work operations acquisition or lease of real property acquisition or lease of segment manufacturing equipment acquisition or lease of equipment for the handling transport and storage of the segments and all other work or num return to table of contents operations which must be performed or costs incurred prior to the manufacture of the concrete segments including engineering services such as shop drawings .
partial payments will be made as indicated below num .
upon production of documentary evidence such as paid invoices canceled checks or similar executed financial instruments the cost for the acquisition of the casting forms for the precast segments by purchase lease or manufacture will be paid up to a limit of num of the lump sum price bid .
num .
when the first precast superstructure segment has been cast out of the first operable casting form and the segment is approved and accepted by the engineer num of the lump sum price bid will be paid .
num .
thereafter when each succeeding superstructure segment has been cast out of any operable casting form and approved and accepted by the engineer num of the lump sum price bid will be paid for each segment up to a limit of num of the lump sum price bid i.e .
num for each of the next ten acceptable segments .
the total lump sum price bid under this item will not exceed the least of num .
num of the sum of the amounts paid for the concrete in the precast segments only i.e .
excluding any castinplace concrete in joints closures or designated castin place segments or num .
num of the contract amount excluding mobilization and this item .
the balance of the lump sum price not paid after completion of casting the first eleven satisfactory superstructure segments will be paid after completion of the erection of the first span or closure of the first pair of cantilevers whichever occurs first .
num epoxy jointing no separate payment will be made for the work of epoxy jointing of precast concrete segments .
the cost of this work will be included in payment for the various precast concrete items .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num numclass iv concrete precast superstructure segmentsper cubic yard .
item no .
num num numclass iv concrete precast substructure segmentsper cubic yard .
item no .
num num numclass v concrete precast substructure segmentsper cubic yard .
item no .
num numreinforcing steel superstructureper pound .
item no .
num numreinforcing steel substructureper pound .
item no .
num numprecast segment productionlump sum .
num return to table of contents section num structures foundations index a .
general num through num b. piling num through num c. drilled shafts num through num d. spread footings num through num e. structures other than bridge foundations auger cast piles num through num a .
general num general .
the contractor may examine available soil samples and rock cores obtained during the soil boring operations at the appropriate district materials office .
num monitor existing structures monitor existing structures in accordance with section num .
num excavation complete all excavation of the foundations prior to installing piles or shafts unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
after completing pileshaft installation remove all loose and displaced materials from around the pilesshafts leaving a clean solid surface .
compact the soil surface on which concrete is to be placed or which will support the forming system for the concrete to support the load of the plastic concrete without settling or causing the concrete to crack or as shown in the contract documents .
num abutment end bent fill place and compact the fill before installing endbent pilingshafts except when driving specified test piling in end bents or the plans show uncased piles through proprietary retaining wall fills .
when installing pilesshafts or casing prior to placing fill take necessary precautions to prevent displacement of pilesshafts during placing and compacting fill materials within num feet of the pilesshafts or casing .
reference and check the position of the pilesshafts or casing at three approximately equal intervals during construction of the embankment .
place embankment material in num inch loose lifts in the num foot area around the pilesshafts or casing .
compact embankment material within the num foot area adjacent to the pilesshafts or casing to the required density with compaction equipment weighing less than num pounds .
when installing pilesshafts prior to the completion of the surrounding fills do not cap them until placing the fills as near to final grade as possible leaving only the necessary working room for construction of the caps .
when shown in the plans provide permanent casings installed prior to placement of the fill for all drilled shafts through mechanically stabilized fills for example behind proprietary retaining walls for shafts installed after fill placement .
install temporary casings through the completed conventional fill when permanent casings are not required .
provide permanent casings if required before the fill is placed extending a sufficient distance into the existing ground to provide stability to the casings during construction of the abutment fill .
num return to table of contents num cofferdams construct cofferdams as detailed in the plans .
when cofferdams are not detailed in the plans employ a qualified specialty engineer to design cofferdams and to sign and seal the plans and specification requirements .
submit the designs to the engineer for their records before beginning construction .
provide a qualified diver and a safety diver to inspect the conditions of the foundation enclosure or cofferdam when the contract documents require a seal for construction .
equip these divers with suitable voice communications and have them inspect the foundation enclosure and cofferdam periphery including each sheeting indentation and around each piling or drilled shaft to ensure that no layers of mud or other undesirable materials were left above the bottom of seal elevation during the excavation process .
also have the divers check to make sure the surfaces of the piles or drilled shafts are sufficiently clean to allow bond of the concrete down to the minimum bottom of seal elevation .
ensure that there are no mounds of stone shell or unapproved backfill material left after placement and grading .
assist the engineer as required to ensure that the seal is placed as specified and evaluate the adequacy of the foundation soils or rock .
correct any deficiencies found by the divers .
upon completion of inspection by the divers the department may also elect to inspect the work before authorizing the contractor to proceed with subsequent construction operations .
submit a written report by the divers to the engineer indicating the results of their underwater inspection before requesting authorization to place the seal concrete .
num vibrations on freshly placed concrete drilled shafts and piers ensure that freshly placed concrete is not subjected to peak particle velocities greater than num inches per second from vibration sources located within num feet from the nearest outside edge of freshly placed concrete to the vibration source until that concrete has attained its final set as defined by astm cnum except as required to remove temporary casings before the drilled shaft elapsed time has expired .
num static compression load tests .
num general employ a professional testing laboratory or specialty engineer with prior load test experience on at least three projects to conduct the load test in compliance with these specifications to record all data and to submit reports of the test results to the engineer except when the contract documents show that the department will supply a geotechnical engineer to provide these services .
perform the load test by applying a load up to the load required in the contract documents or to the failure load whichever occurs first .
do not apply test loads to piles sooner than num hours or the time interval shown in the plans after driving of the test pile or reaction piles whichever occurs last .
allow up to four weeks after the last load test for the analysis of the load test data and to provide all the estimated production tip elevations .
if the contractor is willing to construct production foundation elements in areas designated by the engineer tip elevations will be determined in these areas beginning seven days after the receipt of the load test data which represents the designated area .
do not begin static load testing of drilled shafts until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
the contractor may use high early strength concrete to obtain this strength at an earlier time to prevent testing delays .
load test pilesshafts in the order directed by the engineer .
unless shown otherwise in the contract documents provide all equipment materials labor and technical personnel required to conduct the load tests including determination of anchor reaction member num return to table of contents depths .
in this case provide a loading apparatus designed to accommodate the maximum load plus an adequate safety factor .
while performing the load test provide safety equipment and employ safety procedures consistent with the latest approved practices for this work .
include with these safety procedures adequate support for the load test plates and jack to prevent them from falling in the event of a release of load due to hydraulic failure test pileshaft failure or any other cause .
include in the bid the cost of transporting load test equipment and instrumentation supplied by the department from their storage location to the job site and back .
handle these items with care .
the contractor is responsible for the safe return of these items .
after completion of the static load tests return all department furnished equipment in satisfactory operating condition .
repair all damage to the test equipment furnished by the department to the satisfaction of the engineer .
clean all areas of rust on structural steel items and recoat those areas in accordance with section num .
return all load test equipment supplied by the department within num days after completing the load tests .
the contractor is responsible for the equipment from the time it leaves its storage area until the time it is returned .
during this time insure the equipment against loss or damage for the replacement cost thereof the greater of num or the amount shown in the plans or for the full insurable value if replacement cost insurance is not available .
notify the engineer at the preconstruction conference or no later than num days before beginning test pile installation of the proposed testing schedule so that items supplied by the department may be reserved .
notify the department at least ten working days before pickup or return of the equipment .
during pickup the department will complete a checklist of all equipment placed in the contractors possession .
the department will later use this checklist to verify that the contractor has returned all equipment .
provide personnel and equipment to load or unload the equipment at the departments storage location .
provide lifting tongs or nylon slings to handle department owned test girders .
do not perform cutting welding or drilling on department owned girders jacks load cells or other equipment .
num loading apparatus provide an apparatus for applying the vertical loads as described in one of the following num .
as shown and described in the contract documents .
num .
as supplied by the contractor one of the following devices designed to accommodate a load at least num higher than the test load shown in the plans or described herein for test loads a .
load applied by hydraulic jack acting against weighted box or platform construct a test box or test platform resting on a suitable support over the pile and load it with material with a total weight greater than the anticipated maximum test load .
locate supports for the weighted box or platform at least num feet or three pileshaft diameters whichever is greater measured from the edge of the pile or shaft to the edge of the supports .
insert a hydraulic jack with pressure gauge between the test pile or shaft and the underside of the reaction beam and apply the load to the pile or shaft by operating the jack between the reaction beam and the top of the pile or shaft .
b .
load applied to the test pile or shaft by hydraulic jack acting against anchored reaction member construct reaction member anchorages in accordance with article num of astm dnum .
attach a girders of sufficient strength to act as a reaction beam to the upper ends of the anchor piles or shafts .
insert a hydraulic jack with pressure gauges between num return to table of contents the head of the test pileshaft and the underside of the reaction beam and apply the test load to the pileshaft by operating the jack between the reaction beam and the pileshaft head .
if using drilled shafts with bells as reaction member anchorages locate the top of the bell of any reaction shaft anchorage at least three shaft diameters below the bottom of the test shaft .
c. combination devices the contractor may use a combination of devices a and b as described above to apply the test load to the pile or shaft .
d. other systems proposed by the contractor and approved by the engineer when necessary provide horizontal supports for loading the pileshaft and space them so that the ratio of the unsupported length to the minimum radius of gyration of the pile does not exceed num for steel piles and the unsupported length to the least crosssection dimension does not exceed num for concrete piles or drilled shafts .
ensure that horizontal supports provide full support without restraining the vertical movement of the pile in any way .
when required by the contract documents apply a horizontal load to the shaft either separately or in conjunction with the vertical load .
apply the load to the test shaft by hydraulic jacks jacking against contractor provided reaction devices .
after receiving the engineers approval of the proposed method of load application apply the horizontal load in increments and relieve it in decrements as required by the contract documents .
num modified quick test num .
loading procedure apply vertical loads concentric with the longitudinal axis of the tested pileshaft to accurately determine and control the load acting on the pileshaft at any time .
place the load on the pileshaft continuously in increments equal to approximately num of the maximum test load specified until approaching the failure load as indicated by the measuring apparatus andor instruments .
then apply increments of approximately num until the pileshaft plunges or attains the limiting load .
the engineer may elect to stop the loading increments when he determines the contractor has met the failure criteria or when a settlement equal to num of the pileshaft width or diameter is reached .
apply each load increment immediately after taking and verifying the complete set of readings from all gauges and instruments .
apply each increment of load within the minimum length of time practical and immediately take the readings .
complete the addition of a load increment and the completion of the readings within num to num minutes .
the engineer may elect to hold the maximum applied load up to one hour .
remove the load in decrements of about num of the maximum test load .
remove each decrement of load within the minimum length of time practical and immediately take the readings .
complete the removal of a load decrement and the taking of the readings within num to num minutes .
the engineer may also require up to two reloading cycles with five loading increments and three unloading decrements .
record the final recovery of the pileshaft until movement is essentially complete for a period up to one hour after the last unload interval .
num .
failure criteria and nominal resistance use the criteria described herein to establish the failure load .
the failure load is defined as the load that causes a pileshaft top deflection equal to the calculated elastic compression plus num inches plus num of the pileshaft minimum width or the diameter in inches for pilesshafts num inches or less in width and equal to the calculated elastic compression plus num of the pileshaft minimum width or diameter for pilesshafts greater than num inches in width .
consider the nominal resistance of any pileshaft so tested as either the maximum applied load or the failure load whichever is smaller .
num return to table of contents num measuring apparatus provide an apparatus for measuring movement of the test pilesshafts that consists of all of the following devices num .
wire line and scale stretch a wire as directed by the engineer between two supports located at a distance at least a .
num feet from the center of the test pile but not less than num times the pile diameter or width .
b .
num feet from the centerline of the shaft to be tested but not less than three shaft diameters .
locate the wire supports as far as practical from reaction beam anchorages .
at overwater test sites the contractor may attach the wire line as directed by the engineer to the sides of the service platform .
mount the wire with a pulley on one support and a weight at the end of the wire to provide constant tension on the wire .
ensure that the wire passes across the face of a scale mounted on a mirror attached to the test pileshaft so that readings can be made directly from the scale .
use the scale readings as a check on an average of the dial readings .
when measuring both horizontal and vertical movement mount separate wires to indicate each movement horizontal or vertical .
measure horizontal movements from two reference wires set normal to each other in a horizontal .
num .
wooden reference beams and dial gauges attach wooden reference beams as detailed in the plans or approved by the engineer to independent supports .
for piles install the greater of num times the pile diameter or width or num feet from the centerline of the test pile .
for drilled shafts install at the greater of three shaft diameters or num feet from the centerline of the shaft to be tested .
locate the reference beam supports as far as practical from reaction beam anchorages .
for overwater test sites the contractor may attach the reference beams as directed by the engineer between two diagonal platform supports .
attach dial gauges with their stems resting either on the top of the pileshaft or on lugs or similar reference points on the pileshaft to the fixed beams to record the movement of the pileshaft head .
ensure that the area on the pileshaft or lug on which the stem bears is a smooth surface which will not cause irregularities in the dial readings .
provide a minimum of four dial gauges each with num inch divisions and with num inch minimum travel placed at num degree intervals for measuring vertical or horizontal movement .
num .
survey level as a check on the dial gauges determine the elevation of a point near the top of the test pileshaft on plan datum by survey level at each load and unload interval during the load test .
unless approved otherwise by the engineer level survey precision is num foot .
alternately the surveyor may read an engineers num scale attached near the pileshaft head .
determine the first elevation before applying the first load increment make intermediate readings immediately before a load increment or an unload decrement and after the final unload decrement that completely removes the load .
make a final reading at the time of the last recovery reading or as directed by the engineer .
for overwater test sites when shown in the plans or directed by the engineer the contractor shall drive an h pile through a num inch casing to provide a stable support for the level and to protect it against wave action interfering with level measurements .
provide a suitable movable jig for the surveyor to stand .
use a jig that has a minimum of three legs has a work platform providing at least num feet width of work area around the casing and is approved by the engineer before use .
the described work platform may be supported by the protective casing when approved by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num load test instrumentation num .
general the intent of the load test instrumentation is to measure the test load on top of the pileshaft and when provided in the contract documents its distribution between side friction and end bearing to provide evaluation of the preliminary design calculations and settlement estimates and to provide information for final pileshaft length design .
ensure that the instrumentation is as described in the contract documents .
when requested by the engineer provide assistance during installation of any instrumentation supplied by the department .
supply num v num hz num a of ac electric power in accordance with the national electric code nec to each test pileshaft site during the installation of the instrumentation during the load testing and during any instrumented redrives ordered by the engineer .
place all of the internal instrumentation on the rebar cage before installation in the test shaft .
construct the rebar cage at least two days before it is required for construction of the test shaft .
provide assistance during installation of instrumentation supplied by the department including help to string place and tie the instrumentation and any assistance needed in moving or repositioning the cage to facilitate installation .
place the rebar cage in one segment complete with its instrumentation .
the engineer may require multiple lift points andor a suitable stiffleg length of h pile or other suitable section to get the cage in a vertical position without causing damage to the instrumentation .
successfully demonstrate the lifting and handling procedures before the installing instrumentation .
num .
hydraulic jack and load cell provide hydraulic jacks of adequate size to deliver the required test load to the pileshaft unless shown otherwise in the plans .
before load testing begins submit a certificate from a reputable testing laboratory showing a calibration of gauge readings for all stages of jack loading and unloading for jacks provided .
ensure that the jack has been calibrated within the preceding six months unless approved otherwise .
recalibrate the jack after completing load testing if so directed by the engineer .
ensure that the accuracy of the gauge is within num of the true load .
provide an adequate load cell approved by the engineer that has been calibrated within the preceding six months .
provide an approved electrical readout device for the load cell .
submit a certificate from an independent testing laboratory showing a calibration of readings for all stages of loading and unloading for load cells furnished by the contractor and obtain the approval of the engineer before beginning load testing .
ensure that the accuracy of the load cell is within num of the true load .
num .
telltales when shown in the contract documents furnish and install telltales that consist of an unstressed steel rod placed greased for reducing friction and corrosion with appropriate clearance inside a constantdiameter pipe that rests on a flat plate attached to the end of the pipe at the point of interest shown in the contract documents .
construct telltales in accordance with the contract documents .
install dial gauges reading to num inch with num inch minimum travel as directed by the engineer to measure the movement of the telltale with respect to the top of the pileshaft .
num .
embedded strain gauges when shown in the contract documents furnish and install strain gauges in the test shaft to measure the distribution of the load .
ensure that the type number and location of the strain gauges are as shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
use strain gauges that are waterproof and have suitable shielded cable that is unspliced within the shaft .
num return to table of contents num support facilities furnish adequate facilities for making load and settlement readings num hours per day .
provide such facilities for the instrumented area and include lighting and shelter from rain wind and direct sunlight .
num load test personnel furnished by the contractor provide a certified welder together with necessary cutting and welding equipment to assist with the load test setup and to make any necessary adjustments during the load test .
provide personnel to operate the jack generators and lighting equipment and also provide one person with transportation to assist as required during load test setup and conducting of the load tests .
provide qualified personnel as determined by a specialty engineer or testing lab required to read the dial gauges take level measurements and conduct the load test except when the contract documents show that the department will provide these personnel .
num cooperation by the contractor cooperate with the department and ensure that the department has access to all facilities necessary for observation of the conduct and the results of the test .
num required reports submit a preliminary static load test report to the engineer within five days after completing the load test .
when the contract documents do not require internal instrumentation submit the final report within ten days after completing the load test .
submit the final report of test results for internally instrumented shafts within num days after completing the load test .
include in the report of the load test the following information num .
a tabulation of the time of and the amount of the load and settlement readings and the load and recovery readings taken during the loading and unloading of the pileshaft .
num .
a graphic representation of the test results during loading and unloading of pileshaft top movement as measured by the average of the dial gauge readings from wireline readings and from level readings .
num .
a graphic representation of the test results when using telltales showing pileshaft compression and pileshaft tip movement .
num .
the estimated failure and safe loads according to the criteria described herein .
num .
remarks concerning any unusual occurrences during the loading of the pileshaft .
num .
the names of those making the required observations of the results of the load test the weather conditions prevailing during the load test and the effect of weather conditions on the load test .
num .
all supporting data including jack and load cell calibrations and certificates and other equipment requiring calibration .
num .
when the contract document requires internal instrumentation of the pileshaft furnish all of the data taken during the load test together with instrument calibration certifications .
in addition submit a report showing an analysis of the results of axial load and lateral load tests in which soil resistance along and against the pileshaft is reported as a function of deflection .
submit the necessary reports prepared by the specialty engineer responsible for collection and interpretation of the data except when the contract documents show that the department will provide a geotechnical engineer .
num disposition of loading material remove all equipment and materials which remains the contractors property from the site .
clean up and restore the site to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num return to table of contents num disposition of tested pilesshafts after completing testing cut off the tested pilesshafts which are not to be incorporated into the final structure and any reaction pilesshafts at an elevation num inches below the finished ground surface or as shown in the plans .
take ownership of the cutoffs and provide areas for their disposal .
b. piling num description .
furnish and install concrete steel or wood piling including driving jetting preformed pile holes cutting off splicing dynamic load testing and static load testing of piling .
in the event a pile is broken or otherwise damaged by the contractor to the extent that the damage is irreparable in the opinion of the engineer the contractor shall extract and replace the pile at no additional expense to the department .
in the event that a pile is mislocated by the contractor the contractor shall extract and replace the pile at no expense to the department except when a design change proposed by the contractor is approved by the department as provided in num .
num classification .
the department classifies piling as follows num .
treated timber piling .
num .
prestressed concrete piling .
num .
steel piling .
num .
test piling .
num .
sheet piling .
a .
concrete sheet piling .
b .
steel sheet piling .
num .
polymeric piles see section num for requirements .
num general requirements .
num predrilling of pile holes predrilled pile holes are either starter holes to the depth described in this subarticle or holes drilled through embankmentfill material down to the natural ground surface at no additional cost to the department .
when using low displacement steel piling such as structural shapes drive them through the compacted fill without the necessity of drilling holes through the fill except when the requirements for predrilling are shown in the plans .
when using concrete or other high displacement piles drill pile holes through fill new or existing to at least the elevation of the natural ground surface .
use the range of drill diameters listed below for square concrete piles .
num inch square piles num to num inches num inch square piles num to num inches num inch square piles num to num inches num inch square piles num to num inches num inch square piles num to num inches num inch square piles num to num inches for other pile sizes use the diameter of the drills shown in the plans or approved by the engineer .
accurately drill the pile holes with the hole centered over the plan location of num return to table of contents the piling .
maintain the location and vertical alignment within the tolerances allowed for the piling .
for predrilled holes required through rock or other hard i.e .
debris obstructions etc .
materials that may damage the pile during installation predrill hole diameters approximately num inches larger than the largest dimension across the pile crosssection .
fill the annular space around the piles as described in num .
num with clean anum sand or sand meeting the requirements of num .
in the setting of permanent and test piling the contractor may initially predrill holes to a depth up to num feet or num of the pile length whichever is greater unless otherwise shown in the plans .
where installing piles in compacted fill predrill the holes to the elevation of the natural ground surface .
with prior written authorization from the engineer the contractor may predrill holes to greater depths to minimize the effects of vibrations on existing structures adjacent to the work andor for other reasons the contractor proposes .
num underwater driving underwater driving is defined as any driving through water which is above the pile head at the time of driving .
when conducting underwater driving provide a diver equipped with voice communications to aid in placing the hammer back on the pile for required cushion changes or for subsequent redriving to attach or recover instrumentation the engineer is using to inspect the condition of the pile or for other assistance as required .
select one of the following methods for underwater driving num .
accomplish underwater driving using conventional driving equipment and piling longer than authorized so that the piling will extend above the water surface during final driving .
when choosing this option furnish a pile hammer that satisfies the requirements of this section for use with the longer pile .
num .
accomplish underwater driving using an underwater hammer that meets the requirements of this section and is approved by the engineer .
when choosing this option provide at least one pile longer than authorized at each pile group extending above the water surface at final driving .
at each group location drive the longer pile first .
the engineer will evaluate the adequacy of the underwater driving system .
the engineer may use the pile tip elevation of the longer pile that the contractor has driven and the engineer has accepted to evaluate the acceptability of the piles driven with the underwater hammer .
num .
accomplish underwater driving using conventional driving equipment with a suitable approved pile follower .
when choosing this option provide at least one pile longer than required at each pile group extending above the water surface at final driving .
at each group location drive the full length pile first without using the follower .
the engineer will evaluate the adequacy of the follower used for underwater driving .
the engineer may choose to perform a dynamic load test on the first pile the contractor drives with the follower in each group .
the engineer may use the pile tip elevation of the longer pile that the contractor has driven and the engineer has accepted to evaluate the acceptability of the piles driven with the follower .
prior to use submit details of the follower for the engineers evaluation and approval along with the information required in num .
include the weight crosssection details stiffness type of materials and dimensions of the follower .
num pile hammers all equipment is subject to satisfactory field performance .
use a variable energy hammer to drive concrete piles .
hammers will be rated based on the theoretical energy of the ram at impact .
supply driving equipment which provides the required resistance at num return to table of contents a blow count ranging from num blows per inch num blows per foot to num blows per inch num blows per foot at the end of initial drive unless approved otherwise by the engineer after satisfactory field trial .
ensure the hammer is capable of driving to a resistance equal to at least num times the factored design load plus the scour and down drag resistance shown in the contract documents without overstressing the piling in compression or tension and without reaching or exceeding num blows per inch .
when the engineer determines the stroke height or bounce chamber pressure readings do not adequately determine the energy of the hammer provide and maintain a device to measure the velocity of the ram at impact .
determine the actual hammer energy in the field so that it is consistent with the hammer energy used for each bearing capacity determination .
when requested submit to the engineer all technical specifications and operating instructions related to hammer equipment .
num airsteam variable energy airsteam hammers shall be capable of providing at least two ram stroke lengths .
the short ram stroke length shall be approximately half of the full stroke for hammers with strokes up to num feet and no more than num feet for hammers with maximum strokes lengths over num feet .
operate and maintain airsteam hammers within the manufacturers specified ranges .
use a plant and equipment for steam and air hammers with sufficient capacity to maintain under working conditions the hammer volume and pressure specified by the manufacturer .
equip the plant and equipment with accurate pressure gauges which are easily accessible to the engineer .
the engineer will not accept final bearing on piles the contractor drives with airsteam hammers unless the contractor operates the hammers within num of the manufacturers rated speed in blows per minute unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
provide and maintain in working order for the engineers use an approved device to automatically determine and display the blows per minute of the hammer .
num diesel variable energy diesel hammers shall have at least three fuel settings that will produce reduced strokes .
operate and maintain diesel hammers within the manufacturers specified ranges .
determine the rated energy of diesel hammers using measured ram stroke length multiplied by the weight of the ram for open end hammers and by methods recommended by the manufacturer for closed end hammers .
provide and maintain in working order for the engineers use an approved device to automatically determine and display ram stroke for openend diesel hammers .
equip closedend double acting diesel hammers with a bounce chamber pressure gauge in good working order mounted near ground level so the engineer can easily read it .
also submit to the engineer a chart calibrated to actual hammer performance within num days prior to initial use equating bounce chamber pressure to either equivalent energy or stroke for the closedend diesel hammer to be used .
num hydraulic variable energy hydraulic hammers shall have at least three hydraulic control settings that provide for predictable energy or equivalent ram stroke .
the shortest stroke shall be a maximum of num feet for the driving of concrete piles .
the remaining strokes shall include full stroke and approximately halfway between minimum and maximum stroke .
supply hammer instrumentation with electronic read out and control unit that allows the operator to read and adjust the hammer energy or equivalent ram stroke .
when pressure measuring equipment is required to determine hammer energy calibrate the pressure measuring equipment before use .
num vibratory vibratory hammers of sufficient capacity force and amplitude may be used to drive steel sheet piles and with approval of the engineer to drive num return to table of contents steel bearing piles a sufficient distance to get the impact hammer on the pile to stick the pile .
the engineer will determine the allowable depth of driving using the vibratory hammer based on site conditions .
however in all cases use a power impact hammer for the last num feet or more of the final driving of steel bearing piles for bearing determinations after all piles in the bentpier have been driven with a vibratory hammer .
do not use vibratory hammers to install concrete piles or to install support or reaction piles for a load test .
num cushions and pile helmet num capblock provide a capblock also called the hammer cushion as recommended by the hammer manufacturer .
use commercially manufactured capblocks constructed of durable manmade materials with uniform known properties .
do not use wood chips wood blocks rope or other material which permit excessive loss of hammer energy .
do not use capblocks constructed of asbestos materials .
obtain the engineers approval for all proposed capblock materials and proposed thickness for use .
maintain capblocks in good condition and replace them when charred melted or otherwise significantly deteriorated .
the engineer will inspect the capblock before driving begins and weekly or at appropriate intervals determined by the engineer based on field trial .
replace or repair any capblock which loses more than num of its original thickness in accordance with the manufacturers instructions before permitting further driving .
num pile cushion provide a pile cushion that is adequate to protect the pile from being overstressed in compression and tension during driving .
use a pile cushion sized so that it will fully fill the lateral dimensions of the pile helmet minus one inch but does not cover any void or hole extending through the top of the pile .
determine the thickness based upon the hammerpilesoil system .
for driving concrete piles use a pile cushion made from pine plywood or oak lumber .
alternative materials may be used with the approval of the engineer .
obtain the engineers approval for all pile cushions .
do not use materials previously soaked saturated or treated with oil .
maintain pile cushions in good condition and replace them when charred splintered excessively compressed or otherwise deteriorated to the point it will not protect the pile against overstressing in tension or compression .
protect cushions from the weather and keep them dry .
do not soak the cushions in any liquid .
replace the pile cushion if during the driving of any pile the cushion is either compressed more than onehalf the original thickness begins to burn or as directed by the engineer after field performance .
provide a new cushion for each pile unless approved otherwise by the engineer after satisfactory field trial .
reuse pile cushions in good condition to perform all setchecks and redrives .
use the same cushion to perform the setcheck or redrive as was used during the initial driving unless this cushion is unacceptable due to deterioration in which case use a similar cushion .
num pile helmet provide a pile helmet suitable for the type and size of piling being driven .
use a pile helmet deep enough to adequately contain the required thickness of pile cushion and to assist in maintaining pilehammer alignment .
use a pile helmet that fits loosely over the pile head and is at least num inch larger than the pile dimensions .
use a pile helmet designed so that it will not restrain the pile from rotating .
num leads provide pile leads constructed in a manner which offers freedom of movement to the hammer and that have the strength and rigidity to hold the hammer and pile in the correct position and alignment during driving .
when using followers use leads that are long enough and suitable to maintain position and alignment of the hammer follower and pile throughout driving .
num return to table of contents num followers when using followers perform dynamic load testing as per num .
obtain the engineers approval for the type of follower when used and the method of connection to the leads and pile .
use followers constructed of steel with an adequate cross section to withstand driving stresses .
when driving concrete piles ensure that the crosssectional area of the follower is at least num of the crosssectional area of the pile .
when driving steel piles ensure that the crosssectional area of the follower is greater than or equal to the cross sectional area of the pile .
provide a pile helmet at the lower end of the follower sized according to the requirements of num .
use followers constructed that maintain the alignment of the pile follower and hammer and still allow the pile to be driven within the allowable tolerances .
use followers designed with guides adapted to the leads that maintain the hammer follower and the piles in alignment .
use information from dynamic load tests described in num to evaluate the adequacy of the follower and to determine pile capacity .
num templates and ground elevations provide a fixed template adequate to maintain the pile in proper position and alignment during driving with swinging leads or with semifixed leads .
where practical place the template so that the pile can be driven to cutoff elevation before removing the template .
ensure that templates do not restrict the vertical movement of the pile .
supply a stable reference close to the pile which is satisfactory in the opinion of the engineer for determination of the pile penetration .
at the time of driving piles furnish the engineer with elevations of the original ground and template at each pile or pile group location .
note the highest and lowest elevation at each required location and the ground elevation at all piles .
num water jets use jet pumps supply lines and jet pipes that provide adequate pressure and volume of water to freely erode the soil .
do not perform jetting without prior approval by the engineer or unless allowed by the plans .
do not perform jetting in the embankment or for end bents .
where conditions warrant with approval by the engineer perform jetting on the holes first place the pile therein then drive the pile to secure the last few feet of penetration .
only use one jet for prejetting or jetting through piles constructed with a center jethole .
use two jets when using external jets .
when jetting and driving position the jets slightly behind the advancing pile tip approximately num feet or as approved by the engineer .
when using water jets in the driving determine the pile bearing only from the results of driving after withdrawing the jets except where using jets to continuously eliminate soil resistance through the scour zone ensure that they remain in place as directed by the engineer and operating during pile bearing determination .
where practical perform jetting on all piles in a pile group before driving begins .
when large pile groups or pile spacing and batter make this impractical or when the plans specify a jetdrive sequence set check a sufficient number of previously driven piles in a pile group to confirm their capacity after completing all jetting .
num penetration requirements measure the penetration of piles from the elevation of natural ground scour elevation shown in the plans or the bottom of excavation whichever is lower .
when the contract documents show a minimum pile tip elevation drive the tip of the pile to this minimum elevation .
the engineer will accept the bearing of a pile only if the contractor achieves the required bearing when the tip of the pile is at or below the specified minimum tip elevation and below the bottom of the preformed or predrilled pile hole .
num return to table of contents when the plans do not show a minimum tip elevation ensure that the penetration is at least num feet into firm bearing material or at least num feet into soft material unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
if a scour elevation is shown in the plans achieve this penetration below the scour elevation .
the engineer may accept a penetration between num feet and num feet when there is an accumulation of five consecutive feet or more of firm bearing material .
firm bearing material is any material offering a driving resistance greater than or equal to num tons per square foot of gross pile area as determined by the dynamic load testing num .
soft material is any material offering less than these resistances .
the gross pile area is the actual pile tip crosssectional area for solid concrete piles the product of the width and depth for h piles and the area within the outside perimeter for pipe piles and voided concrete piles .
do not drive piles beyond practical refusal .
to meet the requirements in this subarticle provide penetration aids such as jetting or preformed pile holes when piles can not be driven to the required penetration without reaching practical refusal .
if the contractor encounters unforeseeable isolated obstructions that the contractor can not practically penetrate by driving jetting or preformed pile holes and the contractor must remove the pile to obtain the required pile penetration the department will pay the costs for such removal as unforeseeable work .
num preformed pile holes num description preformed pile holes serve as a penetration aid when all other pile installation methods fail to produce the desired penetration and when authorized by the engineer to minimize the effects of vibrations on adjacent structures .
preformed pile holes are necessary when the presence of rock or strong strata of soils will not permit the installation of piles to the desired penetration by driving or a combination of jetting and driving when determined necessary by the engineer or when authorized by the engineer to minimize the effects of vibrations on adjacent existing structures .
the engineer may require preformed holes for any type of pile .
drive all piles installed in preformed pile holes to determine that the bearing requirements have been met .
for preformed holes which are required through material that caves during driving to the extent that the preformed hole does not serve its intended purpose case the hole from the surface through caving material .
after installing the pile to the bottom of the casing remove the casings unless shown otherwise in the plans .
determine bearing of the pile after removing the casing unless shown otherwise in the plans .
fill all voids between the pile and soil remaining after driving through preformed holes with clean anum sand or sand meeting the requirements of num after the pile has achieved the required minimum tip elevation unless grouting of preformed pile holes is shown in the plans .
if pile driving is interrupted during sand placement drive the pile at least num additional blows after filling all of the voids between the pile and soil with sand at no additional cost to the department .
num provisions for use of preformed pile holes the department generally anticipates the necessity for preformed pile holes and includes directions in the contract documents .
the department will pay for preformed pile holes when the contractor establishes that the required results can not be obtained when driving the load bearing piles with specified driving equipment or if jetting is allowed while jetting the piles and then driving or while jetting the piles during driving .
num conditions under which payment will be made the department will make payment for preformed pile holes shown in the plans required by the engineer or where the contractor demonstrates that such work is necessary to achieve the required num return to table of contents penetration without overstressing the pile .
the department considers but does not limit to the following conditions as reasons for preformed pile holes num .
inability to drive piles to the required penetration with driving and jetting equipment .
num .
to penetrate a hard layer or layers of rock or strong stratum that the engineer considers not sufficiently thick to support the structure .
num .
to obtain greater penetration into dense strong material and into dense material containing holes cavities or unstable soft layers .
num .
to obtain penetration into a stratum in which it is desired to found the structure .
num .
to minimize the effects of vibrations or heave on adjacent existing structures .
num .
to minimize the effects of ground heave on adjacent piles .
num construction methods construct preformed pile holes by drilling or driving and withdrawing a suitable punch or chisel at the locations of the piles .
construct a hole that is equal to or slightly greater than the largest pile dimension for the entire length of the hole and of sufficient depth to obtain the required penetration .
carefully form the preformed hole by using a drill or punch guided by a template or other suitable device and do not exceed the minimum dimensions necessary to achieve the required penetration of the pile .
when the plans call for grouting the preformed pile holes provide a minimum pile hole dimension num inches larger than the largest pile dimension .
construct the holes at the plan position of the pile and the tolerances in location and ensure the hole is straight and that the batter is the same as specified for the pile .
loose material may remain in the preformed pile hole if the conditions in num are satisfied .
num grouting of pile holes clean and grout preformed pile holes for bearing piles when the plans require grouting after driving .
use grout that meets the requirements of num to num and has a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days or as specified in the plans .
prepare cylinders and perform qc testing in accordance with num .
lot size and verification will be in accordance with num .
pump the grout through three or more grout pipes initially placed at the bottom of the preformed hole .
the contractor may raise the grout pipes when necessary to prevent clogging and to complete the grouting operations .
maintain the grout pipes below the surface of the previously placed grout .
continue grouting until the grout reaches the ground surface all around the pile .
provide divers to monitor grouting operations when the water depth is such that it is impractical to monitor from the ground surface .
when grouting is shown in the plans include the cost in the price for piles .
in the event that the engineer determines the contractor must grout and the required grouting is not shown in the plans the department will pay for the grouting work as unforeseeable work .
num bearing requirements num general drive piles to provide the bearing required for carrying the loads shown in the plans .
for all types of bearing piles consider the driving resistance as determined by the methods described herein sufficient for carrying the specified loads as the minimum bearing which is accepted for any type of piles .
determine pile bearing using the method described herein or as shown in the plans .
for foundations requiring num dynamic testing of production piles the engineer may accept a driven pile when the pile has achieved minimum penetration and the minimum required bearing for num inches of consecutive driving or when the minimum penetration num return to table of contents is achieved driving has reached practical refusal in firm material and the bearing capacity is obtained in all the refusal blows .
for foundations not requiring num dynamic testing of production piles the engineer may accept a driven pile when the pile has achieved minimum penetration the blow count is generally the same or increasing and the minimum required bearing capacity obtained for num inches of consecutive driving .
at the discretion of the engineer the driven pile may be accepted when the minimum penetration is achieved and driving has reached practical refusal in firm material .
the engineer may modify the scour resistance shown in the plans if the dynamic load test is used to determine the actual soil resistance through the scour zone .
also the engineer may make modifications in scour resistance when the contractor proposes drilling andor jetting to reduce the soil resistance in the scour zone .
num bearing criteria for foundations requiring num dynamic testing the engineer will determine the bearing of all piles using the data received from dynamic load testing equipment utilizing internally or externally mounted sensors according to the methods described in num .
for foundations not requiring num dynamic testing the engineer will determine the number of blows required to provide the required bearing according to the methods described herein .
determine the pile bearing by computing the penetration per blow with less than num inches rebound averaged through num inches of penetration .
when it is considered necessary by the engineer determine the average penetration per blow by averaging the penetration per blow through the last num to num blows of the hammer .
num practical refusal practical refusal is defined as num blows per inch or less than one inch penetration with the hammer operating at the highest setting determined by the engineer and less than num inches rebound per blow .
stop driving as soon as the engineer determines that the pile has reached practical refusal .
num setchecks and pile redrive num .
setchecks in the event that the contractor has driven the pile to approximately num inches above cutoff without reaching the required resistance the engineer may require the contractor to interrupt driving to perform a setcheck .
provide an engineers level or other suitable equipment for elevation determinations to determine accurate pile penetration during the setchecks .
in the event the results of the initial setchecks are not satisfactory the engineer may direct additional setchecks .
the engineer may accept the pile as driven when a setcheck shows that the contractor has achieved the minimum required pile bearing and has met all other requirements of this section .
num .
pile redrive pile redrive consists of redriving the pile after the following working day from initial driving to determine time effects to reestablish pile capacity due to pile heave or for other reasons determined by the engineer .
redrive piles as directed by the engineer .
num .
uninstrumented setchecks and uninstrumented pile redrive the engineer may consider the pile to have sufficient bearing resistance when the specified setcheck criteria is met through the last num to num blows of the hammer at the specified minimum stroke and the total penetration is less than six inches with less than num inches rebound per blow .
when the total penetration is greater than six inches or pile rebound exceeds num inches per blow the engineer may consider the pile to have sufficient bearing resistance when the specified blow count criteria is achieved in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents num .
instrumented setchecks and instrumented pile redrive when considered necessary by the engineer dynamic load tests using at least num hammer blows will determine whether the pile bearing is sufficient .
the engineer may consider the pile to have sufficient bearing resistance when dynamic measurements demonstrate the static pile resistance exceeds the required pile resistance for at least one hammer blow and the average static pile resistance during the next five hammer blows exceeds num of the required pile resistance .
if the pile is advanced farther the static pile resistance during all subsequent blows must exceed num of the required pile resistance .
num pile heave pile heave is the upward movement of a pile from its originally driven elevation .
drive the piles in an approved sequence to minimize the effects of heave and lateral displacement of the ground .
monitor piles previously driven in a pile group for possible heave during the driving of the remaining piles .
when required by the engineer take elevation measurements to determine the magnitude of the movement of piles and the ground surface resulting from the driving process .
redrive all piles that have heaved num inches or more unless the engineer determines that the heave is not detrimental to pile capacity .
the department will pay for all work in conjunction with redriving piles due to pile heave under the pile redrive item .
num piles with insufficient bearing in the case that the engineer determines that the safe bearing capacity of any pile is less than the required bearing capacity the contractor may splice the pile and continue driving or may extract the pile and drive a pile of greater length or if so ordered by the engineer drive additional piles .
num methods to determine pile capacity num general dynamic load tests using an externally mounted instrument system and signal matching analyses or internal gauges will determine pile capacity for all structures or projects unless otherwise shown in the plans .
when necessary the engineer may require static load tests to confirm pile capacities .
when the contract documents do not include items for static load tests the engineer will consider all required static load testing unforeseeable work .
notify the engineer two working days prior to placement of piles within the template and at least one working day prior to driving piles .
do not drive piles without the presence of the engineer .
if the internally mounted system fails to communicate properly with the receiving system allow the engineer sufficient time to mobilize backup equipment for performing dynamic load testing .
num wave equation num .
use wave equation analysis for piles weap programs to evaluate the suitability of the proposed driving system including the hammer follower capblock and pile cushions as well as to estimate the driving resistance in blows per num inches or blows per inch to achieve the pile bearing requirements and to evaluate pile driving stresses .
use wave equation analyses to show the hammer meets the requirements described in num and maximum allowed pile stresses are not exceeded .
num .
required equipment for driving hammer approval is based on satisfactory field performance including dynamic load test results .
in the event piles require different hammer sizes the contractor may elect to drive with more than one size hammer or with a variable energy hammer provided the hammer is properly sized and cushioned will not damage the pile and will develop the required resistance .
num .
maximum allowed pile stresses num return to table of contents a .
general the maximum allowed driving stresses for concrete steel and timber piles are given below .
in the event dynamic load tests show that the hammer will overstress the pile modify the driving system or method of operation as required to prevent overstressing the pile .
in such cases provide additional cushioning reduce the stroke or make other appropriate agreed upon changes .
b. prestressed concrete piles use the following equations to determine the maximum allowed pile stresses num f num f s pe c apc num num f num f s cpe num c apt numa for piles less than num feet long num f num f s cpe num c apt numb for piles num feet long and greater sapt num numc within num feet of a mechanical splice where sapc maximum allowed pile compressive stress psi sapt maximum allowed pile tensile stress psi fc specified minimum compressive strength of concrete psi fcpe effective prestress after all losses at the time of driving psi taken as num times the initial prestress force divided by the minimum net concrete crosssectional area of the pile fcpe num for dowel spliced piles .
c. steel piles ensure the maximum pile compression and tensile stresses measured during driving are no greater than num times the yield strength num fy of the steel .
d. timber piles ensure the maximum pile compression and tensile stresses measured during driving are no greater than num ksi for southern pine and pacific coast douglas fir and num of the ultimate parallel to the grain strength for piles of other wood .
num temporary piles submit for the engineers review an analysis signed and sealed by a specialty engineer which establishes the pile lengths for temporary piles .
submit for the engineers approval a wave equation analysis signed and sealed by a specialty engineer which establishes the driving criteria for temporary piles at least five working days prior to driving temporary production piles .
the required driving resistance is equal to the sum of the factored design load plus the scour and down drag resistances shown in the plans divided by the appropriate resistance factor or the nominal bearing resistance shown in the plans whichever is higher .
the maximum resistance factor is num when only wave equation analysis is performed .
however a larger resistance factor may be applicable when additional testing is provided by the specialty engineer in accordance with section num of volume num of the fdot structures manual .
if the contractor elects to perform num dynamic load testing submit a certification package prepared by the specialty engineer .
the certification package shall include a signed and sealed letter by the specialty engineer that certifies the piles meet the load requirements and have no integrity deficiencies .
the package shall also include the dynamic load num return to table of contents test records all signal matching analysis performed to determine pile capacities and a summary table that indicates the final capacity of every pile .
num dynamic load tests dynamic load testing consists of estimating pile capacity by the analysis of electronic data collected from blows of the hammer during driving of an instrumented pile in accordance with num .
num static load tests static load testing consists of applying a static load to the pile to determine its capacity .
use the modified quick test procedure in accordance with num .
num fender pile installation for piles used in fender systems regardless of type or size of pile either drive them full length or jet the piles to within num feet of cutoff and drive to cutoff elevation to seat the pile .
the engineer will not require a specific driving resistance unless noted in the plans .
use methods and equipment for installation that do not damage the piles .
if the method or equipment used causes damage to the pile modify the methods or equipment at no expense to the department .
num structures without test piles for structures without num dynamic testing or test piles the engineer will dynamically test the first piles in each bent or pier at locations shown in the plans to determine the blow count criteria for the remaining piles .
when locations are not shown in the plans allow for dynamic load tests at num of the piles at each bent or pier rounded up to the next whole number .
if the engineer requires additional dynamic load tests for comparison purposes the contractor will be paid for an additional dynamic load test as authorized by the engineer in accordance with num .
allow the engineer one working day after driving the dynamic load tested piles to complete the signal matching analyses and determine the driving criteria for the subsequent piles in the bent or pier .
num test piles num general all test piles will have dynamic load tests .
drive piles of the same crosssection and type as the permanent piles shown in the plans in order to determine any or all of the following num. installation criteria for the piles .
num. nature of the soil .
num. lengths of permanent piles required for the work .
num. driving resistance characteristics of the various soil strata .
num. amount of work necessary to obtain minimum required pile penetration .
num. ability of the driving system to do the work .
num. need for point protection .
because test piles are exploratory in nature drive them harder within the limits of practical refusal deeper and to a greater bearing resistance than required for the permanent piling .
except for test piles which are to be statically or statnamically load tested drive test piles their full length or to practical refusal .
splice test piles which have been driven their full length without achieving the required bearing and proceed with further driving unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
as a minimum unless otherwise directed by the engineer do not cease driving of test piles until obtaining the required bearing capacity continuously where the blow count is increasing for num feet unless reaching practical refusal first .
drive test piles which are to be statically or statnamically load tested as anticipated for the production piles .
num return to table of contents when test piles attain practical refusal prior to attaining minimum penetration perform all work necessary to attain minimum penetration and the required bearing .
where practical use water jets to break the pile loose for further driving .
where jetting is impractical extract the pile and install a preformed pile hole through which driving will continue .
the department will consider the work of extracting the pile to be unforeseeable work .
when driving test piles other than low displacement steel test piles have preforming equipment available at the site and water jets as specified in num when jetting is allowed ready for use before the test pile driving begins .
the engineer may elect to interrupt pile driving up to four times on each test pile two times for up to two hours and two additional times during the next working day of initial driving to determine time effects during the driving of test piles .
num location of test piles drive all test piles in the position of permanent piles at the designated locations .
ensure that all test piles designated to be statically load tested are plumb .
in the event that all the piles are battered at a static load test site the engineer will designate an outofposition location for driving a plumb pile for the static load test .
num equipment for driving use the same hammer and equipment for driving test piles as for driving the permanent piles .
also use the same equipment to redrive piles .
num dynamic load tests the engineer will take dynamic measurements during the driving of piles designated in the plans or authorized by the engineer .
for concrete piles install instruments prior to driving and assist the engineer in monitoring all blows delivered to the pile .
for steel production piles the engineer may accept instrumented setchecks or redrives .
the engineer will perform dynamic load tests to evaluate any or all of the following num .
suitability of the contractors driving equipment including hammer capblock pile cushion and any proposed follower .
num .
pile capacity .
num .
pile stresses .
num .
energy transfer to pile .
num .
distribution of soil resistance .
num .
soil variables including quake and damping .
num .
hammerpilesoil system for wave equation analyses .
num .
pile installation problems .
num .
other .
either install internal gauges in the piles in accordance with standard plans index num or attach instruments strain transducers to measure force and accelerometers to measure acceleration with bolts to the pile for dynamic load testing .
make each follower and pile to be dynamically tested with externally attached instruments available to drill holes for attaching instrumentation and for wave speed measurements .
support the pile with timber blocks placed at appropriate intervals .
ensure that the pile is in a horizontal position and does not contact adjacent piles .
provide a sufficient clear distance at the sides of the pile for drilling the holes .
the engineer will furnish the equipment materials and labor necessary for drilling holes and taking the wave speed measurements .
if the engineer directs dynamic load testing instrumented setchecks or instrumented redrives provide the engineer safe access to the top of the piles for drilling the attachment holes .
after placing the num return to table of contents leads provide the engineer safe access to the piles to attach the instruments and for removal of the instruments after completing the pile driving .
the engineer will monitor the stresses in the piles with the dynamic test equipment during driving to ensure the contractor does not exceed the maximum allowed stresses .
if necessary add additional cushioning replace the cushions or reduce the hammer stroke to maintain stresses below the maximum allowable .
if dynamic test equipment measurements indicate nonaxial driving immediately realign the driving system .
if the cushion is compressed to the point that a change in alignment of the hammer will not correct the problem add cushioning or change the cushion as directed by the engineer .
drive the pile to the required penetration and resistance or as directed by the engineer .
when directed by the engineer perform instrumented setchecks or redrives .
do not use a cold diesel hammer for a setcheck or redrive unless in the opinion of the engineer it is impractical to do otherwise .
generally warm up the hammer by driving another pile or applying at least num blows to a previously driven pile or to timber mats placed on the ground .
num pile lengths num test pile length provide the length of test piles shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num production pile length num structures with test piles when test pile lengths are shown in the plans the production pile lengths are based on information available during design and are approximate .
the engineer will determine final pile lengths in the field which may vary significantly from the lengths or quantities shown in the plans .
num structures without test piles authorized lengths are provided as production pile order lengths in the pile data table in the structure plans .
use these lengths for furnishing the permanent piling for the structure .
num authorized pile lengths the authorized pile lengths are the lengths determined by the engineer based on all information available before the driving of the permanent piles including but not limited to information gained from the driving of test piles dynamic load testing static load testing supplemental soil testing etc .
when authorized by the department soil freeze information obtained during set checks and pile redrives may be used to determine authorized pile lengths for sites with extreme soil conditions .
the contractor may elect to provide piling with lengths longer than authorized to suit his method of installation or schedule .
when the contractor elects to provide longer than authorized pile lengths the department will pay for the furnished length as either the originally authorized length or the length between cutoff elevation and the final accepted pile tip elevation whichever is the longer length .
within five working days after driving all the test piles completing all load tests completing all redrives and receiving all test reports the engineer will provide an itemized list of authorized pile lengths .
use these lengths for furnishing the permanent piling for the structure .
if the contractor is willing to start the pile driving operations in zones consisting of at least four test piles designated by the engineer and if the contractor so requests in writing at the beginning of the test pile program the department will provide pile lengths for these designated phases within five working days after driving all the test piles completing all load tests completing all redrives and receiving all test reports for those designated zones .
the num return to table of contents engineer will provide the driving criteria for piles within three working days of furnishing pile lengths .
on multiple phase projects the engineer will not provide pile lengths on subsequent phases until completing the piling on initial phases .
num allowable driving tolerances num general meet the tolerances described in this subarticle for the piles that are free standing without lateral restraint after the template is removed .
after the piles are driven do not move the piles laterally to force them to be within the specified tolerances except to move battered piles to overcome the dead load deflections caused by the piles weight .
when this is necessary submit calculations signed and sealed by a specialty engineer that verify the amount of dead load deflection prior to moving any piles .
num position ensure that the final position of the pile head at cutoff elevation is no more than num inches or num of the diameter of the pile whichever is less laterally in the x or y coordinate from the plan position indicated in the plans .
num axial alignment ensure that the axial alignment of the driven piles does not deviate by more than num inches per foot from the vertical or batter line indicated in the plans .
num elevation ensure that the final elevation of the pile head is no more than num inches above or more than num inches below the elevation shown in the plans however in no case shall the pile be embedded less than num inches into the cap or footing .
for fender piles cut off piles at the elevation shown in the plans to a tolerance of plus num inches to minus num inches using sawing or other means as approved by the engineer to provide a smooth level cut .
num deviation from above tolerances when the contractor has failed to meet the above tolerances the contractor may propose a redesign to incorporate out of tolerance piles into pile caps or footings at no expense to the department .
ensure the contractors engineer of record performs any redesign and signs and seals the redesign drawings and computations .
do not begin any proposed construction until the redesign has been reviewed for acceptability and approved by the engineer .
num disposition of pile cutoffs test piles and load test materials num pile cutoffs num .
steel piling unless shown otherwise in the plans or directed by the engineer take ownership of cutoff sections or portions of cutoff sections and unused piling .
remove them from the job and dispose of them .
num .
other pile types upon completion of all work under the contract in connection with piling unless shown otherwise in the plan take ownership of any unused cutoff lengths remaining and remove them from the rightofway .
provide areas for their disposal .
num test piles where so directed by the plans or the engineer cut off or buildup as necessary test piles and leave them in place as permanent piles .
extract and replace test piles driven in permanent position and found not suitable for use due to actions of the contractor at no expense to the department .
pull or cut off at an elevation num feet below the ground surface or bottom of proposed excavation test piles driven out of permanent position and dispose of the removed portion of the test pile .
when test piles are required to be driven in permanent pile positions the contractor may elect to drive the test pile out of position with the approval of the engineer provided that a replacement pile is furnished and driven by the contractor at no expense to the num return to table of contents department in the position that was to be occupied by the test pile .
under this option the department will pay for the test pile in the same manner as if it were in permanent position .
unless otherwise directed in the plans or by the engineer retain ownership of test piles that are pulled or cut off and provide areas for their disposal .
num timber piling .
num description drive timber piles of the kind and dimensions specified in the plans at the locations and to the elevations shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num materials meet the timber piling requirements of section num .
treat the piles according to the applicable provisions of section num .
treat all cuts and drilled holes in accordance with num .
num preparation for driving num caps protect the heads of timber piles during driving using a cap of approved type that will distribute the hammer blow over the entire crosssection of the pile .
when necessary cut the head of the pile square before beginning pile driving .
num collars provide collars or bands to protect piles against splitting and brooming at no expense to the department .
num shoes provide piles shod with metal shoes of a design satisfactory to the engineer at no expense to the department .
shape pile tips to receive the shoe and install according to the manufacturers directions .
num storage and handling store and handle piles in the manner necessary to avoid damage to the piling .
take special care to avoid breaking the surface of treated piles .
do not use cant dogs hooks or pike poles when handling and storing the piling .
num cutting off saw off the tops of all timber piles at the elevation indicated in the plans .
saw off piles which support timber caps to the exact plane of the superimposed structure so that they exactly fit .
withdraw and replace broken split or misplaced piles .
num buildups the engineer will not permit splices or buildups for timber piles .
extract piles driven below plan elevation and drive a longer pile .
num pile heads num piles with timber caps on piles wider than the timber caps dress off the part of the pile head projecting beyond the sides of the cap to a slope of num degrees .
coat the cut surface with the required preservative and then place a sheet of copper with a weight of num ounces per square foot or greater meeting the requirements of astm bnum .
provide a cover measuring at least num inches more in each dimension greater than the diameter of the pile .
bend the cover down over the pile and fasten the edges with large head copper nails or three wraps of no .
num copper wire .
num fender and bulkhead piles paint the heads of fender piles and of bulkhead piles with preservative and then cover with copper as provided above for piles supporting timber caps .
num prestressed concrete piling .
num description provide prestressed concrete piles that are manufactured cured and driven in accordance with the contract documents .
provide piles full length without splices when transported by barge or the pile length is less than or equal to num feet .
when piles are transported by truck and the pile length exceeds num feet but is less than the maximum length for a three point pickup according to standard plans index num and splicing is desired provide minimal splices .
include the cost of the splices in the cost of the pile .
num return to table of contents num manufacture fabricate piles in accordance with section num .
when internal gauges will be used for dynamic load testing supply and install in square prestressed concrete piles in accordance with standard plans index num .
ensure the internal gauges are installed by personnel approved by the manufacturer .
num storage and handling num time of driving piles drive prestressed concrete piles at any time after the concrete has been cured in accordance with section num and the concrete compressive strength is equal to or greater than the specified num day compressive strength .
num storage support piles on adequate dunnage both in the prestress yard and at the job site in accordance with the locations shown in the standard plans to minimize undue bending stresses or creating a sweep or camber in the pile .
num handling handle and store piles in the manner necessary to eliminate the danger of fracture by impact or of undue bending stresses in handling or transporting the piles from the forms and into the leads .
in general lift concrete piles by means of a suitable bridge or slings attached to the pile at the locations shown in the standard plans .
construct slings used to handle piles of a fabric material or braided wire rope constructed of six or more wire ropes which will not mar the corners or the surface finish of the piles .
do not use chains to handle piles .
during transport support concrete piles at the lifting locations shown in the standard plans or fully support them throughout num or more of their length .
in handling piles for use in salty or brackish water exercise special care to avoid damaging the surface and corners of the pile .
if an alternate transportation support arrangement is desired submit calculations signed and sealed by the specialty engineer for approval by the engineer prior to transporting the pile .
calculations must show that the pile can be transported without exceeding the bending moments calculated using the support locations shown in the plans .
num cracked piles the engineer will reject any pile that becomes cracked in handling to the point that a transverse or longitudinal crack extends through the pile shows failure of the concrete as indicated by spalling of concrete on the main body of the pile adjacent to the crack which in the opinion of the engineer will not withstand driving stresses or becomes damaged during installation .
the engineer will not reject any pile for the occasional minor surface hairline cracking caused by shrinkage .
do not drive piling with irreparable damage which is defined as any cracks that extend through the pile crosssectional area that are or will be below ground or water level at the end of driving .
remove and replace broken piles or piles cracked to the extent described above at no expense to the department .
the engineer will accept cracks less than num inches which do not extend through the pile .
using approved methods cut off and splice or buildup to cutoff elevation piles with cracks greater than num inches at the pile head or above ground or water level and piles with cracks above ground or water level which extend through the cross sectional area of the pile .
the engineer may require correction of pile damage or pile cracks by cutting down the concrete to the plane of sound concrete below the crack and rebuilding it to cut off elevation or the engineer may reject the pile .
extract and replace rejected piles that can not be repaired at no expense to the department .
take appropriate steps to prevent the occurrence of cracking whether due to handling transporting or driving .
num preparation for transportation cut strands flush with the surface of the concrete using an abrasive cutting blade before transporting the piles from the casting yard .
cut and patch the metal lifting devices in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents num method of driving unless otherwise directed drive piles by a hammer or by means of a combination of water jets and hammer when jetting is allowed .
when using jets in combination with a hammer withdraw the jets and drive the pile by the hammer alone to secure final penetration and to rigidly fix the tip end of the pile .
keep jets in place if they are being used to continuously eliminate the soil resistance in the scour zone .
num extensions and buildups used to increase production lengths num general where splices extensions and buildups for concrete piles are necessary construct them in accordance with standard plans index num .
these requirements are not applicable to specially designed piling .
make splices for special pile designs as shown in the plans .
num extensions to be driven or those num feet or longer construct extensions to be driven or extensions num feet or longer in length in accordance with the details shown in the plans and in a manner including the requirements sequences and procedures outlined below num .
cast a splice section in accordance with section num with the dowel steel in the correct position and alignment .
num .
drill dowel holes using an approved steel template that will position and align the drill bit during drilling .
drill holes a minimum of num inches deeper than the length of the dowel to be inserted .
num .
clean the drilled dowel holes by inserting a high pressure air hose to the bottom of the hole and blowing the hole clean from the bottom upward .
eliminate any oil dust water and other deleterious materials from the holes and the concrete surfaces to be joined .
num .
place forms around joints between the pile sections .
num .
mix the adhesive components in accordance with the manufacturers directions .
do not mix sand or any other filler material with the epoxy components unless it is prepackaged by the manufacturer for this specific purpose .
use adhesives meeting the requirements of section num for type ab epoxy compounds .
num .
after ensuring that all concrete surfaces are dry fill the dowel holes with the adhesive material .
num .
insert the dowels of the spliced section into the adhesive filled holes of the bottom section and position the spliced section so that the axes of the two sections are in concentric alignment and the ends of the abutting sections are spaced num inches apart .
the contractor may use small steel spacers of the required thickness provided they have num inches or more of cover after completing the splice .
fill the space between the abutting sections completely with the adhesive .
num .
secure the spliced sections in alignment until the adhesive is cured in accordance with the manufacturers directions for the time appropriate with the prevailing ambient temperatures .
do not utilize the crane to secure the pile extension during the adhesive cure time .
utilize alignment braces to maintain the proper pile alignment during the epoxy cure time .
num .
after curing is completed remove alignment braces and forms and clean and dress the spliced area to match the pile dimensions .
when dowel splices need to be driven assist the engineer in performing dynamic instrumentation during the driving of each dowel spliced pile to monitor and control the stresses and verify the splicing integrity .
replace any damaged pile splices in accordance with num .
provide the engineer num hours advance notification prior to driving spliced piles .
num return to table of contents num precast reinforced nondrivable buildups less than num feet construct precast reinforced nondrivable buildups less than num feet in accordance with the requirements of this subarticle section num and section num .
provide the same material for the form surfaces for precast buildups as was used to form the prestressed piles .
use concrete of the same mix as used in the prestressed pile and dimension the crosssection the same as piling being built up .
install buildups as specified in num through num .
apply to the build ups the same surface treatment or sealant applied to the prestressed piles .
num preplanned splices construct splices in accordance with the dowel splice method contained in the standard plans indexes or using proprietary splices which are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
splice test piles in the same manner as the production piles .
include in the pile installation plan the chosen method of splicing and the approximate locations of the splice .
generally place the splice at approximately the midpoint between the estimated pile tip and the ground surface considering scour if applicable .
stagger the splice location between adjacent piles by a minimum of num feet .
obtain the engineers approval prior to constructing any pile sections .
construct piles which are to be spliced using the dowel splice with preformed dowel holes in the bottom section and embedded dowels in the upper section .
when dowel splices need to be driven assist the engineer in performing dynamic instrumentation during the driving of each dowel spliced pile to monitor and control the stresses and verify the splicing integrity .
replace any damaged pile splices in accordance with num .
provide the engineer num hours advance notification prior to driving spliced piles .
mechanical pile splices must be capable of developing the following capacities in the pile section unless shown otherwise in the plans and capable of being installed without damage to the pile or splice num .
compressive strength pile cross sectional area x num day concrete strength num .
tensile strength pile cross sectional area x num psi pile size inches bending strength kipfeet num num num num num num num num num pile cutoffs after the completion of driving cut piles off which extend above the cutoff elevation with an abrasive saw .
make the cut the depth necessary to cleanly cut through the prestressed strands .
take ownership and dispose of cutoff sections not used elsewhere as allowed by this section .
num steel piling .
num description furnish splice drive and cut off structural steel shapes to form bearing piles .
include in this work the installation of structural steel bracing by bolting or welding construction of splices and the filling of pipe piles with the specified materials specified in num .
num material for the material in steel piles pile bracing scabs wedges and splices meet the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents num pile splices order and use the full authorized pile length where practicable .
do not splice to obtain authorized lengths less than num feet except when shown in the plans .
locate all splices in the authorized pile length in portions of the pile expected to be at least num feet below the final ground surface after driving .
when it is not practicable to provide authorized pile lengths longer than num feet in a single length use no more than one field splice per additional num feet of authorized pile length .
shop splices may be used to join single lengths of pile which are at least num feet in length .
one shorter segment of pile may be used to achieve the authorized pile length when needed .
where the pile length authorized is not sufficient to obtain the required bearing value or penetration order an additional length of pile and splice it to the original length .
make all splices in accordance with details shown in the plans and in compliance with the general requirements of aws dnum or american petroleum institute specification numl api numl .
num welding make all welded connections to steel piles by electric arc welding in accordance with details shown in the plans and in compliance with the general requirements of aws dnum .
electroslag welding is not permitted .
welds will be inspected by visual methods .
num pile heads and tips cut off all piles at the elevation shown in the plans .
if using a cutting torch make the surface as smooth as practical .
where foundation material is so dense that the contractor can not drive the pile to the required penetration and firmly seat it without danger of crumpling the tip reinforce the tips with approved cast steel point protectors as shown in the plans or required by the engineer .
construct point protectors in one piece of cast steel meeting the requirements of astm anum grade num heat treated to provide full bearing for the piles .
attach points by welding according to the recommendations of the manufacturer .
num pile bent bracing members place structural steel sway and cross bracing and all other steel tie bracing on steel pile bents and bolt or weld in place as indicated in the plans .
where piles are not driven into position in exact alignment as shown in the plans the engineer may require the use of fills and shims between the bracing and the flanges of the pile .
furnish and place all fills and shims required to square and line up faces of flanges for cross bracing at no additional expense to the department .
num coating coat exposed parts of steel piling wedging bracing and splices in accordance with the provisions for coating structural steel as specified in section num .
num storage and handling while handling or transporting the piles from the point of origin and into the leads store and handle in the manner necessary to avoid damage due to bending stresses .
in general lift steel piles by means of a suitable bridge or a sling attached to the pile at appropriate points to prevent damage .
lift the pile from the horizontal position in a manner that will prevent damage due to bending of the flanges andor web .
num filling pipe piles when required by the plans fill pipe piles with the specified materials .
use clean concrete sands and concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
place concrete in pipes containing water using methods in accordance with num with modified tremie and pump line sizes .
concrete may be placed directly into pipes which are dry .
construct and place reinforcement cages in accordance with num except the minimum number of spacers per level is three .
reinforcement cages may be installed before concrete placement or after concrete placement is completed if proper alignment and position is obtainable .
num return to table of contents num sheet piling .
num description leave permanent piling in place as part of the finished work and remove temporary piling after each construction phase unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
num materials meet the following requirements concrete section num bar reinforcement section num prestressing reinforcementsection num steel sheet piles section num for temporary steel sheet piles meet the requirements specified in the plans .
num steel sheet piling drive steel sheet piling and cut off true to line and grade .
install steel sheet piling with a suitable hammer .
remove and replace any section damaged during handling and installation at no additional expense to the department .
num method of installation where rock or strong material is encountered such that the sheet piles can not be set to grade by driving remove the strong material by other acceptable means such as excavation and backfilling drilling or by punching .
when the plans do not indicate the existence of rock or strong material work of removing drilling or punching the strong material or rock will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
num concrete sheet piling num description ensure that concrete sheet piling is of prestressed concrete construction and manufactured cured and installed in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents .
num manufacture of piles ensure that the piles are fabricated in accordance with section num .
num method of installation jet concrete sheet piling to grade where practical .
the engineer will require a minimum of two jets .
provide water at the nozzles of sufficient volume and pressure to freely erode material adjacent to the piles .
where encountering rock or strong material such that the sheet piles can not be set to grade by jetting remove the strong materials by other acceptable means such as excavation and backfilling drilling or by punching with a suitable punch .
when the plans do not indicate the existence of rock or strong material and the piles can not be set by jetting the department will pay for the work of removing drilling or punching the strong material or rock as unforeseeable work .
num grouting and caulking concrete sheet piles are generally detailed to have tongues and grooves on their lower ends and double grooves on their upper ends .
where so detailed after installation clean the grooves of all sand mud or debris and fully grout the grooves .
use approved plastic bags sheaths which will meet the shape and length of the groove to be grouted to contain the plastic grout within the double grooves .
provide grout composed of one part cement and two parts sand .
use clean anum sand or sand meeting the requirements of section num in this grout .
in lieu of sandcement grout the contractor may use concrete meeting the requirements of section num using small gravel or crushed stone coarse aggregate .
deposit the grout through a grout pipe placed within a watertight plastic sheath bag extending the full depth of the double grooves and which when filled completely fills the slot formed by the double grooves .
num storage and handling handle and store all sheet piles in a manner to prevent damage .
handle long sheet piles with fabric slings or braided wire rope constructed of six or more wire ropes placed at appropriate lift points to prevent damage due to excessive bending .
num return to table of contents num pile installation plan .
num general submit the completed pile driving installation plan form form no .
num with the following information at the preconstruction conference or no later than num days before driving the first pile .
num .
list and size of proposed equipment including cranes barges driving equipment jetting equipment compressors and preformed pile hole equipment .
include manufacturers data sheets on hammers .
num .
methods to determine hammer energy in the field for determination of pile capacity .
include in the submittal necessary charts and recent calibrations for any pressure measuring equipment .
num .
detailed drawings of any proposed followers .
num .
detailed drawings of templates .
num .
details of proposed load test equipment and procedures including recent calibrations of jacks and required load cells .
num .
sequence of driving of piles for each different configuration of pile layout .
num .
details of proposed features and procedures for protection of existing structures .
num .
required shop drawings for piles cofferdams etc .
num .
methods and equipment proposed to prevent displacement of piles during placement and compaction of fill within num feet of the piles .
num .
methods to prevent deflection of battered piles due to their own weight and to maintain their asdriven position until casting of the pile cap is complete .
num .
proposed pile splice locations and details of any proprietary splices anticipated to be used .
num .
methods and equipment proposed to prevent damage to voided or cylinder piles due to interior water pressure .
notify the engineer of any test pile driving and production pile driving at least one week prior to beginning the installation operations of any pile .
num acceptance of equipment and procedures all equipment and procedures are subject to satisfactory field performance .
make required changes to correct unsatisfactory field performance .
the engineer will give final acceptance after the contractor makes necessary modifications .
do not make any changes in the driving system after acceptance without authorization of the engineer .
a hammer repaired on site or removed from the site and returned is considered to have its performance altered efficiency increased or decreased which is considered a change in the driving system and is subject to a dynamic load test in accordance with num at no additional compensation .
num method of measurement all piling .
num general the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet furnished placed and accepted according to the authorized lengths list including any additions and excluding any deletions thereto as approved by the engineer .
no adjustments in the length in feet of piling will be made if cutoffs are required after the pile has been driven to satisfactory bearing .
num prestressed concrete piling num length the length of precast concrete piles will be considered as the overall length from head to tip .
final pay length will be based on the casting length as authorized num return to table of contents in accordance with num subject to provisions of num through num num num and num .
num driving of unplanned epoxybonded dowel splice if a pile is driven below cutoff and satisfactory bearing is not obtained and additional driving is required after construction of a satisfactory splice an additional num feet of piling will be paid for the additional driving .
this compensation for driving of splice however will not be allowed for test piles that are spliced and redriven .
num extracting piles in the event that a pile is driven below cutoff without obtaining the required bearing and the engineer elects to have the pile extracted and a longer pile substituted the pile extraction will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
in the event a pile is damaged or mislocated and the damage or mislocation is determined to be the departments responsibility and the engineer elects to have the pile extracted the pile extraction will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
if a replacement pile is required compensation will be made under the item for piling for both the original pile and replacement pile .
redriving of an extracted and undamaged pile will be paid for at num of the contract unit price for piling .
the contractor may substitute a longer pile in lieu of splicing and buildingup a pile .
in this event the contractor will be paid for the original authorized length of the pile plus any additional length furnished by the contractor up to the authorized length of the buildup as piling .
the contractor will be paid num feet of piling as full compensation for extracting the original pile .
num underwater driving when the contractor selects one of the optional underwater driving methods payment will be made by selecting the applicable method from the following num .
using a pile longer than the authorized length measurement for piling will be made only for the authorized length at that location unless the length of pile from cutoff elevation to the final tip elevation is greater than the authorized length in which case payment for piling will be made from cutoff elevation to final tip elevation .
no payment will be made for pile splice when this option is selected unless the pile is physically spliced and the splice is driven below cutoff elevation to achieve bearing .
num .
using an underwater hammer or a pile follower measurement will be in accordance with num .
num steel piling point protectors the quantity to be paid for will be each for the total of point protectors authorized furnished and properly installed .
num test piles the quantity to be paid for of test piles of various types will be the length in feet of test piling furnished driven and accepted according to the authorized length list and any extensions thereof as approved by the engineer .
test piles left in place as permanent piles will be paid for only as test piling .
any extensions necessary to continue driving the pile for test purposes as authorized by the engineer will be paid for as test piles .
other extensions of piles additional length paid for splicing and buildups will be included in the quantities of regular piling and will not be paid for as test piling .
num dynamic load tests payment will be based on the number of dynamic load tests shown in the plans authorized by the engineer or required in num completed and accepted in accordance with the contract documents .
no separate payment will be made for dynamic load tests used to evaluate changes in the contractors driving equipment .
no payment will be made for dynamic load tests used to evaluate the integrity of a preplanned epoxybonded num return to table of contents dowel splice .
include all costs associated with dynamically testing production piles with epoxy bonded dowel splices under pay item no .
num .
no payment will be made for dynamic load tests on test piles .
for structures with num dynamic testing the cost of supplying and installing internal gauges or attaching external gauges to each pile for dynamic load tests is included in the cost of the pile and no separate payment will be made .
for structures without num dynamic testing the cost of supplying and installing internal gauges or attaching external gauges to each production pile for dynamic load testing prior to initial driving authorized by the engineer will be num feet of additional pile .
no payment will be made for attaching dynamic testing equipment for setchecks or redrives .
no payment will be made for dynamic load testing performed when driving using followers .
no payment will be made for any dynamic load testing performed on temporary piles .
num steel sheet piling the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity area in square feet measured from top of pile elevation to the bottom of pile elevation and beginning and end wall limits as shown in the plans with no allowance for variable depth surface profiles .
approved alternate support structures would be paid for as plan quantity computed for sheet pile .
sheet piling used in cofferdams and to incorporate the contractors specific means and methods and not ordered by the engineer will be paid for as required in section num .
num concrete sheet piling the quantity to be paid for will be the product of the number of such piles satisfactorily completed in place times their lengths in feet as shown in the plans or authorized by the engineer .
this quantity will be based upon piles num feet wide .
when the engineer approves the contractor may furnish the concrete sheet piling in widths wider than shown in the plans then the number of piles shall be the actual number of units completed times the width used divided by the width in the plans .
num pile splices the quantity to be paid for authorized drivable splices and build ups greater than num feet in length in concrete piling and test piling which are made for the purpose of obtaining authorized pile lengths longer than shown as the maximum length in the standard plans indexes for obtaining greater lengths than originally authorized by the engineer to incorporate test piling in the finished structure for further driving of test piling or for splices shown in the plans will be num feet of additional prestressed concrete piling under pay item no .
num .
for concrete piles and test piles where the buildup is num feet or less in length the quantity to be paid for will be num feet of prestressed concrete piling under pay item no .
num as compensation for drilling and grouting the dowels and all other costs for which provision has not otherwise been made .
the quantity to be paid for authorized splices in steel piling and test piling for the purpose of obtaining lengths longer than the lengths originally authorized by the engineer will be num feet of additional steel piling under pay item no .
num .
num setchecks and redrives num set checkstest piles there will be no separate payment for the initial four setchecks performed the day of and the working day following initial driving .
for each additional setcheck ordered by the engineer and performed within the following working day of initial driving an additional quantity of num feet of piling will be paid .
num set checksproduction piles there will be no separate payment for the initial two setchecks performed the day of and the working day following initial driving .
for num return to table of contents each additional setcheck ordered by the engineer and performed within the following working day of initial driving an additional quantity of num feet of piling will be paid .
num redrives the quantity to be paid for will be the number of redrives each authorized by the engineer .
payment for any pile redrive test pile or production pile ordered by the engineer will consist of num feet of additional piling .
num pile extraction piles authorized to be extracted by the engineer and successfully extracted as provided in num will be paid for as described in num .
no payment for extraction will be made for piles shown in the plans to be extracted or piling damaged or mislocated by the contractor that are ordered to be extracted by the engineer .
num static load tests the quantity to be paid for will be the number of static load tests of the designated tonnages each as shown in the plans or authorized by the engineer actually applied to piles completed and accepted in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
num preformed pile holes the quantity added to the payment for piling will be num of the length of completed preformed pile holes from existing ground or the bottom of any required excavation whichever is lower to the bottom of preformed hole acceptably provided complete for the installation of the bearing piles regardless of the type of pile test pile or production pile installed therein .
only those holes authorized to be paid for as provided in num will be included in the measurement for payment .
the engineer will authorize payment for preformed pile holes only when the pile has been placed in proper position and has achieved the required penetration .
num basis of payment all piling .
num treated timber piling price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing all materials including collars metal shoes copper cover sheets preservatives and tar and for wrapping pile clusters with wire cable where so shown in the plans .
num prestressed concrete piling price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing all reinforcing steel predrilled holes furnishing the material for and wrapping pile clusters with wire cable where so shown in the plans and grouting of preformed pile holes when shown in the plans .
num steel piling price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing steel piling including welding and painting as specified and the cost of predrilling pile holes described in num .
the cost of any concrete fill and reinforcing steel in pipe piles will be included in the price for steel piling .
bracing and other metal parts attached to or forming a part of piling or bracing and not otherwise classified will be measured and paid for as provided in section num .
num test piles price and payment will be full compensation for all incidentals necessary to complete all the work of this item except splices buildups pile extractions and preformed pile holes authorized by the engineer and paid for under other pay items or payment methods .
the cost of all additional work not listed above necessary to ensure required penetration and attain required bearing of the test piles will be included in the price bid per foot of test pile including driving and all other related costs .
num dynamic load tests num dynamic load tests test piles all test piles will require dynamic load tests .
include all costs associated with assisting the engineer in performing the dynamic load tests in the pay items for test piles .
num return to table of contents num dynamic load tests production piles payment will be full compensation for all costs associated with assisting the engineer in performing the dynamic load tests .
num steel sheet piling num permanent sheet piling price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing steel sheet piling including preformed holes and coating but will not include furnishing and placing anchors when an anchored wall system is designed and detailed in the plans .
in such cases furnishing and installing anchors will be paid separately .
num temporary sheet piling for critical temporary steel sheet pile walls walls which are necessary to maintain the safety of the traveling public or structural integrity of nearby structures roadways and utilities during construction that are detailed in the plans price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing steel sheet piling including preformed holes when shown in the plans and including wales anchor bars dead men soil anchors proof tests creep tests and other incidental items when an anchored wall system is required .
removal of the sheet piling anchors and incidentals will be included in the cost per square foot for steel sheet piling critical temporary .
when the temporary steel sheet pile walls are not detailed in the plans the cost of furnishing and installation shall be incidental to cost of other related items and no separate payment shall be made .
if the wall is not shown in the plans but deemed to be critical as determined by the engineer then a design shall be furnished by the department and paid for separately under steel sheet piling critical temporary .
num concrete sheet piling price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing concrete sheet piling including reinforcing steel grouting plastic filter fabric preformed holes and installation .
num preformed pile holes payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment casings and materials required to perform this work .
num point protectors price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required for furnishing and installing point protectors .
num static load tests price and payment will be full compensation for all labor equipment and materials required to perform this work .
num pile cutoff anticipate all piles will require cuttingoff and include all costs associated with pile cutoff in the pay items for piling .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num treated timber piling per foot .
item no .
num num concrete sheet piling per foot .
item no .
num num prestressed concrete piling per foot .
item no .
num num steel piling per foot .
item no .
num num concrete cylinder piling per foot .
item no .
num test loads each .
item no .
num point protection each .
item no .
num sheet piling per square foot .
item no .
num test piles prestressed concrete per foot .
item no .
num test piles steel per foot .
item no .
num test piles concrete cylinder per foot .
num return to table of contents c. drilled shafts num description .
construct drilled shaft foundations consisting of reinforced concrete drilled shafts .
num materials .
num concrete use concrete meeting the requirements of section num unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num reinforcing steel meet the reinforcing steel requirements of section num .
num construction methods and equipment .
num general requirements num templates provide a fixed template adequate to maintain shaft position and alignment during all excavation and concreting operations when drilling from a barge .
do not use floating templates attached to a barge .
the engineer will require a fixed template adequate to maintain shaft position and alignment during all excavation and concreting operations for shafts drilled on land when the contractor fails to demonstrate satisfactorily that he can properly maintain shaft position and alignment without use of a template .
num drilled shaft installation plan dsip at the preconstruction conference submit a dsip for review by the engineer .
final approval will be subject to satisfactory performance .
include in this plan the following details num .
name and experience record of drilled shaft superintendent or foreman in responsible charge of drilled shaft operations .
ensure the drilled shaft superintendent or foreman in responsible charge of the drilled shaft operations has a minimum of one year of experience of installing drilled shafts of the size and depth shown in the plans and a minimum of three years experience in the construction of drilled shafts using the following methods a .
wet method mineral and polymer slurry b. casings up to the length shown in the plans c. shaft drilling operations on water under conditions as shown in the plans .
num .
list and size of proposed equipment including cranes drills augers bailing buckets final cleaning equipment desanding equipment slurry pumps core sampling equipment tremies or concrete pumps and casings .
num .
details of sequence of construction operations and sequence of shaft construction in bents or shaft groups .
num .
details of shaft excavation methods .
num .
details of slurry including proposed methods to mix circulate desand test methods and proposed ctqp certified technician that will perform and document the fluid tests .
num .
details of proposed methods to clean the shaft excavation .
num .
details of shaft reinforcement including methods to ensure centeringrequired cover cage integrity during placement placement procedures cage support and tie downs .
num .
details of concrete placement including elapsed concrete placement times and proposed operational procedures for concrete tremie or pump including initial placement raising during placement and overfilling of the shaft concrete .
include provisions to ensure proper final shaft cutoff elevation .
num return to table of contents num .
details of casing removal when removal is required including minimum concrete head in casing during removal .
num .
required submittals including shop drawing and concrete design mixes .
num .
details of any required load tests including equipment and procedures and recent calibrations for any jacks or load cells .
num .
proposed crosshole sonic logging csl and thermal integrity testing for drilled titds specialty engineer to supervise field testing and report the test results .
num .
methods and equipment proposed to prevent displacement of casing andor shafts during placement and compaction of fill .
num .
provide the make and model of the shaft inspection device if applicable .
num .
details of environmental control procedures used to prevent loss of slurry or concrete into waterways or other protected areas .
num .
proposed schedule for test shaft installation load tests and production shaft installation .
num .
other information shown in the plans or requested by the engineer .
num .
for drilled shafts constructed using polymer slurry identify the polymer slurry meeting the requirements of num the ph and viscosity ranges recommended by the manufacturer for the materials to be excavated and a description of the mixing method to be used .
submit the material safety data sheets sds for the product and certifications that the polymer slurry and components meet the requirements of num .
submit the contact information for the manufacturers representative available for immediate contact during shaft construction and the representatives schedule of availability .
num .
procedure for grouting nondestructive testing access tubes .
the engineer will evaluate the dsip for conformance with the contract documents .
within num days after receipt of the plan the engineer will notify the contractor of any additional information required andor changes that may be necessary in the opinion of the engineer to satisfy the contract documents .
the engineer will reject any part of the plan that is unacceptable .
submit changes agreed upon for reevaluation .
the engineer will notify the contractor within seven days after receipt of proposed changes of their acceptance or rejection .
all equipment and procedures are subject to trial and satisfactory performance in the field .
acceptance by the engineer does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to perform the work in accordance with the contract documents .
the installation plan is for the contractor to explain the approach to the work and allow the engineer an opportunity to comment on the equipment and procedures chosen before field operations begin .
the engineers acceptance is not a guarantee that the chosen methods and equipment are capable of obtaining the required results this responsibility lies with the contractor .
num general methods equipment perform the excavations required for the shafts through whatever materials encountered to the dimensions and elevations shown in the contract documents using methods and equipment suitable for the intended purpose and the materials encountered .
provide drilling tools with a diameter not smaller than one inch of the shaft diameter required in the plans .
provide equipment capable of constructing shafts supporting bridges to a depth equal to the deepest shaft shown in the plans plus num foot or plus three times the shaft diameter whichever is greater except when the plans require equipment capable of num return to table of contents constructing shafts to a deeper depth .
provide equipment capable of constructing shafts supporting nonbridge structures including sign signal lighting and its structures to a depth equal to the deepest shaft shown in the plans plus num feet .
construct drilled shafts according to the contract documents using generally either the dry method wet method casing method or permanent casing method as necessary to produce sound durable concrete foundation shafts free of defects .
use the permanent casing method only when required by the plans or authorized by the engineer .
when the plans describe a particular method of construction use this method except when permitted otherwise by the engineer after field trial .
when the plans do not describe a particular method propose a method on the basis of its suitability to the site conditions and submit it for approval by the engineer .
set a suitable temporary removable surface casing from at least num foot above the ground surface to at least num shaft diameters below the ground surface to prevent caving of the surface soils and to aid in maintaining shaft position and alignment .
do not use a temporary casing larger than num inches of the shaft diameter .
fill the oversized temporary casing with drilled shaft concrete at no additional expense to the department .
withdraw the surface casing after concrete placement .
the engineer may require predrilling with slurry andor overreaming to the outside diameter of the casing to install the surface casing at some sites .
for drilled shafts installed to support sign signal lighting and its structures provide temporary surface casings from at least num foot above the ground surface to at least num feet below the ground surface .
for sign signal lighting and its structure foundations located within permanent sidewalks or within num feet of curb sections provide temporary surface casings from no lower than the top of sidewalk to at least num feet below the ground surface .
for drilled shafts installed to support sign signal lighting and its structures do not attempt to excavate the shaft using plain water or natural slurry .
do not attempt to excavate the shaft using dry construction method unless specifically indicated in the plans or approved by the engineer .
num dry construction method use the dry construction method only at sites where the ground water table and soil conditions generally stiff to hard clays or rock above the water table make it feasible to construct the shaft in a relatively dry excavation and where the sides and bottom of the shaft are stable and may be visually inspected by the engineer prior to placing the concrete .
in applying the dry construction method drill the shaft excavation remove accumulated seepage water and loose material from the excavation and place the shaft concrete in a relatively dry excavation .
use the dry construction method only when shaft excavations as demonstrated in a test hole have num inches or less of seepage water accumulated over a four hour period the sides and bottom remain stable without detrimental caving sloughing or swelling for a four hour period and the loose material and water can be satisfactorily removed prior to inspection and prior to placing concrete .
use the wet construction method or the temporary casing construction method for shafts that do not meet the requirements for the dry construction method .
num wet construction method use the wet construction method at all sites where it is impractical to provide a dry excavation for placement of the shaft concrete .
the wet construction method consists of keeping the shaft excavation filled with fluid mineral slurry polymer slurry natural slurry or water desanding and cleaning the slurry and final cleaning of the excavation by means of a bailing bucket air lift submersible pump or num return to table of contents other approved devices and placing the shaft concrete with a tremie or concrete pump extending to the shaft bottom which displaces the water or slurry during concreting of the shaft excavation .
where drilled shafts are located in open water areas construct the shafts by the wet method using exterior casings extending from above the water elevation into the ground to protect the shaft concrete from water action during placement and curing of the concrete .
install the exterior casing in a manner that will produce a positive seal at the bottom of the casing so that there is no intrusion or extrusion of water or other materials into or from the shaft excavation .
num temporary casing construction method use the temporary casing method at all sites where it is inappropriate to use the dry or wet construction methods without the use of temporary casings other than surface casings .
in this method the casing is advanced prior to excavation and withdrawn after concrete placement .
when a formation is reached that is nearly impervious seal in the nearly impervious formation .
proceed with drilling as with the wet method to the projected depth .
proceed with the placement of the concrete as with the dry method .
in the event seepage conditions prevent use of the dry method complete the excavation and concrete placement using wet methods .
where drilling through materials having a tendency to cave advance the excavation by drilling in a mineral or polymer slurry .
in the event that a caving layer or layers are encountered that can not be controlled by slurry install temporary removable casing through such caving layer or layers .
the engineer may require overreaming to the outside diameter of the casing .
take whatever steps are required to prevent caving during shaft excavation including installation of deeper casings .
if electing to remove a casing and replace it with a longer casing through caving soils backfill the excavation .
the contractor may use soil previously excavated or soil from the site to backfill the excavation .
the contractor may use other approved methods which will control the size of the excavation and protect the integrity of the foundation soils to excavate through caving layers .
before withdrawing the casing ensure that the level of fresh concrete is at such a level that the fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward .
as the casing is withdrawn maintain the level of concrete within the casing so that fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward out of the shaft excavation without mixing with or displacing the shaft concrete .
the contractor may use the casing method when approved by the engineer to construct shafts through weak caving soils that do not contribute significant shaft shear resistance .
in this case place a temporary casing through the weak caving soils before beginning excavation .
conduct excavation using the dry construction method where appropriate for site conditions and the wet construction method where the dry construction method is not appropriate .
withdraw the temporary casing during the concreting operations unless the engineer approves otherwise .
num permanent casing construction method use the permanent casing method when required by the plans .
in this method place a casing to the prescribed depth before beginning excavation .
if the contractor can not attain full penetration the engineer may direct the contractor to excavate through the casing and advance the casing until reaching the desired penetration .
in some cases the engineer may require the contractor to overream to the outside diameter of the casing before placing the casing .
num return to table of contents construct the shaft in accordance with num except for cutting the casing off at the prescribed elevation upon reaching the proper construction sequence and leaving the remainder of the casing in place .
num temporary extension of permanent casing when the wet method does not provide enough support to excavate and clean the drilled shaft extension below the permanent casing tip elevations shown in the plans the permanent casing may be temporarily extended to an elevation deeper than the tip elevation at no additional expense to the department .
the rock socket length must be extended as specified in num and the casing raised to the original casing tip elevation shown in the plans after the concrete placement .
include details of this procedure in the dsip for the engineers review and approval .
num temporary casing to stabilize excavation below permanent casing to stabilize the excavation below the permanent casing tip elevation a temporary casing inside an oversized permanent casing may be used at no additional expense to the department .
the permanent casing must have an inside diameter no more than num inches larger than the drilled shaft diameter specified in the plans .
the following requirements apply num .
excavate and clean the materials from inside the permanent casing .
ensure all materials are removed from the inside wall of the permanent casing .
num .
install the temporary casing prior to excavating below the permanent casing tip elevation .
the temporary casing must have a minimum internal diameter equal to the shaft diameter required in the plans .
num .
if the temporary casing is advanced deeper than the minimum top of rock socket elevation as shown in the plans or the top of rock elevation if deeper extend the rock socket length in accordance with num .
num .
place concrete in accordance with num through the temporary casing .
do not allow concrete to fall or overflow into the annular space between the temporary and permanent casing .
num .
after placement of the concrete remove the temporary casing in accordance with num num and num .
during withdrawal of the temporary casing maintain adequate concrete head in both the temporary and permanent casings to avoid breaching caving or contamination of the concrete .
include details of this procedure in the dsip for the engineers review and approval .
num excavations when pilot holes andor load tests are performed the engineer will use the pilot hole andor load test results to determine the authorized tip elevations andor the authorized installation criteria of the drilled shafts .
drilled shaft construction shall not begin until pilot hole andor load test reports are approved by the engineer .
shaft tip elevations based on pilot hole results andor load tests may vary from the tip elevations presented in the plans .
extend drilled shaft excavations deeper by extra depth excavation when the engineer determines the material encountered while drilling the shaft excavation is unsuitable andor is not the same as anticipated in the design of the drilled shaft .
in the absence of suitable strength tests or load tests to evaluate materials excavated construct the shafts no higher than the tip elevations shown in the plans .
num pilot hole when pilot holes are shown in the plans core a pilot hole prior to shaft excavation in accordance with astm dnum standard practice for rock core drilling and sampling of rock for site excavation and the departments soils foundations num return to table of contents handbook using a double or triple wall core barrel through part or all of the shaft to a depth of num times the diameter of the drilled shaft below the tip elevation shown in the plans as directed by the engineer .
the engineer may require the contractor to cut any core to a total depth below the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation of up to num times the diameter of the drilled shaft .
num cores take cores when shown in the plans or directed by the engineer to determine the character of the material directly below the shaft excavation .
provide equipment to retrieve the core from a depth of num times the diameter of the drilled shaft below the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation in accordance with astm dnum standard practice for rock core drilling and sampling of rock for site excavation .
cut the cores with an approved core barrel to a minimum depth of num times the diameter of the drilled shaft below the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation after completing the shaft excavation as directed by the engineer .
the engineer may require the contractor to cut any core to a total depth below the bottom of the drilled shaft excavation of up to num times the diameter of the drilled shaft .
for cores or pilot holes use only a double or triple wall core barrel designed num. to cut a core sample from num inches to num inches in diameter at least num feet in length and num. so that the sample of material cored can be removed from the shaft excavation and the core barrel in an undisturbed state .
the engineer will inspect the cores and determine the depth of required excavation .
when considered necessary by the engineer take additional cores .
place the core samples in suitable containers identified by shaft location elevation from and to and job number and deliver to the department within num hours after cutting .
when called for in the plans substitute standard penetration tests spt for coring .
in such cases supply these tests at no additional cost per foot to the department above that bid for core shaft excavation .
provide areas for the disposal of unsuitable materials and excess materials as defined in num that are removed from shaft excavations and dispose of them in a manner meeting all environmental requirements .
furnish the additional drilled shaft concrete over the theoretical amount required to complete filling any excavations for shafts which are larger than required by the plans or authorized by the engineer at no expense to the department .
num casings ensure that casings are metal of ample strength to withstand handling and driving stresses and the pressure of concrete and of the surrounding earth materials and that they are smooth and water tight .
ensure that the inside diameter of casing is not less than the specified size of shaft except as provided below .
the department will not allow extra compensation for concrete required to fill an oversize casing or oversize excavation .
the engineer will allow the contractor to supply casing with an outside diameter equal to the specified shaft diameter o.d .
casing provided additional shaft length is supplied at the shaft tip .
determine the additional length of shaft required by the following relationship num return to table of contents d length d d l additional num num num where dnum casing inside diameter specified shaft diameter specified dnum casing inside diameter provided dnum dnum minus twice the wall thickness .
l authorized shaft length below ground for temporary casing methods or below casing for permanent casing methods .
bear all costs relating to this additional length including but not limited to the cost of extra excavation extra concrete and extra reinforcing steel .
install and remove casing by rotating exerting downward pressure or with a vibratory hammer unless otherwise shown in the contract documents .
remove all casings from shaft excavations except those used for the permanent casing method .
ensure that the portion of casings installed under the permanent casing method of construction below the shaft cutoff elevation remains in position as a permanent part of the drilled shaft .
the contractor may leave casings if in the opinion of the engineer the casings will not adversely affect the shaft capacity in place .
when casings that are to be removed become bound in the shaft excavation and can not be practically removed drill the shaft excavation deeper as directed by the engineer to compensate for loss of capacity due to the presence of the casing .
the department will not compensate for the casing remaining .
the department will pay for the additional length of shaft under pay item no .
num .
if temporary casing is advanced deeper than the minimum top of rock socket elevation shown in the plans or actual top of rock elevation if deeper withdraw the casing from the rock socket and overream the shaft .
if the temporary casing can not be withdrawn from the rock socket before final cleaning extend the length of rock socket below the authorized tip elevation onehalf of the distance between the minimum top of rock socket elevation or actual elevation if deeper and the temporary casing tip elevation .
form drilled shafts extending through a body of water with permanent casings .
when the shaft extends above ground or a body of water the contractor may form the exposed portion with removable casing unless otherwise specified in the plans .
remove the portion of metal casings between an elevation num feet below the lowest water elevation or num feet below ground whichever is higher and the top of shaft elevation after the concrete is cured .
remove casings to expose the concrete as required above in a manner which will not damage the drilled shaft concrete .
dismantle removable casings in accordance with the provisions of num .
when practical do not start casing removal until completing all concrete placement in the shaft .
extract casing at a slow uniform rate with the pull in line with the axis of the shaft .
withdraw temporary casings while the concrete remains fluid .
when conditions warrant the contractor may pull the casing in partial stages .
maintain a sufficient head of concrete above the bottom of the casing to overcome the hydrostatic pressure of water outside the casing .
at all times maintain the elevation of the concrete in the casing high enough to displace the drilling slurry between the outside of the casing and the edge of the hole while removing the casing .
num return to table of contents the contractor may use special casing systems in open water areas when approved which are designed to permit removal after the concrete has hardened .
design special casings so that no damage occurs to the drilled shaft concrete during their removal .
expandable or split casings that are removable are not permitted for use below water .
num slurry and fluid in excavation at time of concrete placement num general thoroughly premix the slurry with clean fresh water prior to introduction into the shaft excavation .
introduce slurry before the excavation advances below the bottom of the casing .
ensure that the percentage of polymer or mineral admixture used to make the suspension is such as to maintain the stability of the shaft excavation .
the engineer will require adequate water andor slurry tanks when necessary to perform the work in accordance with this section .
the engineer will not allow excavated pits on projects requiring slurry tanks without the written permission of the engineer .
take the steps necessary to prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft including but not limited to agitation circulation and adjusting the composition and properties of the slurry .
provide suitable offsite disposal areas and dispose of all waste slurry in a manner meeting all requirements pertaining to pollution .
provide a ctqp qualified drilled shaft inspector to perform control tests using suitable apparatus on the slurry mixture to determine the slurry and fluid properties as specified in num to num .
measure the viscosity of the freshly mixed slurry regularly as a check on the quality of the slurry being formed using an approved measuring device .
perform tests from the fluid in the excavation to determine density viscosity and ph value to establish a consistent working pattern taking into account the mixing process and blending of freshly mixed slurry and previously used slurry .
perform a set of tests to determine density viscosity and ph value at intervals not exceeding num hours during the first num hours slurry is in use and one set every num hours thereafter .
perform one set of tests when the excavation reaches the midpoint .
the department may perform comparison tests as determined necessary during the mineral and polymer slurry operations .
if at any time in the opinion of the engineer the wet construction method of stabilizing excavations fails to produce the desired final result discontinue this method of construction propose and submit modifications in procedure or alternate means of construction for approval .
num mineral slurry when mineral slurry is used in an excavation use only processed attapulgite or bentonite clays with up to num by dry weight of added polymer .
use mineral slurry having a mineral grain size such that it will remain in suspension and having sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to a suitable screening system .
use a percentage and specific gravity of the material to make the suspension sufficient to maintain the stability of the excavation and to allow proper placement of concrete .
ensure that the material used to make the slurry is not detrimental to concrete or surrounding ground strata .
during construction maintain the level of the slurry at a height sufficient to prevent caving of the hole .
in the event of a sudden significant loss of slurry such that the slurry level can not practically be maintained by adding slurry to the hole backfill the excavation and delay the construction of that foundation until an alternate construction procedure has been approved .
perform the following tests on the mineral slurry supplied to and in the shaft excavation and ensure that the results are within the ranges stated in the table below num return to table of contents item to be measured range of results at numf test method density num to num lbftnum in fresh water environment num to num lbftnum in salt water environment mud density balance fm numrpnumbnum viscosity num to num seconds marsh cone method fm numrpnumbnum ph num to num electric ph meter or ph indicator paper strips fm numrpnumbnum sand content num or less fm numrpnumbnum the contractor may adjust the limits in the above table when field conditions warrant as successfully demonstrated in a test hole or with other methods approved by the engineer .
the engineer must approve all changes in writing before the contractor can continue to use them .
during construction maintain the level of mineral slurry in the shaft excavation within the excavation and at a level not less than num feet above the highest expected piezometric water pressure along the depth of a shaft .
num polymer slurry materials manufactured expressly for use as polymer slurry for drilled shafts that meet the requirements of this section may be used as slurry for drilled shaft excavations .
a representative of the manufacturer must be onsite or available for immediate contact to assist and guide the construction of the first three drilled shafts at no additional cost to the department .
this representative must also be available for onsite assistance or immediate contact if problems are encountered during the construction of the remaining drilled shafts as determined by the engineer .
use polymer slurry only if the soils below the casing are not classified as organic and the ph of the fluid in the hole can be maintained in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
submit the sds for the product the manufacturers published mixing procedures and the manufacturers published range of values for ph and viscosity of the mixed slurry .
submit a report in accordance with section num volume ii of the departments material manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecsfilessectionnumvii num.pdf .
the report must include test results certification and documentation that demonstrate the polymer slurry and additives meet the following requirements num .
the polymer slurries to be used on the project and their waste products are classified as nonhazardous as defined by resource conservation and recovery act rcra subpart c rules table num of num cfr num toxicity characteristic .
num .
pull out tests demonstrate the bond between the bar reinforcement and the concrete is not materially affected by exposure to the slurry under typical construction conditions over the typical range of slurry viscosities to be used .
num .
load tests demonstrate the bond between the concrete and the soil is not materially affected by exposure to the polymer slurry under typical construction conditions over the typical range of polymer slurry viscosities to be used .
num return to table of contents num .
the method of disposal meets the approval of all federal state and local regulatory authorities .
perform the following tests on the polymer slurry supplied to and in the shaft excavation and ensure that the results are maintained within the ranges stated in the table below mixed polymer slurry properties item to be measured range of results at numf test method density num to num lbftnum fresh water num to num lbftnum salt water mud density balance fm numrpnumbnum viscosity range published by the manufacturer limited by num and num num for materials excavated marsh cone method fm numrpnumbnum ph range published by the manufacturer for materials excavated electric ph meter or ph indicator paper strips fm numrpnumbnum sand content num or less fm numrpnumbnum premix polymer slurry in accordance with the manufacturers published procedures .
during construction maintain the level of the slurry at a height sufficient to prevent caving of the hole .
num fluid in excavation at time of concrete placement when any fluid is present in any drilled shaft excavation including shafts to support sign signal lighting and its structures the applicable test methods and reporting requirements described in num num and num apply to tests of fluid in the shaft prior to placing the concrete .
test samples of the fluid in the shaft from within num inch of the base of the shaft and from the middle of the shaft height for shafts up to num feet in depth .
test samples of the fluid in the shaft from within num inch of the base of the shaft and at intervals not exceeding num feet up the shaft for shafts deeper than num feet .
use a sampling tool approved by the engineer designed to sample over a depth range of num inches or less .
take whatever action is necessary prior to placing the concrete to bring the fluid within the specification and reporting requirements outlined in the tables in num and num except as follows the engineer will not require tests for ph or viscosity nor require the fluid to meet the minimum density specified in num and num when neither polymer nor mineral slurry has been introduced into the shaft excavation .
num tremies and pumps num general the requirements of the applicable provisions of section num will apply when using a tremie or a pump to place drilled shaft concrete .
num dry excavations ensure that the tremie for depositing concrete in a dry drilled shaft excavation consists of a tube of solid construction a tube constructed of sections which can be added and removed or a tube of other approved design .
the contractor may pass concrete through a hopper at the top of the tube or through side openings as the tremie is num return to table of contents retrieved during concrete placement .
support the tremie so that the free fall of the concrete is less than num feet at all times .
if the free falling concrete causes the shaft excavation to cave or slough control the movement of concrete by reducing the height of free fall of the concrete andor reducing the rate of flow of concrete into the excavation .
num wet excavations construct the tremie or pump line used to deposit concrete beneath the surface of water so that it is watertight and will readily discharge concrete .
construct the discharge end of the tremie or pump line to prevent water intrusion and permit the free flow of concrete during placement operations .
ensure that the tremie or pump line has sufficient length and weight to rest on the shaft bottom before starting concrete placement .
during placement operations ensure that the discharge end of the tremie or pump line is within num inches of the bottom of the shaft excavation until at least num feet of concrete has been placed .
ensure the discharge end of the tremie or pump line is continuously embedded at least num feet into the concrete after num feet of concrete has been placed and until the casing is overpoured sufficiently to eliminate all contaminated concrete .
ensure that the free fall of concrete into the hopper is less than num feet at all times .
support the tremie so that it can be raised to increase the discharge of concrete and lowered to reduce the discharge of concrete .
do not rapidly raise or lower the tremie to increase the discharge of the concrete .
maintain a continuous flow of concrete and a positive pressure differential of the concrete in the tremie or pump line at all times to prevent water or slurry intrusion into the shaft concrete .
num excavation and drilling equipment num general all shaft excavation is unclassified shaft excavation .
the engineer will require drilled shaft sidewall overreaming when inspections show it to be necessary .
these terms are defined in num num and num respectively .
use excavation and drilling equipment having adequate capacity including power torque and crowd downthrust and excavation and overreaming tools of adequate design size and strength to perform the work shown in the plans or described herein .
when the material encountered can not be drilled using conventional earth augers andor underreaming tools provide special drilling equipment including but not limited to rock augers core barrels rock tools air tools blasting materials and other equipment as necessary to continue the shaft excavation to the size and depth required .
in the event blasting is necessary obtain all necessary permits .
the contractor is responsible for the effects of blasting on already completed work and adjacent structures .
the engineer must approve all blasting .
num unclassified shaft excavation unclassified shaft excavation is defined as all processes required to excavate a drilled shaft of the dimensions shown in the contract documents to the depth indicated in the plans plus num feet or plus num shaft diameters whichever is deeper completed and accepted .
include in the work all shaft excavation whether the material encountered is soil rock weathered rock stone natural or manmade obstructions or materials of other descriptions .
num unclassified extra depth excavation unclassified extra depth excavation is defined as all processes required to excavate a drilled shaft of plan dimensions which is deeper than the limits defined as unclassified shaft excavation .
num drilled shaft sidewall overreaming drilled shaft sidewall overreaming is defined as the unclassified excavation required to roughen its surface or to enlarge the drilled shaft diameter due to softening of the sidewalls or to remove excessive buildup of slurry cake when slurry is used .
increase the shaft radius a minimum of num inch and a num return to table of contents maximum of num inches by overreaming .
the contractor may accomplish overreaming with a grooving tool overreaming bucket or other approved equipment .
meet the limit for depth of sidewall overreaming into the shaft sidewall material and the elevation limits between which sidewall overreaming is required .
num inspection of excavations num dimensions and alignment provide equipment for checking the dimensions and alignment of each permanent shaft excavation .
determine the dimensions and alignment of the shaft excavation under the observation and direction of the department .
generally check the alignment and dimensions by any of the following methods as necessary num .
check the dimensions and alignment of dry shaft excavations using reference stakes and a plumb bob .
num .
check the dimensions and alignment of casing when inserted in the excavation .
num .
insert a casing in shaft excavations temporarily for alignment and dimension checks .
num .
insert a rigid rod or pipe assembly with several num degree offsets equal to the shaft diameter into the shaft excavation for alignment and dimension checks .
insert any casing rod or pipe assembly or other device used to check dimensions and alignment into the excavation to full depth .
num depth generally reference the depth of the shaft during drilling to appropriate marks on the kelly bar or other suitable methods .
measure final shaft depths with a suitable weighted tape or other approved methods after final cleaning .
num shaft inspection device sid when shown in the plans furnish all power and equipment necessary for the engineer to inspect the bottom conditions of a drilled shaft excavation and to measure the thickness of bottom sediment or any other debris using a sid .
provide a means to position and lower the sid into the shaft excavation to enable the bell housing to rest vertically on the bottom of the excavation .
include all cost related to the inspection device in the cost of drilled shaft items .
furnish a sid meeting the following requirements num .
a remotely operated high resolution color video camera sealed inside a watertight bell housing .
num .
provides a clear view of the bottom inspection on a video monitor at the surface in real time .
num .
provides a permanent record of the entire inspection with voice annotation on a quality dvd with a resolution of not less than num x num .
num .
provides a minimum field of vision of num square inches with at least two graduated measuring devices to record the depth of sediment on the bottom of the shaft excavation to a minimum accuracy of num inch and a length greater than num inches .
num .
provides sufficient lighting to illuminate the entire field of vision at the bottom of the shaft in order for the operator and inspector to clearly see the depth measurement scale on the video monitor and to produce a clear recording of the inspection .
num .
provides a compressed air or gas system to displace drilling fluids from the bell housing and a pressurized water system to assist in determination of bottom sedimentation depth num return to table of contents obtain the engineers approval of the device in advance of the first inspection contingent on satisfactory field performance .
notify the engineer for approval before a different device is used for any subsequent inspection .
num shaft cleanliness requirements adjust cleaning operations so a minimum of num of the bottom of each shaft will have less than num inches of sediment at the time of placement of the concrete .
ensure the maximum depth of sedimentary deposits or any other debris at any place on the bottom of the shaft excavation does not exceed num inches .
the engineer will determine shaft cleanliness by visual inspection for dry shafts using divers or an inspection device or other methods the engineer deems appropriate for wet shafts .
when using slurry meet the requirements of num at the time of concrete placement .
num exceptions for shafts for sign signal lighting and its structures ensure the depth of sedimentary deposits or other debris does not exceed num inch over the bottom of the shaft when installing drilled shafts to support sign signal lighting and its structures .
num time of excavation overream the sidewalls of any unclassified excavation work using mineral slurry lasting more than num hours measured from the beginning of excavation for all methods except the temporary or permanent casing method which begins at the time excavation begins below the casing before placement of the concrete .
ensure that the minimum depth of overreaming the shaft sidewall is num inches and the maximum depth is num inches .
provide any overreaming required at no expense to the department when exceeding the num hour limit unless the time limit is exceeded to accomplish excavating deeper than the elevation shown in the plans as ordered by the engineer .
the department will pay the contractor for authorized overreaming when excavating deeper than the elevation shown in the plans as ordered by the engineer exceeds the num hour time limit as extra work .
when using mineral slurry adjust excavation operations so that the maximum time that slurry is in contact with the bottom num feet of the shaft from time of drilling to concreting does not exceed num hours .
if exceeding the num hour time limit overream the shaft socket or the full shaft when socket is not specified at no additional expense to the department prior to performing other operations in the shaft .
num reinforcing steel construction and placement .
num cage construction and placement completely assemble and place as a unit the cage of reinforcing steel consisting of longitudinal bars ties and cage stiffener bars immediately after the engineer inspects and accepts the shaft excavation and immediately prior to placing concrete .
tie all intersections of drilled shaft reinforcing steel with cross ties or figure num ties .
use double strand ties ties with larger tie wire ubolts or similar when necessary .
the engineer will give final approval of the cage construction and placement subject to satisfactory performance in the field .
num splicing cage if the bottom of the constructed shaft elevation is lower than the bottom of the shaft elevation in the plans extend a minimum of one half of the longitudinal bars required in the upper portion of the shaft the additional length .
continue the tie bars for the extra depth spaced on num foot centers and extend the stiffener bars to the final depth .
the contractor may lap splice these bars or use unspliced bars of the proper length .
do not weld bars to the planned reinforcing steel unless shown in the contract documents .
for drilled shafts supporting sign signal lighting and its structures if the shaft cleaning operations result in excavating below the required tip elevation the reinforcing steel num return to table of contents cage does not need to be extended .
the reinforcing steel cage may be spliced to rest on the bottom of the excavation or suspended in place from the top .
num support alignment and tolerance tie and support the reinforcing steel in the shaft so that the reinforcing steel will remain within allowable tolerances as specified in num and section num .
use wheels or other approved noncorrosive spacing devices within num feet of the bottom within num feet of the top and intervals not exceeding num feet along the shaft to ensure concentric spacing for the entire length of the cage .
do not use block or wire type spacers .
use a minimum of one spacer per num inches of circumference of cage with a minimum of four at each level .
provide spacers at the bottom of the drilled shaft reinforcing cage as required to maintain the proper position of the cage .
check the elevation of the top of the steel cage before and after placing the concrete .
if the cage is not within the specified tolerances correct and submit a revised dsip to the engineer for approval .
do not construct additional shafts until receiving approval from the engineer .
num nondestructive integrity testing access tubes install access tubes full length in all drilled shafts from the tip of shaft to a point high enough above top of shaft to allow thermal integrity testing for drilled shafts titds and crosshole sonic logging csl testing but not less than num inches above the top of the drilled shaft ground surface or water surface whichever is higher .
equally space tubes around circumference of drilled shaft .
securely tie access tubes to the inside of the reinforcing cage and align tubes to be parallel to the vertical axis of the center of the cage .
access tubes from the top of the reinforcing cage to the tip of the shaft shall be nps num schedule num black iron or black steel not galvanized pipe .
access tubes above the top of the reinforcing cage may be the same black iron or black steel pipe or schedule num pvc pipe .
ensure that the access tubes are free from loose rust scale dirt paint oil and other foreign material .
couple tubes as required with threaded couplers such that inside of tube remains flush .
seal the bottom and top of the tubes with threaded caps .
the tubes joints and bottom caps shall be watertight .
seal the top of the tubes with lubricated threaded caps sufficient to prevent the intrusion of foreign materials .
stiffen the cage sufficiently to prevent damage or misalignment of access tubes during the lifting and installation of the cage .
exercise care in removing the caps from the top of the tubes after installation so as not to apply excess torque hammering or other stress which could break the bond between the tubes and the concrete .
provide the following number rounded up to the next whole number of tubes and configuration of crosshole sonic logging access tubes in each drilled shaft based on the diameter of the shaft .
shaft diameter number of tubes required configuration around the inside of circular reinforcing cage num to num inches num num degrees apart greater than num inches num tube per foot of shaft diameter num degrees divided by the number of tubes insert simulated or mock probes in each access tube prior to concreting to ensure the serviceability of the tube .
fill access tubes with clean potable water and recap prior to concreting .
repair or replace any leaking misaligned or unserviceable tubes as in a manner acceptable to the engineer prior to concreting .
num return to table of contents for drilled shaft foundations requiring anchor bolts verify access tubes will not interfere with anchor bolt installation before excavating the shaft .
when access tube locations conflict with anchor bolt locations move the access tube location plus or minus num inches along the inner circumference of the reinforcing cage .
notify the engineer before excavating the shaft if the access tube locations can not be moved out of conflict with anchor bolt locations .
for drilled shafts supporting sign signal lighting and its structures if the shaft cleaning operations result in excavating below the required tip elevation the access tubes do not need to be extended .
if the reinforcing steel cage is suspended in place from the top rather than resting on the bottom of the excavation clearly mark the top of shaft location on each tube num concrete placement .
num general place concrete in accordance with the applicable portions of sections num and num num num num num num num and the requirements herein .
place concrete as soon as possible after completing all excavation cleaning the shaft excavation inspecting and finding it satisfactory and immediately after placing reinforcing steel .
continuously place concrete in the shaft to the top of the casing .
continue placing concrete after the casing is full until good quality concrete is evident at the top of the casing .
place concrete through a tremie or concrete pump using approved methods .
after the shaft is overpoured sufficiently to eliminate all contaminated concrete additional concrete may be added to the shaft without the use of a tremie or pump in accordance with section num .
if the pressure head is lost during concrete placement for any reason the engineer may direct the contractor to perform integrity testing at no expense to the department .
immediately after concreting check the water levels in the csl access tubes and refill as necessary .
if tubes become unserviceable core new holes in the drilled shaft as directed by the engineer .
num placement time requirements the elapsed time for placing drilled shaft concrete includes the concrete mixing and transit time the concrete placement time the time required to remove any temporary casing that causes or could cause the concrete to flow into the space previously occupied by the casing and the time to insert any required column steel bolts weldments etc .
maintain a minimum slump of num inches throughout the elapsed time .
use materials to produce and maintain the required slump through the elapsed time that meets the class of concrete specified .
provide slump loss tests that demonstrate to the engineer that the concrete will maintain a num inch or greater slump for the anticipated elapsed time before beginning drilled shaft construction .
num forms when the top of shaft elevation is above ground or above water form the portion of the shaft above ground and the portion of the shaft above water with a removable form or another approved method to the dimensions shown in the plans except when the permanent casing method is specified .
num riser blocks the contractor may cast a riser block of equal diameter as the column and of a maximum height of num inches at the top of the completed shaft .
when this option is chosen extend any dowel steel above the top of shaft an additional num inches .
num curing cure the top surface in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num and construct any construction joint area as shown in the plans .
protect portions of drilled shafts exposed to a body of water from the action of water by leaving the forms in place for a minimum of seven days after casting the concrete .
the contractor may remove forms prior num return to table of contents to seven days provided the concrete strength has reached num psi or greater as evidenced by cylinder breaks .
num nondestructive testing of drilled shaft integrity num thermal integrity testing for drilled shafts titds perform all titds in accordance with astm dnum .
test all drilled shafts in bridge bents or piers considered nonredundant in the plans using titds .
for all other drilled shafts perform titds only on drilled shafts selected by the engineer .
the minimum number of shafts tested is the number of shafts indicated in the plans .
the engineer may increase the number shafts tested as deemed necessary .
engage a qualified specialty engineer to supervise the titds .
the qualified titds specialty engineer must have a minimum six months experience of titds have a florida licensed professional engineer and supervise the collection and interpretation of data .
the individual performing the titds in the field must work for the specialty engineer firm and have a minimum of six months experience of titds .
the contractor shall provide all necessary assistance to the titds specialty engineer to satisfactorily perform the testing .
after acceptance of production shafts by the engineer remove all water from the access tubes or core holes and fill the tubes or core holes with a structural nonshrink grout meeting the requirements of section num from the bottom via tremie tube .
place the grout utilizing enough pressure to fill the tubes or core holes completely .
if the contractor determines at any time during the nondestructive testing and evaluation of the drilled shaft that the drilled shaft should be replaced no further testing or evaluation of that shaft is required .
num equipment furnish titds test equipment in accordance with astm dnum as follows num .
provide thermal probes with four orthogonally oriented infrared sensors able to be used in num inch i.d .
pipes .
num .
provide a computer based titds data acquisition system for display of signals during data acquisition .
num .
provide a depth encoder sensor to determine probe depths .
num .
provide an air compressor and power supply with sufficient pressure to air lift the water from the access tubes .
num procedure perform titds testing between num and num hours after shaft concrete placement unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
furnish information regarding the shaft tube lengths and depths construction dates and other pertinent shaft installation observations and details to the department at the time of testing .
verify access tube lengths and their condition in the presence of the department at least num hours prior to titds .
if the access tubes do not provide access over the full length of the shaft repair the existing tubes or core additional holes as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
just prior to inserting the thermal probe remove water from the access tubes .
store the removed water in an insulated container for later replacement .
allow the thermal probe to acclimate in accordance with the equipment manufacturer recommendations .
continuously record temperatures at depth intervals of num inches or less from the top to the bottom of each access tube .
repeat the test at each access tube until two sets of data from the same access tube provide similar results .
return the warm water to the access tubes immediately after the testing has been completed .
num return to table of contents immediately report any potential defects indicated by low temperature anomalies to the engineer .
num required titds reports present the titds data and analysis results to the engineer in a signed and sealed report .
the report report shall include as minimum the following items num .
graphs displaying all temperature measurements and average temperature versus depth .
num .
indication of unusual temperatures including cooler local deviations from the average at any depth from the overall average over the entire length .
num .
a graph displaying the average temperature and theoretical temperature versus depth .
num .
variations in temperature between access tubes which may indicate variations in cage alignment .
num .
the calculated radius of the shaft throughout the entire depth .
num .
alignment of the reinforcing cage along the shaft .
num .
calculated concrete cover throughout the entire depth .
num .
a conclusion stating whether the tested shaft is free from integrity defects and meets the minimum concrete cover and diameter requirements by the specifications .
when anomalies are detected include in the report a three dimensional rendering of the shape of the shaft .
num evaluation of titds test results the engineer will evaluate the observations during drilled shaft construction and titds results to determine whether or not the drilled shaft construction is acceptable .
drilled shafts not meeting the minimum cover and diameter requirements or having integrity defects are not acceptable without an engineering analysis .
num coring andor repair of drilled shafts if the engineer determines a drilled shaft is unacceptable based on the titds tests and other testing or observes problems during drilled shaft construction core the shaft to allow further evaluation and repair or replace the shaft as directed by the engineer .
if coring to allow further evaluation of the shaft and repair is chosen one or more core samples shall be taken from each unacceptable shaft for full depth of the shaft or to the depth directed by the engineer .
the engineer will determine the number location and diameter of the cores based on the results of the titds .
keep an accurate log of cores .
properly mark and place the cores in a crate showing the shaft depth at each interval of core recovery .
transport the cores along with five copies of the coring log to the location designated by the engineer .
perform strength testing by an aashto certified lab on portions of the cores as required by the engineer .
if the titds and coring indicate the shaft is defective propose remedial measures for approval by the engineer .
such improvement may consist of but is not limited to correcting defective portions of the shaft providing straddle shafts to compensate for capacity loss or providing a replacement shaft .
repair all detected defects and conduct post repair integrity testing using horizontal and offset csl testing and numd tomographic imaging as described in num .
engage a specialty engineer to perform gammagamma density logging to verify the integrity of the shaft outside the reinforcing cage in the same locations where the repair was required .
when straddle shafts or replacement shafts are used to correct a deficient foundation perform titds in accordance with num through num to verify integrity of these shafts .
submit all results to the engineer within five days of test num return to table of contents completion for approval .
perform all work described in this subarticle at no additional cost to the department and with no increase in contract time .
num cross sonic logging csl and tomography when required by the engineer perform csl testing in accordance with astm dnum .
engage a qualified specialty engineer to perform the csl testing .
the qualified csl specialty engineer must be a professional engineer in the state of florida and have a minimum six months experience of csl testing supervising the collection of csl data and interpretation of csl results .
the individual performing the cls testing in the field must work for the specialty engineer firm and have a minimum of six months experience of csl testing .
the contractor shall provide all necessary access and assistance to the csl specialty engineer to satisfactorily perform the testing .
when a shaft contains four tubes test every possible tube combination .
for shafts with five or more tubes test all pairs of adjacent tubes around the perimeter and one half of the remaining number of tube combinations as chosen by the engineer .
pull the probes simultaneously starting from the bottoms of the tubes over an electronic depth measuring device .
perform the csl tests with the source and receiver probes in the same horizontal plane .
continuously record temperatures at depth intervals of num inches or less from the bottom of the tubes to the top of each shaft .
remove all slack from the cables prior to pulling to provide accurate depth measurements in the csl records .
when the measurements indicate a num or greater reduction in velocity between one or more pairs perform numd tomography analysis as indicated below .
to perform numd tomography analysis conduct offset csl measurements between the tube pair combinations in addition to the horizontal measurements .
record offset measurements with source and receiver vertically offset in the tubes .
these measurements add four measurements per tube combination to the horizontal measurements described in this section .
offset measurements are described by the angle in degrees and direction the signal travels between the probes with respect to the horizontal plane plus num plus num source below receiver and minus num minus num source above receiver .
record offset measurements from the point where the higher probe is at least num feet below the velocity reduction to the point where the lower probe is at least num feet above the velocity reduction .
when repairs are done provide offset measurements from the point where the higher probe is at least num feet below the lower limit of the repaired zone to the point where the lower probe is at least num feet above the upper limit of the repaired zone .
perform offset measurements and provide csl logs and numd tomographic analysis at no additional cost to the department .
after acceptance of production shafts by the engineer fill the tubes or core holes with a structural nonshrink grout in accordance with num .
if the contractor determines at any time during the nondestructive testing and evaluation of the drilled shaft that the drilled shaft should be replaced no further testing or evaluation of that shaft is required .
num required csl reports present the csl data and analysis results to the engineer in a signed and sealed report .
include csl logs with analyses of first pulse arrival time fat versus depth and pulse energyamplitude versus depth .
present a csl log for each tube pair tested with any defect zones identified on the logs and discussed in the test report as appropriate .
when offset measurements are required perform numd tomographic analysis using all offset data and include color coded numd tomographic images in the report .
num evaluation of cross hole sonic logging testing the engineer will evaluate the observations during drilled shaft construction and the csl test results num return to table of contents to determine whether or not the drilled shaft construction is acceptable .
drilled shafts with velocity reduction exceeding num are not acceptable without an engineering analysis .
num coring andor repair of drilled shafts if the engineer determines a drilled shaft is unacceptable based on the csl test and other testing core the shaft to allow further evaluation and repair or replace the shaft in accordance with num .
if repairs are performed or additional shafts installed to correct a deficient foundation conduct integrity testing and submit the results to the engineer in accordance with num .
num method shafts .
the engineer will use the construction of method shafts test holes to determine if the methods and equipment used by the contractor are sufficient to produce a shaft excavation meeting the requirements of the contract documents .
during method shaft excavations the engineer will evaluate the ability to control dimensions and alignment of excavations within tolerances to seal the casing into impervious materials to control the size of the excavation under caving conditions by the use of slurry or by other means to properly clean the completed shaft excavation to construct excavations in open water areas to determine the elevation of ground water to place reinforcing steel and concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications within the prescribed time frame and to execute any other necessary construction operation .
revise the methods and equipment as necessary at any time during the construction of the method shaft when unable to satisfactorily carry out any of the necessary operations described above or when unable to control the dimensions and alignment of the shaft excavation within tolerances .
construct method shafts out of permanent position at the location shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
ensure the diameter and depth of the method shaft or holes are the same diameter and maximum depth as the production drilled shafts .
reinforce the method shaft unless otherwise directed in the contract documents .
fill the method shaft with concrete in the same manner production drilled shafts will be constructed .
backfill method shaft which are not filled with concrete with suitable soil in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
leave concreted method shaft in place except remove the top of the shaft to a depth of num feet below the ground line .
use the same procedure for shafts constructed in water .
restore the disturbed areas at the sites of method shaft drilled out of position as nearly as practical to their original condition .
when the contractor fails to demonstrate to the engineer the adequacy of his methods or equipment and alterations are required make appropriate modifications and provide additional test holes at no expense to the department .
include the cost of all method shaft in the cost of the drilled shafts .
make no changes in methods or equipment after initial approval without the consent of the engineer .
a separate method shaft is not required for drilled shafts installed under sign signal lighting and its structures .
the first production shaft will serve as a method shaft for determining acceptability of the installation method .
num test bells .
test bells are no longer used .
num construction tolerances .
meet the following construction tolerances for drilled shafts num .
ensure that the top of the drilled shaft is no more than num inches laterally in the num return to table of contents x or y coordinate from the position indicated in the plans .
num .
ensure that the vertical alignment of the shaft excavation does not vary from the alignment shown in the plans by more than num inches per foot of depth .
num .
after placing all the concrete ensure that the top of the reinforcing steel cage is no more than num inches above and no more than num inches below plan position .
num .
ensure that the reinforcing cage is concentric with the shaft within a tolerance of num inches .
ensure that concrete cover is a minimum of num inches unless shown otherwise in the plans .
num .
all casing diameters shown in the plans refer to i.d .
inside diameter dimensions .
however the contractor may use casing with an outside diameter equal to the specified shaft diameter if the extra length described in num is provided .
in this case ensure that the i.d .
of the casing is not less than the specified shaft diameter less num inch .
when approved the contractor may elect to provide a casing larger in diameter than shown in the plans to facilitate meeting this requirement .
ensure that the minimum diameter of the drilled shaft is num inch less than the specified shaft diameter .
when conditions are such that a series of telescoping casings are used provide the casing sized to maintain the minimum shaft diameters listed above .
num .
except when abutting or encroaching within a sidewalk ensure that the top elevation of the drilled shaft concrete has a tolerance of plus num inch and minus num inches from the top of shaft elevation shown in the plans .
num .
when abutting or encroaching within a sidewalk ensure that the top elevation of the drilled shaft is flush with the sidewalk surface .
num .
the dimensions of casings are subject to american petroleum institute tolerances applicable to regular steel pipe .
num .
use excavation equipment and methods designed so that the completed shaft excavation will have a flat bottom .
ensure that the cutting edges of excavation equipment are normal to the vertical axis of the equipment within a tolerance of plus or minus num inches per foot of diameter .
num drilled shaft excavations constructed out of tolerance .
do not construct drilled shaft excavations in such a manner that the concrete shaft can not be completed within the required tolerances .
the contractor may make corrections to an unacceptable drilled shaft excavation by any combination of the following methods num .
overdrilling the shaft excavation to a larger diameter to permit accurate placement of the reinforcing steel cage with the required minimum concrete cover .
num .
increasing the number andor size of the steel reinforcement bars .
when the tolerances are not met the contractor may propose a redesign to incorporate shafts installed out of tolerance into caps or footings .
incorporate shafts installed out of tolerance at no expense to the department .
ensure the contractors engineer of record performs any redesign and signs and seals the redesign drawings and computations .
do not begin any proposed construction until the redesign has been reviewed for acceptability and approved by the engineer .
backfill any out of tolerance shafts in an approved manner when directed by the engineer until the redesign is complete and approved .
furnish additional materials and work necessary including engineering analysis and redesign to effect corrections of out of tolerance drilled shaft excavations at no expense to the department .
num return to table of contents num load tests .
when the plans include load testing perform all load tests in accordance with num or as shown in the contract documents .
num method of measurement .
num drilled shafts the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet of the reinforced concrete drilled shaft of the diameter shown in the plans completed and accepted .
the length will be determined as the difference between the top of shaft elevation as shown in the plans and the final bottom of shaft elevation as authorized and accepted .
when the contractor elects to provide outside diameter o.d .
sized casing rather than inside diameter i.d .
sized casing as allowed in num the pay quantity measured as described above will be multiplied by a factor f determined as follows d d num d f num num num where f factor to adjust pay quantities to compensate for smaller shafts .
dnum casing inside diameter specified shaft diameter specified .
dnum casing inside diameter provided dnum dnum minus twice the wall thickness .
num drilled shafts unreinforced the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet of unreinforced concrete drilled shaft of the diameters shown in the plans completed and accepted .
the length will be determined as the difference between the top of shaft elevation as shown in the plans and the final bottom of shaft elevation as authorized and accepted .
when the contractor elects to use o.d .
casing the quantity as determined above will be multiplied by the factor f determined as described in num .
num unclassified shaft excavation the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet of unclassified shaft excavation of the diameter shown in the plans completed and accepted measured along the centerline of the shaft from the ground surface elevation after any required excavation per num to the plan bottom of shaft elevation authorized and accepted plus up to num feet or num shaft diameters whichever is deeper of additional excavation as authorized by the engineer .
when drilled shafts are constructed through fills placed by the contractor the original ground surface before the fill was placed will be used to determine the quantity of unclassified shaft excavation .
when the contractor elects to use o.d .
casing the quantity as determined above will be multiplied by the factor f determined as described in num .
num unclassified extra depth excavation when excavation is required by the engineer to extend more than num feet or num shaft diameters whichever is deeper below the bottom of the shaft elevation shown in the plans the work will be considered as unforeseeable work .
num method shafts the cost of all method shafts will be included in the cost of drilled shafts .
num core shaft excavation the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet measured from the bottom of shaft elevation to the bottom of the corehole for each authorized core drilled below the shaft excavation completed and accepted .
when the engineer authorizes num return to table of contents pilot holes extending through part or all of the shaft prior to excavation to some depth below the shaft bottom the quantity paid as core shaft excavation will be the length in feet measured from the top elevation to the bottom elevation authorized by the engineer completed and accepted .
when spt tests are substituted for coring or pilot holes as provided in num the quantity will be determined as described above in this section .
num casings the quantity to be paid for will be the length in feet of each size casing as directed and authorized to be used .
the length will be measured along the casing from the top of the shaft elevation or the top of casing whichever is lower to the bottom of the casing at each shaft location where casing is authorized and used except as described below when the top of casing elevation is shown in the plans .
casing will be paid for only when the permanent casing method is specified when the plans show a casing that becomes a permanent part of the shaft or when the engineer directs the contractor to leave a casing in place which then becomes a permanent part of the shaft .
no payment will be made for casings which become bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be practically removed .
the contractor shall include the cost of all temporary removable casings for methods of construction other than that of the permanent casing method in the bid price for unclassified shaft excavation item .
when the permanent casing method and the top of casing elevation are specified the casing will be continuous from top to bottom .
authorization for temporary casing will not be given unless the contractor demonstrates that he can maintain alignment of the temporary upper casing with the lower casing to be left in place during excavation and concreting operations .
when artesian conditions are or may be encountered the contractor shall also demonstrate that he can maintain a positive watertight seal between the two casings during excavation and concreting operations .
when the top of casing elevation is shown in the contract documents payment will be from the elevation shown in the plans or from the actual top of casing elevation whichever is lower to the bottom of the casing .
when the contractor elects to use an approved special temporary casing system in open water locations the length to be paid for will be measured as a single casing as provided above .
num load tests the quantity to be paid for will be the number and type of load tests conducted .
num instrumentation and data collection the quantity to be paid for will be at the lump sum price .
num thermal integrity testing for drilled shafts and crosshole sonic logging the quantity of the ttids to be paid for will be the number of drilled shafts accepted based on titds tests .
when titds is not performed in accordance with num perform csl testing at no cost to the department .
no payment will be made for any integrity testing when such testing indicates the shaft can not be accepted based on the integrity testing itself .
no payment will be made for integrity testing performed to evaluate the integrity of postrepair work or for csl testing not requested by the engineer .
when the engineer requests csl tests and the results indicate the shaft is acceptable the testing will be paid as unforeseen work .
num basis of payment .
num drilled shafts price and payment will be full compensation for all drilled shafts including the cost of concrete reinforcing steel and crosshole sonic logging tubes including all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the drilled shaft .
the cost of the reinforcing steel including lap lengths to accommodate shaft lengths longer than num return to table of contents shown in the plans is included in the cost of drilled shafts .
costs associated with repairing defects found in the drilled shaft shall be included in the cost of the drilled shaft .
num drilled shafts unreinforced price and payment will be full compensation for all drilled shafts unreinforced including the cost of concrete and all labor equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the drilled shaft .
num unclassified shaft excavation price and payment will be full compensation for the shaft excavation except for the additional costs included under the associated pay items for casing removal from the site and disposal of excavated materials restoring the site as required cleaning and inspecting shaft excavations using slurry as necessary using drilling equipment blasting procedures special tools and special drilling equipment to excavate the shaft to the depth indicated in the plans and furnishing all other labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work in an acceptable manner .
num method shafts no separate payment will be made for method shafts test holes .
all cost of method shafts will be included in the cost of drilled shafts .
num core shaft excavation price and payment will be full compensation for drilling and classifying the corespilot hole delivering them to the department furnishing drilled shaft concrete to fill the corepilot hole and all other expenses necessary to complete the work .
when spt tests are substituted for corespilot holes as provided in num they will be paid for at the price per foot for coring .
num casings price and payment will be full compensation for additional costs necessary for furnishing and placing the permanent casing in the shaft excavation above the costs attributable to the work paid for under associated pay items for unclassified shaft excavation .
num load tests price and payment will include all costs related to the performance of the load test .
num instrumentation and data collection price and payment will include all labor equipment and materials incidental to the instrumentation and data collection and when required the load test report .
num thermal integrity testing for drilled shafts and crosshole sonic logging price and payment will include all costs related to the performance of the titds and csl testing and incidentals to the thermal integrity and crosshole sonic tests .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num drilled shaft per foot .
item no .
num casing per foot .
item no .
num core shaft excavation per foot .
item no .
num test loads each .
item no .
num unclassified shaft excavation per foot .
item no .
num instrumentation and data collection lump sum .
item no .
num thermal integrity testing for drilled shafts each num return to table of contents d. spread footings num description .
construct reinforced concrete spread footing foundations including dewatering when necessary excavating to the required limits compacting the underlying soil as required and constructing seals when required .
num general requirements .
meet the following requirements for all spread footings num .
perform excavations including the removal of all material of whatever nature necessary for the construction of spread footings .
as used herein the term soil shall constitute any material whether soil rock or other materials .
num .
slope excavations as required or support them with sheeting and shore them if necessary to provide a safe excavation that is adequate for construction purposes and that will adequately protect any existing adjacent structures .
num .
ensure that the foundation soils are firm stable and in the opinion of the engineer meet or exceed the design bearing and compressibility requirements before constructing the footings or any required seals .
the department may elect to use any type of tests to evaluate the foundation soils that is appropriate in the opinion of the engineer .
cooperate with the engineer in the evaluation of the foundation soils and assist the engineer as necessary to provide access to the site .
num .
the elevation of the bottom of footings or seals andor the depth of overexcavation shown in the plans is approximate and the engineer may order in writing such changes as may be necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation .
num .
place all spread footing concrete in the dry .
num monitor existing structures .
monitor existing structures in accordance with section num .
num dewatering .
the contractor is responsible for the design installation and operation of an adequate dewatering system to dewater excavations for spread footings .
use a well point or well system .
submit a dewatering plan to the engineer for his records before beginning construction .
use well points or wells where the piezometric water level is above an elevation num feet below the bottom of the excavation .
maintain the water table num feet or more below the maximum depth of excavation .
provide continuous dewatering until completing construction of the footing and backfill the excavation at least num feet above the piezometric water table elevation .
continue dewatering until the engineer considers conditions safe to discontinue dewatering .
in the event of a dewatering failure assist the engineer as required in determining the effects of such a failure on the foundation soils and take whatever corrective measures are required at no additional expense to the department .
when the engineer approves the discontinuing of dewatering decrease the rate of pumping allowing the water level to rise slowly .
use a rate in feet per hour that the water table is allowed to rise equal to the total number of feet the water table was lowered divided by ten hours or a rate of num foot per hour whichever is less .
install one piezometer well approximately every num feet of footing perimeter .
provide a minimum of two and a maximum of six piezometers at locations within num feet from the outside of the footing perimeter .
install piezometer wells to a depth at least num feet below the bottom of num return to table of contents footing elevation or as directed by the engineer .
measure water elevation in the piezometer wells prior to excavation and at numhour intervals between excavation and discontinuation of dewatering .
maintain the piezometers in working condition throughout the dewatering process and repair or replace them when damaged at no expense to the department .
num excavations if the excavation must be carried deeper than shown in the plans to obtain a satisfactory foundation the engineer will revise the plans in accordance with the following num .
when the change in bottom elevation of the footing is num inches or less the engineer will keep the top of the footing at the elevation shown in the original plans and will increase the thickness to obtain a satisfactory foundation .
num .
when the change in elevation of the bottom of footing exceeds num inches the engineer will revise the plans and lower the footing thereby increasing the height of stem to obtain a satisfactory foundation .
generally the engineer will also increase the thickness and width of footing over that shown in the original plans .
num dry excavations dry excavations are excavations that can be completed without the need to lower the piezometric water level .
perform dry excavations when the piezometric water level at the time of construction is and in the opinion of the engineer will remain at least num feet below the bottom of the authorized excavation or overexcavation .
demonstrate to the engineer that a stable excavation can be made without dewatering .
make adequate provisions to divert surface runoff and to collect and remove any water entering the excavation .
excavate to the bottom of footing to the overexcavation limits shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
save any suitable materials for backfill .
provide areas for the disposal of all unsuitable materials and dispose of them in a satisfactory method .
compact the foundation soils below the footing as shown in the plans or described herein before constructing the footing .
num dewatered excavations dewatered excavations are excavations made after first lowering the piezometric water level with wellpoints or wells .
perform dewatering as described in num .
excavate in the dry after lowering of the water table .
when dewatering is required the contractor may excavate within num feet of the ground water table before dewatering begins if the dewatering system is operating and the contractor has demonstrated that the water level has been lowered to and maintained at acceptable limits .
where large excavations require stage lowering of the water table additional wellpoint systems installed at lower elevations the contractor may continue excavating as long as the water elevation is maintained at least num feet below the excavation .
ensure that surface runoff is diverted from the excavation .
compact the foundation soils as shown in the plans or as described herein before constructing the footing .
num wet excavations wet excavations are excavations made below the existing water table without prior dewatering .
when the plans show a cofferdam and seal perform the excavation in the wet .
maintain the water level during excavation at or above the water level outside the cofferdam .
place the seal directly upon the foundation soils or rock when using wet excavations .
do not compact foundation soils for wet excavations .
ensure that the foundation soils or rock are disturbed as little as practical .
remove all materials that are determined by the engineer to be loose or disturbed before placing the seal concrete .
num return to table of contents num fill or backfill .
in all excavations including overexcavations below the footing use only fill or backfill materials considered select in accordance with standard plans index num .
ensure the material is free of rubble debris or rocks that would prevent uniform placement and compaction .
ensure the material below the top of the footing is free of recycled asphalt pavement rap .
perform sampling and testing in accordance with num except replace aashto tnum method c with fm numtnum method d. num compaction and density requirements .
compact the bottom of the excavation with suitable equipment .
compact the soil beneath footing excavation whether dug to the bottom of footing or overexcavated to a density not less than num of the maximum density as determined by fm numtnum method d for a minimum depth of num feet below the bottom of the excavation or to the depth shown in the plans before backfilling begins .
for every num feet of excavation or isolated compaction operation perform two quality control qc density tests with a num inch depth of measurement one qc density test with the gauge placed at an elevation of num foot below the bottom of the excavation and one qc density test with the gauge placed at the bottom of the excavation in accordance with fm num tnum .
compact the backfill in footing excavations which have been overexcavated to a density not less than num of the maximum density as determined by fm numtnum method d. ensure that the maximum lift thickness after compaction does not exceed num inches .
for every num ft of backfill or isolated compaction operation perform at least one qc density test .
the engineer will conduct one density verification test per every num qc test with a minimum of one density test below the bottom of the excavation and one density test in the backfill .
verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures will be in accordance with num except replace aashto tnum method c with fm numtnum method d. for compaction use an approved heavy vibratory roller with a static drum weight of at least num tons .
compact each lift to the required density .
also compact the final lift below the footing with a suitable sled vibratory compactor to remove any upper disturbance caused by the drum roller .
when conditions require use of smaller compaction equipment obtain the engineers approval for the equipment and reduce the lift thickness to achieve the required density .
perform backfilling to the original ground surface finished grade or subgrade as required by the plans in the immediate vicinity by approved mechanical compactors weighing less than num pounds .
the contractor may compact backfill located more than num feet away from the exterior periphery of the footing with heavier compactors .
do not place backfill on the footing until the engineer has given permission and until the concrete is at least seven days old .
when the plans indicate spread footing abutments on mechanically stabilized earth mse walls place and compact the backfill material underneath the footing in accordance with the requirements of num .
meet the density requirements of num .
num forming .
form spread footings if it can not be demonstrated that the natural soil or rock is strong enough to prevent caving during construction .
for forms meet the applicable requirements of num .
when forms are not required meet the requirements of num .
num materials .
num concrete meet the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents num reinforcing steel meet the requirements of section num .
for spread footing reinforcing steel use grade num .
num reinforcing steel placement .
place and fasten reinforcing steel for footings according to the applicable provisions of num .
num concrete placement .
num placement place all footing concrete in the dry and according to the applicable provisions of section num .
do not construct joints in footings .
num finish after placing and consolidating the concrete strikeoff the top surface to the grades shown in the contract documents leaving the surface smooth and free of undesirable cavities and other defects .
do not provide a special finish unless the footing will be visible after construction in which case meet the applicable provisions of section num .
num curing provide continuousmoisturecuring for footings .
for cover materials use clean sand sawdust or other materials meeting the approval of the engineer .
continuously wet the cover materials for a period of num hours .
num method of measurement .
num dewatering the quantity to be paid for will be at the contract unit price for each footing excavation only at locations authorized by the engineer and acceptably dewatered .
num excavation no separate payment will be made for backfill or will separate payment be made for excavation above bottom of footing elevation .
the cost of this work will be included in the contract unit price for concrete substructure .
for footings with excavation overexcavation below the bottom of the footing elevation shown in the plans the cost of this excavation backfilling and compaction will be included in the contract unit price for excavation for structures .
the pay quantity will be the volume in cubic yards bounded by vertical planes num inches outside of the limits of the footing and parallel thereto and extending from the bottom of the footing elevation to the authorized bottom of overexcavation or within the pay limits shown in the plans .
if the elevation of a footing as shown in the plans is changed to a higher or lower elevation the engineer will not consider such change as a material change to the original contract documents a waiver of any condition of the contract or an invalidation of any of the provisions of the contract .
num reinforcing steel the quantity to be paid for will be the total weight in pounds determined as described in section num .
num concrete the quantity to be paid for will be the volume of the classes shown in the plans in cubic yards determined as described in section num .
num basis of payment .
num dewatering price and payment will be full compensation for all work related to the successful dewatering of footings including installing maintaining and monitoring piezometer wells .
dewatering will be considered unforeseeable work when the engineer determines that dewatering is required and the plans do not include a dewatering item .
num excavation price and payment will be full compensation for all work related to overexcavating below the bottom of footing elevation backfill and compaction as specified .
num reinforcing steel price and payment will be full compensation for all work required to furnish and place the steel as shown in the plans and as specified herein .
num return to table of contents num concrete price and payment will be full compensation for all work required to construct footings and seals as shown in the plans and described herein .
no separate payment will be made for sheeting and shoring required for excavation and footing construction except when a separate pay item for sheeting and shoring is included in the plans .
the cost of all work not specifically mentioned in the other footing items will be included in the price per cubic yard for substructure concrete .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num excavation for structures per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class ii concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class iii concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num class iv concrete per cubic yard .
item no .
num num dewatering for spread footings each .
item no .
num num reinforcing steel per pound .
e. structures other than bridge foundationsauger cast piles num description .
furnish and install auger cast piles used for structural support other than bridge foundations .
num general requirements .
num contractors operations submit an auger cast pile installation plan in accordance with num .
prior to the start of production piles demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer the dependability of the equipment techniques and source of materials by construction of a demonstration pile .
num monitor existing structures monitor existing structures in accordance with section num .
num materials .
meet the following material requirements portland cement and blended cement section num pozzolans and slag section num fine aggregate sand section num admixtures section num water section num fluidifier astm c num the engineer will only permit silica sand except as provided in num .
num grout mix proportions .
use a grout mix consisting of a mixture of cementitious materials admixtures sand and water proportioned and mixed to produce a mortar capable of maintaining the solids in suspension without appreciable bleed water which may be pumped without difficulty and will fill open voids in the adjacent soils .
the grout mix may also include a fluidifier if desired .
proportion these materials to produce a hardened grout of the required strength .
num return to table of contents num mixing and pumping cement grout .
meet the following requirements num .
only use pumping equipment approved by the engineer in the preparation and handling of the grout .
before using the mixers remove all oil or other rust inhibitors from the mixing drums stirring mechanisms and other portions of the equipment in contact with the grout .
num .
use a quantity of water and mixing time that will produce a homogenous grout having an efflux of not less than num seconds when tested with a flow cone in accordance with astm dnum .
reject loads with efflux of less than num seconds .
notify the production facility to adjust the mix design .
calibrate the flow cone in accordance with astm d num .
conduct the calibration initially before its first use and as directed by the engineer when there is a question of the flow cones accuracy .
technicians performing the efflux test must take the auger cast pile course and pass the final examination to be qualified to test for any auger cast pile installations in the field .
assist the engineer in verifying the technicians meet these requirements .
conduct tests for efflux time at the beginning of each days grouting operation and as directed by the engineer to ensure the specification requirements are met .
num .
mix the grout at least one minute .
if agitated continuously the grout may be held in the mixer or agitator for a period not exceeding num hours at grout temperatures below numf two hours for temperatures from numf to numf .
do not place grout when its temperature exceeds numf .
if there is a lapse in the operation of grout injection recirculate the grout through the pump or through the mixer drum or agitator .
num .
use mixers capable of combining components into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass free from balls or lumps and capable of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity .
the engineers approval of grout mixers and all other equipment will be contingent on proper performance during construction of the demonstration pile and subsequent production work .
num .
use a screen no larger than num inch mesh between the mixer and pump to remove large particles which might clog the injection system .
num .
use a positive displacement piston type grout pump equipped with a pressure gauge capable of developing displacing pressures at the pump up to num psi .
num .
accurately monitor the volume and pressure of the grout flow .
test and calibrate the equipment during construction of the demonstration pile to demonstrate flow volume measurement accuracy of plus or minus num over the range of grouting pressures anticipated during this work .
provide a pump stroke counter in good working condition on the grout pump .
also calibrate the equipment any time the engineer determines the grout pump performance may have changed .
num testing cement grout .
prepare three num inches x num inches cylinders in accordance with astm cnum except pour grout in a single lift into cylinders molds without rodding for each lot .
plastic properties in accordance with astm cnum are not required .
a lot is defined as the lesser of num cubic yards of cement grout placed or one day of pile placement .
prepare one additional hold cylinder on the lot that is selected by the engineer for verification .
provide curing facilities for all qc and verification test cylinders in accordance with astm cnum .
test the cylinders at num days in accordance with astm cnum .
num return to table of contents when one of the three qc cylinders from a lot is lost missing damaged or destroyed determination of compressive strength will be made by averaging the remaining two cylinders .
if more than one qc cylinder from a lot is lost missing damaged or destroyed core the structure at no additional expense to the department to determine the compressive strength .
acceptance of lot may be based on verification data at the discretion of the engineer .
obtain the approval of the engineer to core and of the core location prior to coring .
repair core holes after samples are taken with a product meeting the approval of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
for each qc cylinder that is lost missing damaged or destroyed payment for that lot will be reduced by num per num psi of the specified design strength example loss of two auger cast pile grout qc cylinders that have no verification data will require the element to be cored and a pay reduction will be assessed num psi num psi x num x num num .
this reduction will be in addition to any pay adjustment for low strength .
the engineer will also cast three verification cylinders and one hold cylinder from one of every four consecutive lots randomly selected .
the engineer will compare qc and verification results in accordance with section num .
if the results do not compare the engineer will initiate a resolution investigation in accordance with section num personnel makingcuring concrete cylinders shall be certified as aci concrete field testing technician grade i .
personnel performing tests on hardened properties of concrete such as strength determination of cylinders or beams they shall be certified as aci concrete strength testing technician .
all low strength cement grout accepted by the engineer will be subject to reduced payment as follows num per cubic yard for each num psi of strength test value below the specified minimum strength .
the engineer will use the average compressive strength of the lot tests for the computation of this pay reduction .
the engineer will compute the volume of grout for which the reduction will be applied as num of the theoretical volume of the auger cast pile diameter required in the contract documents .
reduction in pay will be applied to the entire length of all piles containing low strength cement grout in any quantity .
the quantity of cement grout affected by the price reduction may exceed the quantity of cement grout contained in the lot .
when separate payment for auger grouted piles is provided the dollar reduction will be equated to an equivalent length of pile not to exceed the total pile length constructed utilizing the subject lot based on the following formula plr rcuc where plr equivalent pile length reduction in feet rc total reduction in payment dollars uc unit cost of pile dollars foot when a cement grout acceptance strength test falls more than num psi below the specified minimum strength perform one of the following num .
remove and replace the cement grout represented by the lot in question at no additional cost to the department or num .
submit a structural analysis performed by the contractors engineer of record .
if the results of the analysis approved by the department indicate adequate strength to serve the intended purpose with adequate durability the concrete may remain in place .
num return to table of contents otherwise remove and replace the lot of concrete in question at no additional cost to the department .
num pile installation .
meet the following requirements num .
locate the piles as shown on the drawings .
num .
should soft compressible muck organics clay or other unsuitable materials non anum anum anum or limestone materials be encountered remove the unsuitable material to a maximum depth of num feet and a maximum diameter about the pile centerline not to exceed num of the distance to the adjacent pile .
backfill with clean granular backfill materials anum anum anum placed and compacted in maximum num inch lifts to at least num of maximum dry density as determined by aashto tnum .
complete this work to the engineers satisfaction prior to auger cast pile construction .
should more than num feet or excessive quantities of unsuitable material be encountered immediately advise the engineer and proceed with the work as directed by the engineer .
num .
provide continuous auger flighting from the auger head to the top of auger with no gaps or other breaks uniform in diameter throughout its length and of the diameter specified for the piles less a maximum of num .
provide augers with a distance between flights of approximately half the diameter of the auger .
num .
use augers with the grout injection hole located at the bottom of the auger head below the bar containing the cutting teeth and with pile auger leads containing a bottom guide .
num .
construct piles of the length and diameter shown on the drawings .
num .
clearly mark the auger leads to facilitate monitoring of the incremental drilling and grout placement .
provide individual foot marks with num foot increments highlighted and clearly visible .
provide a clear reference mark on the moving auger assembly to facilitate accurately monitoring the vertical movement of the auger .
num .
place piles by rotating a continuous flight hollow shaft auger into the ground at a continuous rate that prevents removal of excess soil .
stop advancement after reaching the predetermined depth .
num .
should auger penetration to the required depth prove difficult due to hard materialsrefusal the pile location may be predrilled upon approval of the engineer through the obstruction using appropriate drilling equipment to a diameter no larger than num the prescribed finish diameter of the auger cast pile .
commence auger cast pile construction immediately upon predrilling to minimize ground loss and soil relaxation .
should nondrillable material be encountered preventing placement to the depth required immediately advise the engineer and proceed with the work as directed by the engineer .
refusal is defined as the depth where the penetration of the standard auger equipment is less than num inches per minute .
num .
plug the hole in the bottom of the auger while being advanced into the ground .
remove the plug by the grout or with the reinforcing bar .
num .
pump the grout with sufficient pressure as the auger is withdrawn to fill the auger hole preventing hole collapse and to cause the lateral penetration of the grout into soft or porous zones of the surrounding soil .
prior to commencing withdrawal of the auger establish a head of at least num feet of grout by pumping a volume of grout equivalent to num feet of pile volume .
maintain this head of at least num feet of grout above the injection point around the perimeter of the auger to displace and remove any loose material from the hole .
maintain positive rotation of the auger at least until placement of the grout .
num return to table of contents num .
once the grout head has been established greatly reduce the speed of rotation of the auger and commence extraction at a rate consistent with the pump discharge .
maintain extraction at a steady rate to prevent a lockedin auger necking of the pile or a substantially reduced pile section .
ensure grout starts flowing out from the hole when the cutting head is at least num feet below the ground surface .
place a minimum volume of grout in the hole of at least num of the column of the auger hole from a depth of num feet to the tip .
place a minimum volume of grout in the hole of at least num of the column of the auger hole from the ground surface to a depth of num feet .
do not include any grout needed to create surplus grout head in the volume of grout placed into the hole .
if the grout does not flow out from the hole when the cutting head is at least num feet below the ground surface redrill the pile under the direction of the engineer .
if grouting is interrupted for any reason reinsert the auger by drilling at least num feet below the tip of the auger when the interruption occurred and then regrout .
use this method of placement at all times .
do not depend on the stability of the hole without the earth filled auger .
place the required steel reinforcement while the grout is still fluid but no later than num hour after pulling of the auger .
num .
assume responsibility for the grout volume placed .
if less than num of the theoretical volume of grout is placed in any num foot increment num in the top num foot increment reinstall the pile by advancing the auger num feet or to the bottom of the pile if that is less followed by controlled removal and grout injection .
num .
furnish and install the reinforcing steel and anchoring bolts as shown in the contract drawings .
num .
use reinforcement that is without kinks or nonspecified bends free of mud oil or other coatings that could adversely affect the bond .
make splices in reinforcement as shown on the contract drawings unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the steel cage shall be installed into the grout by its own weight or manually .
do not use a mechanical equipment or tool to impact the steel cage or to force it into the grout .
num .
leave any temporary supports offor items placed into a grouted pile reinforcement template anchor bolt template precast column supports etc .
in place for a minimum of num hours after completion of the pile .
do not place wall panels or other significant loads before the grout has set a minimum of seven days or reached the num day strength .
num construction tolerances .
locate piles as shown on the drawings or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
locate pile centers to an accuracy of plus or minus num inches .
ensure that the top of pile elevation is within an accuracy of plus or minus num inches of the plan elevation .
num unacceptable piles .
repair or replace unacceptable piles as directed by the engineer at no cost to the department .
unacceptable piles are defined as piles that fail for any reason including but not limited to the following piles placed out of position or to improper elevation piles with reduced cross section contaminated grout lack of grout consolidation honeycombed or deficient grout strength and piles with reinforcement anchor devices or other components cast or placed into the fluid grout out of position .
num return to table of contents num auger cast pile installation plan .
at the preconstruction conference but no later than num days before auger cast pile construction begins submit an auger cast pile installation plan for approval by the engineer .
provide the following detailed information on the plan num .
name and experience record of auger cast pile superintendent or foreman in responsible charge of auger cast pile operations .
place a person in responsible charge of day to day auger cast pile operations who possesses satisfactory prior experience constructing auger cast piles similar to those described in the contract documents .
the engineer will give final approval subject to satisfactory performance in the field .
num .
list and size of the proposed equipment including cranes augers concrete pumps mixing equipment etc .
including details of proposed pump calibration procedures .
num .
details of pile installation methods .
num .
details of reinforcement placement and method of centering in pile including details of all temporary supports for reinforcement anchor bolts precast columns etc .
num .
details of how and by whom the grout volumes will be determined monitored and documented .
num .
required submittals including shop drawings and concrete grout design mixes .
num .
other information shown in the plans or requested by the engineer .
num inspection and records .
the engineer will monitor pile installation .
num method of measurement .
num auger cast pile the quantity to be paid for will be at the contract unit price per foot between tip and required pile top elevations for all piles completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
num auger cast piles price and payment will be full compensation for all labor materials and incidentals for construction of auger cast piles of the sizes and depths indicated on the contract drawings or otherwise required under this contract .
price and payment will also include the removal and proper disposal off site of all spoil from the auger operation and all excess grout displaced from the auger hole unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
work to remove and replace unsuitable material when necessary as specified in num will be considered unforeseeable work .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num auger grouted piles per foot .
num return to table of contents section num bridge deck joints num description .
furnish and install bridge deck joints of the types and at the locations shown in the plans .
this section covers the following types of joints poured joint poured joint with backer rod system strip seal joint system modular joint num materials .
num general transport store and prepare all joint materials and components for all joint types as per the manufacturers recommendations .
num poured joint furnish a type d silicone sealant material meeting the requirements of section num that is listed on the approved product list apl .
num poured joint with backer rod system furnish poured joint with backer rod systems consisting of type d silicone sealant material foam backer rods sidewalk cover plates as required and all associated miscellaneous components .
the type d silicone sealant material used in the system shall be listed on the apl and meet the requirements of section num .
num strip seal joint system furnish strip seal joint systems in accordance with astm dnum and standard plans index num that are listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product for the apl shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
design documentation showing the expansion joint system shall include installation details and temporary or sacrificial support brackets bolts clamps etc .
that are compatible with decks constructed with or without blockouts .
furnish joint systems consisting of watertight steel edge rails elastomeric strip seals sidewalk cover plates as required and all associated miscellaneous components .
obtain the elastomeric strip seals from the edge rail manufacturer .
num sidewalk cover plates furnish slip resistant random hatch matrix or suitable pattern galvanized steel sidewalk cover plates fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of astm anum or astm anum grade num or num .
do not use diamond plate or surface applied slip resistant tapes films nonmetallic coatings or other similar materials .
fabricate cover plates in accordance with standard plans indexes num and num .
after shop fabrication hotdip galvanize cover plates in accordance with section num .
galvanized sidewalk cover plates shall have a minimum coefficient of friction on the top surface of num in dry condition and num in a wet condition as determined by astm fnum or astm fnum .
furnish flat head stainless steel sleeve anchors in accordance with astm fnum group num alloy num for attaching sidewalk cover plates .
install sleeve anchors in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num modular joint furnish modular joints meeting the requirements of this section .
submit manufacturer certification that modular joint components meet the following material requirements .
table num component material requirements solid separation beams steel extrusions support bars plate and milled steel shapes astm anum or astm anum grade num num return to table of contents table num component material requirements box seals astm dnum strip seals astm dnum seal adhesive astm dnum stud shear connectors and threaded studs astm anum stainless steel sliding plates astm anum type num ptfe sliding surface astm dnum provide seals with hardness type a durometer equal to num plus or minus num by astm dnum .
supply test results from the manufacturer verifying the maximum coefficient of friction between mating surfaces .
testing must be performed by an independent testing laboratory according to the manufacturers stated precompression values for the system to a minimum of two million cycles .
maximum allowed coefficient of friction is num .
bond ptfe polytetrafluorethylene using a heat cured high temperature epoxy capable of withstanding temperatures of minus numf to plus numf .
for springs bearing and equidistance devices i.e .
control springs use the same material composition and formulation manufacturer fabrication procedure and configuration as those used in the prequalification test .
components manufactured from polyurethane compounds are not permitted .
num calculations and shop drawings .
num all joint types with the exception of poured joints submit shop drawings in accordance with section num for any applicable joint system supplied .
for format and required details follow the aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration guideline for shop detail drawing presentation .
the following information must be included on the shop drawings num .
the name and address of the joint system manufacturer including the physical address where the fabrication is performed .
num .
the joint manufacturers instructions for proper installation including the proper width settings for a minimum numf temperature range .
shop drawings that are submitted without this information will be returned without review .
num .
show all materials including project specific details and dimensions .
include the joint model number and joint movement range .
num sidewalk cover plates submit shop drawings for sidewalk cover plates showing all materials project specific details and dimensions .
the submittal must include a certification from the manufacturer that the sidewalk cover plates meet the minimum coefficient of friction requirements .
num strip seals provide the apl number in the shop drawings .
num modular joints when support boxes are supported by the deck or abutment detail in the shop drawings a minimum of num inches between the bottom surfaces of the joint elements and the deck blockouts to allow easy placement of concrete and allow for proper consolidation of concrete under and around all parts of the joints .
detail in the shop drawings at least num inches of clear space between the support boxes or anchorages on the ends of support boxes and the periphery of the blockout to permit placing of concrete .
submittal of shop drawings must include a manufacturers installation manual in accordance with this section .
num return to table of contents include design calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of florida confirming that all load bearing components are in conformance with the requirements of this section .
num fabrication and installation .
num general install the joint in accordance with the specific requirements of this section the plan details the standard plans and the manufacturers installation instructions for the particular type of expansion joint to be installed .
num poured joint install the joint at the locations and in accordance with the details shown in the plans and the manufacturers recommendations .
num poured joint with backer rod system num casting joint opening when casting the bridge deck approach slab or raised sidewalk adjacent to the expansion joint at temperatures other than numf adjust the joint opening dim .
a as shown in standard plans index num at numf by the amount of the adjustment per numf shown in the structures plans poured expansion joint data table .
for temperatures above numf decrease the opening .
for temperatures below numf increase the opening .
num installation of poured joint system after deck profiling grinding and grooving operations are complete install poured joint with backer rod in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations when the joint opening is plus or minus num inch of the design joint opening dim a at numf shown in the structures plans poured expansion joint data table .
the minimum opening must not be less than num inch at the time of installation .
place poured joint material only when the ambient temperature is between numf and numf and is expected to rise for the next three hours minimum to provide for adequate joint opening and compression of the poured joint material during curing .
num strip seal system num elastomeric seal fabrication furnish continuous heavy duty bridge deck elastomeric seals sized in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to perform satisfactorily for the opening range shown .
minimum movement classification is num inches .
shop vulcanization is restricted to use on horizontal turns on skewed bridges at upturn ends where the horizontal turn angle is greater than num degrees .
field vulcanization is not permitted .
num edge rail fabrication num .
furnish extruded hot rolled or machined solid steel edge rails in accordance with astm anum grade num num or numw .
furnish edge rails with a minimum mass of num lbft excluding studs a minimum height of num inches a minimum thickness of num inch and a maximum top surface riding surface width of num inches .
edge rails manufactured from bent plate or built up pieces are not acceptable .
num .
furnish anchor studs in accordance with astm anum and electric arc endweld anchor studs with complete fusion .
anchor studs may be piggy backed to achieve required lengths .
num .
perform all shop welding in accordance with the bridge welding code ansiaashtoaws dnum .
do not weld to surfaces in contact with the elastomeric seal or the top surface riding surface except as shown in the shop splice detail .
do not weld inside seal cavity .
num .
fabricate edge rail assemblies in one piece including upturns .
splices in an individual joint are only permitted where a construction joint is specifically required by the plans joint segment length exceeds num feet or approved by the engineer in writing .
shop splice num return to table of contents sections of edge rail to obtain the required length by partial penetration double vgroove welds on prepared beveled edges and seal welds as shown in the shop splice detail .
weld all around the joint as far as practical to achieve a watertight seal .
do not use short pieces of edge rail less than num feet num inches long unless required at curbs sidewalks or phase construction locations .
num .
after shop fabrication hotdip galvanize edge rail in accordance with section num and the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
furnish temporary or sacrificial support brackets bolts clamps etc .
that are capable of resisting shipping handling and construction forces without damage to the edge rail assemblies or galvanized coating and are adjustable to account for variable temperature settings .
do not use temporary or sacrificial support brackets bolts clamps etc .
between the faces of the edge rails .
num .
clearly match mark corresponding edge rail assemblies with joint location and direction of stationing .
num installation num .
install the edge rail assemblies at proper grade and alignment before or after deck planing in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
when installed after deck planing and grinding install the edge rail assemblies in the blockouts on a profile tangent between the ends of the deck andor approach slab to within a plus num inch and minus num inch variation .
when installed before deck planing install the edge rail assemblies num inches plus or minus num inch below the top surface of the deck or approach slab to compensate for concrete removal during planing and grinding .
num .
bolt weld or clamp edge rail assemblies in position using temporary or sacrificial brackets as required .
for phased construction install edge rail assemblies in a given subsequent phase to align with those installed in an adjacent prior phase after deflection and rotation due to deck casting of adjoining spans has occurred .
num .
for installation of edge rail assemblies at temperatures other than numf adjust the opening of the joint dim .
a as shown in standard plans index num by the amount of the adjustment per numf shown in the structures plans strip seal expansion joint data table .
for temperatures above numf decrease the opening .
for temperatures below numf increase the opening .
num .
after galvanizing do not weld within num inches of edge rail surfaces exposed in the completed structure .
do not weld expansion joint components to or electrically ground to reinforcing steel or structural steel .
seal field butt joints and empty shipping and erection holes with caulk before placing deck concrete .
num .
protect galvanized edge rail assemblies during screeding operations per the manufacturers recommendations .
provide temporary blocking material in the edge rail seal cavities to prevent concrete intrusion during deck pour and finishing .
num .
loosen any temporary or sacrificial support brackets bolts clamps etc .
that span across the joint after initial set of concrete but not more than two hours after conclusion of concrete placement .
num .
install elastomeric seal after completion of deck casting .
remove all joint form material and blocking material prior to installing elastomeric seal .
field install elastomeric seal in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
thoroughly coat all contact surfaces between the elastomeric seal and the edge rail seal cavities with an adhesive lubricant before setting elastomeric seal in place .
num modular joints num return to table of contents num fabrication perform all steel fabrication in accordance with the requirements of section num .
after fabrication hotdip galvanize all nonstainless steel metal surfaces in accordance with section num .
joint systems must be designed in accordance with the latest edition of aashto lrfd bridge design specifications or as required by the contract documents .
supply joint systems for which identical fullsize specimens have been subjected to full life cycle fatigue testing .
obtain all joint system components from the same manufacturer fabricated at their approved corporate facilities using subcomponents meeting the testing requirements of this section .
except for sliding plates provide all load bearing structural steel components with a num inch minimum thickness in any direction .
construct edge rails consisting of a monolithic steel shape with a machined or extruded retainer cavity .
multiple component welded steel shapes to achieve a final member cross section or seal retainer cavity are not permitted .
attach separation beams to individual support bars with a complete joint penetration weld .
support each separation beam with a dedicated support bar connected by a complete joint penetration welded connection .
use of bolted connections yokes or other means to directly attach separation beams to support bars is not permitted .
maintain equal spacing between separation beams at all stages of movement .
contain support bars with bearings capable of transferring all imposed loads to the structure and allow the support bar to freely move within the limits of the expansion joint .
fabricate a full length modular joint system as one piece .
only a minimal number of splices in an individual joint may be permitted where a construction joint is specifically required by the plans joint segment length exceeds num feet or approved by the engineer in writing .
when phased construction is permitted or required by the contract documents fabricate each segment to exactly fit that portion of superstructure including sidewalks under construction in each specific phase .
connect segments with a bolted splice to ensure continuity .
fit segments with temporary seals .
lubricant adhesive is not required for temporary seals .
submit watertight seal details for the splice .
shop inspection will be conducted at the discretion of the engineer in accordance with article num .
fabricate final seal assembly as one single continuous component .
splicing of seals in the field is not permitted .
provide lifting devices and devices to maintain the preset opening of the joint at a uniform spacing of not greater than num feet along the length of the joint .
provide at least three of these preset opening devices per joint segment .
provide lifting and preset opening devices that function and then are removed without damaging the modular joint system assemblies or galvanized coating .
prior to shipment preset the joint opening in accordance with the joint opening as shown in the plans at numf .
prior to installation place the centerbeamsupport bar assembly on a flat surface to verify the support bars lay in a single plane with no part of the bottom of any support bar exceeding num inches off the surface .
the subassembly may be straightened .
no more than three attempts may be made to heatstraighten the subassembly .
num return to table of contents polish stainless steel sliding surfaces to an num inch mirror finish .
num installation clean any metal surface component exhibiting surface rust and field metalize in accordance with section num .
replace any component exhibiting pitting andor section loss with a new component .
install the joint system in strict compliance with the manufacturers instructions in the shop drawings and as directed by the manufacturers installation technician .
num manufacturers installation manual submit the manufacturers installation manual at least two weeks prior to installation activities containing complete and detailed installation instructions for the modular expansion joint supplied by the contractor .
the manual must include stepbystep installation instructions and all related manufacturers recommendations including bridge deck pouring sequence restraints finishing etc .
for successful installation and long term operation and serviceability of the joint .
num manufacturers installation technician provide for a manufacturers installation technician under the direct employ of the manufacturer to be on the jobsite prior to the first joint installation and in sufficient time to train the contractors joint installation crews using the shop drawings and the manufacturers installation manual .
the manufacturers installation technician must remain on the jobsite and be present for all modular joint installation activities for a minimum of the first two joints for each of the contractors installation crews .
the manufacturers installation technician will submit written certification to the engineer that the contractors installation process follows the requirements outlined in the manufacturers installation manual .
num field inspection the engineer will inspect the joint system for proper alignment complete bond between neoprene gland seal and steel and proper stud placement and effectiveness .
bends or kinks in the joint system steel are not allowed except as necessary to follow roadway grades .
straightening of any bends or kinks in the steel whether intentional or inadvertent is not allowed .
any joint system exhibiting bends or kinks will be rejected removed from the jobsite and replaced by a new joint system .
match joint system to the finished roadway profile and grades before final acceptance .
restore bond of any neoprene gland seal found not fully bonded to steel .
visually inspect all stud welds .
test a minimum of num of the total number of stud welds at the discretion and direction of the engineer .
any stud found to not have a complete end weld as evidenced by a ringing sound when struck by a hammer will require replacement .
any stud located more than one inch in any direction from location shown in the shop drawings will require removal and a new stud placed in the proper location .
num width for installation at temperatures other than numf adjust opening of the joint as shown in the contract documents by amount of adjustment per numf shown in the contract documents .
for temperatures above numf decrease the opening .
for temperatures below numf increase the opening .
release all support brackets as the concrete is being placed and no later than when the concrete takes initial set .
remove opening devices immediately after the concrete is placed .
num permanent seals when phased construction is necessary remove temporary neoprene seals and replace with full width permanent seals after joint system is completely installed over full width of structure including sidewalks .
num return to table of contents clean sspcspnum all metal surfaces which will be in contact with permanent seals to visual standard cspnum as defined by sspc vis num .
num final placement after modular joint system has been set to its final line and grade fill any deck joint blockouts with class ii bridge deck concrete or as specified in the plans .
prepare contact surfaces in accordance with the same procedure described in this section .
finish the uppermost surface of concrete placement in accordance with requirements of num except that machine finishing is not required .
unless otherwise noted in the plans include the cost of the pourback in the unit bid price of superstructure concrete .
construction loads are not allowed on the modular joint for num hours after complete installation unless approved by the engineer .
in the event it is necessary to cross the modular joint before the num hour prohibition bridge over the joint in a manner approved by the engineer .
num acceptance acceptance of fabricated joint systems will be based on the engineers visual inspection at the jobsite and in accordance with requirements of this section .
submit certified mill test reports to the engineer for all steel used to fabricate the joint system .
num watertight integrity test test full length of joint system for watertight integrity in accordance with this section no more than five working days after each joint system installation is completed .
in case of phased construction perform this test after the full length of joint is installed after all applicable phases .
for the first two joints perform the watertight integrity test and inspection in the presence of the manufacturers installation technician and the engineer .
for all remaining joints perform the watertight integrity test and inspection in the presence of the engineer .
cover full length of joint with either water ponded to a minimum num inch depth or continuously flowing water directly over full plan area of joint for a num minute minimum duration .
inspect underdeck surfaces beneath the joint for any evidence of dripping water or moisture for the num minute duration of water application and for num minutes after water supply is removed .
watertight integrity of joint system is interpreted as absolutely no free dripping water or moisture on underdeck surfaces beneath joint .
document date time and location of joint inspections and submit the report to the engineer .
repair joint integrity at every location exhibiting free dripping water or moisture identified during the watertight integrity test and subsequently retest subject to same conditions and consequences as the initial test .
retest and repair until joints pass the watertight integrity test .
num method of measurement .
the poured joint without backer rod will be incidental to the concrete work and included in the cost of the concrete .
poured joints with backer rod strip seal joints and modular expansion joints will be the plan quantity length of each type of joint constructed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
num basic items of joints .
the contract unit price per foot for joints will be full compensation for all work and materials necessary for the complete installation .
such price and payment will include but not be limited to the following specific incidental work num .
any work required to clean and prepare the adjacent bridge deck deck block out or deck joint gap .
num return to table of contents num .
any work to replace any rejected joints .
num .
any repairs to the galvanizing on metallic joint components .
num .
any additional work or materials required for nonstandardized or special construction or installation techniques .
num .
any cost of erection and removal of any temporary supports which may be necessary for ensuring proper alignment and positioning of the joint relative to the bridge deck .
num .
any sidewalk cover plates required .
num .
all costs associated with the manufacturers installation technician .
num .
all work related to performance of the watertight integrity test and any necessary repairs and retesting .
num payment items payment shall be made under item no .
num num bridge deck expansion joint per foot .
num return to table of contents section num bitumen coating and polyethylene sheeting on concrete piles num description .
furnish and apply bituminous coating and primer or install polyethylene sheeting and lubricant to prestressed concrete piles .
num materials .
num bituminous coating use an asphalt type bituminous coating meeting the requirements of section num with a minimum viscosity at numf of num poises and a maximum of num poises .
apply bituminous coating uniformly over an asphalt primer .
num primer meet the requirements of astmd num .
num polyethylene sheeting use polyethylene sheeting that is num mils thick and is clean new and has a smooth surface .
num lubricant use a lubricant between the two layers of sheeting that is either a vegetable oil or other approved environmentally and functionally acceptable lubricant .
num construction requirements .
before surfaces are coated with bitumen dry and thoroughly clean them of dust and loose materials .
do not apply primer or bitumen in wet weather or when the temperature is below numf .
apply the primer to the surfaces and allow it to dry completely before applying the bituminous coating .
apply primer uniformly at the quantity of num galnum ftnum of surface .
apply bitumen uniformly at a temperature of not less than numf or more than numf and apply either by mopping brushing or spraying at the project site .
completely fill all holes or depressions in the concrete surface with bitumen .
apply the bituminous coating to a minimum dry thickness of num inch but not less than num galnum ftnum .
store bitumen coated piles before driving and protect piles from sunlight and heat .
ensure that pile coatings are not damaged during storage hauling or handling .
take appropriate measures to preserve and maintain the bitumen coating .
at the time of pile driving ensure that the bitumen coating has a minimum dry thickness of num inch .
if necessary recoat the piles at no cost to the department to comply with the requirements of this section .
ensure that all surfaces to be wrapped with polyethylene sheeting are dry and thoroughly cleaned of dust and loose materials .
place the sheeting on the pile to the limits shown on the plans .
wrap the pile with a minimum of num num wraps of sheeting .
apply a uniform coating of a lubricant between the first and the second layers .
ensure that this coating fully covers the entire surface of the first layer of sheeting .
once the pile has been wrapped with the minimum of two and onequarter wraps of sheeting secure the sheeting with tape or other means that does not damage the sheeting or restrict its movement .
do not place any tape or other material other than the lubricant between the first and second layers of sheeting .
protect the sheeting from construction damage .
where sheeting has been damaged completely remove the damaged sheet of polyethylene and replace it at no cost to the department as directed by the engineer .
where the sheeting will not wrap the specified limits of the pile in one sheet overlap the previous sheet with each subsequent sheet by num inches .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
num bitumen coating the quantity will be paid for by the square yard of coating in place on concrete pile surfaces .
num polyethylene sheeting the quantity will be paid for by the square yard of wrapped concrete pile surfaces .
num basis of payment .
num bitumen coating price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and doing all the work involved in applying the bituminous coating and primer as specified in the contract documents .
num polyethylene sheeting price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials including primer and lubricant tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in installing the polyethylene sheeting and lubricant as specified in the contract documents .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num bitumen coating on concrete piles per square yard .
item no .
num num polyethylene sheeting on concrete piles per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals num description .
num general prepare fabricate assemble erect and perform all nondestructive testing for structural steel or miscellaneous metal structures or portions thereof in accordance with the contract documents .
obtain structural steel and miscellaneous metals from a fabricator that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
fabricators seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
as used in this specification the following terms shall apply main or primary loadcarrying member or component this designation refers to the following num .
longitudinal or transverse rolled beams or fabricated girders i or box curved or straight num .
all truss members not designated as cross frames num .
cross frames diaphragms and connection plates of horizontally curved beams or girders num .
rib members of steel arches num .
bracing members subjected to and specifically designed for traffic live load andor other loads num .
cross frames or diaphragms at pier and abutment supports of tub or box girders trapezoidal members and their connection plates num .
attachments and components of the above such as splice cover cross frame and diaphragm connection and gusset plates but not transverse and bearing stiffeners unless acting as a cross frame or diaphragm num .
cables moment release pins and links and hangers num .
all steel substructure members except those designated as secondary in the contract documents num .
other members as may be identified in the contract documents miscellaneous components this designation refers to but is not limited to the following num .
ladders num .
platforms num .
bearings num .
railings num .
end wall grates num .
roadway gratings num .
metal drainage components num .
steel expansion joint and components num fabrication categories as a prerequisite for being on the departments production facility listing fabricators must currently be accredited in accordance with one of the programs in table num by fabrication categorycategories of the products that they are producing .
num return to table of contents fabricators are required to submit their proposed fabrication quality control qc plan for review by the department .
table num fabrication categories structure type accepted accreditation program advanced bridge tub or trapezoidal box girders closed boxed girders large or nonpreassembled truss bridges arches cable supported bridges moveable bridges and bridges with curved radii tighter than defined for intermediate bridge .
aisc advanced bridge intermediate bridge a rolled beam bridge with field or shop slices either straight or with a radius over num feet a builtup ishaped plate girder bridge with constant web depth except for dapped ends with or without splices either straight or with a radius over num feet a buildup ishaped plate girder with variable web depth e.g .
haunched either straight or with a radius over num feet a truss bridge with a length of num feet or less that is entirely or substantially preassembled at the certified facility and shipped in no more than three subassemblies .
aisc intermediate bridge simple bridge unspliced rolled sections and pedestrian bridges aisc simple bridge highway metal components including aluminum fence materials guardrails handrails reinforcing steel rebar casing pipes metal drainage items stayinplace forms light poles high mast poles metal buildings steel strain poles bridge rail stairs walkways grid decks scuppers expansion joints bearings ballast plates complex expansion joints high load multirotational bearings bracing not designed for primary loads diaphragms cross frames and lateral bracing moveable bridge machinery and sign or signal structures erected partially or completely over the traveled roadway or mounted on bridges .
aisc highway metal components iso num aws cwf notes an aisc fracture critical fc endorsement is required for all fc work .
other accreditations programs may be submitted to the fdot state materials office for review and consideration in addition to the programs listed in the table above .
num materials .
provide the materials specified in the contract documents in accordance with sections num num astm anum and aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
fabricate all unpainted steel elements using steels with weathering characteristics as defined in astm anum for grades with a w suffix .
structural components designated as fracture critical shall conform to the provisions of the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code clause numaashtoaws fracture critical control plan for nonredundant members in addition to the requirements of the contract documents .
meet the additional following requirements num return to table of contents steel and miscellaneous metal items section num material testing and certifications section num galvanizing section num structural coatingssection num structural coating materials section num num preassembly requirements .
num shop drawings when shop drawings are required submit such drawings in accordance with section num .
for drawing presentation format refer to the aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration guidelines for shop detail drawing presentation .
num welding procedures submit all shop and field welding procedures to the engineer .
such procedures shall contain a notation that they have been reviewed by a certified welding inspector and shall be signed dated and stamped accordingly .
num preassembly meeting prior to commencing work a meeting shall be held between the contractor and the engineer .
representatives of the fabricator suppliers or subcontractors may attend the meeting if requested by the engineer or contractor .
during this meeting the engineer may review various aspects of the job including but not limited to any of the following num .
plant and personnel certification .
num .
organizational structure of contractor personnel .
num .
traceability of materials to prequalified fabricator .
num .
shop drawing requirements submittal review and approval process .
num .
fabrication procedures especially shop assembly welding and painting .
num .
sampling and testing procedures .
num .
project specific areas of concern for fabrication inspection and testing .
num .
handling of material test reports .
num .
work schedule .
num .
lines of communication .
num .
availability of quality control and verification inspectors during specific fabricationerection operations .
num .
loading and transporting .
num .
handling of nonconformance and repair issues .
num .
special requirements .
num .
consistency between fabrication shop drawings and the erection plan specifically between the fabrication shop blocking diagrams and available site locations for temporary support during erection .
num access to fabrication facilities provide the engineer full access of facilities or sites where the product is being stored fabricated assembled coated or erected .
provide and maintain office facilities at the fabrication facility for the departments inspectors that ensure a reasonable amount of privacy are clean properly illuminated heated or airconditioned as necessary and are relatively free of noise dust and odors .
locate the office reasonably close to the work and provide access any time fabrication assembly or erection operations are in progress .
provide a desk chair and a fourdrawer locking file cabinet for the use by each inspector and the engineer .
provide a telephone within the office with an outside line suitable for modem communication .
provide ready access to adequate num return to table of contents parking fax and copy machines and clean contractormaintained restrooms within a reasonable distance to the office .
the engineer may observe any or all activities and perform nondestructive testing of materials components and the fabricated product to the extent considered necessary to confirm the conformance with contract documents .
num notification prior to commencement of assembly notify the engineer at least one week prior to beginning assembly when conducted instate and at least two weeks prior to beginning assembly when conducted outofstate .
num shop workmanship and assembly .
num handling transporting and storage of materials num general handle transport and store plates shapes assemblies fastener components and other parts in a manner that protects them from damage and facilitates subsequent inspections in a safe manner .
provide storage which will keep materials assemblies other components and parts clean and free from dirt grease other foreign matter unacceptable corrosion or coating deterioration and any other adverse environmental conditions .
num bulk materials ensure that all bulk materials such as shear studs are stored together in individual lots and that the outside of each container has a list and description of the contents .
maintain a separate list of the weights of all tools and erection materials .
num fastener assemblies bolts nuts and washers transport and store fastener assemblies in sealed watertight containers .
label the side of each container with the suppliers name and lot identification number and marked to identify the contents and size of the fastener components .
ensure that all surfaces of the nuts are lubricated prior to their placement in watertight containers .
provide containers for components that are capable of protecting them from moisture and other harmful materials .
maintain containers in their sealed conditions until they are opened for use at their assembly locations .
do not remove more fastener assemblies from the protected area than can be installed and tightened during a work shift .
leave the containers unopened until needed for assembly .
at the end of the work shift return unused fastener assemblies to the protected storage area for future use .
protect opened storage containers from contamination .
num coatings store coatings in accordance with sections num and num and the manufacturers recommendations .
notify the engineer if the manufacturers recommendations vary from that provided in the contract documents .
num anchor rods and nuts ship anchor rods and nuts as an assembly .
washers may be shipped separate from the assembly .
num material traceability num general all materials arriving at the shop shall be properly identified in accordance the requirements of astm anum .
document all main loadcarrying member material highstrength fastener assemblies and weld materials incorporated into the work through the entire fabrication process .
document this material traceability in a report type format that correlates heat numbers to their respective locations in the completed members .
submit diagrams and sketches as requested by the engineer for clarity .
at the fabrication facility maintain the records of the material testing and certification processes and componentpart identification as part of the fabricators permanent num return to table of contents project records for a period of not less than two years as measured from the last shipment of materials from the fabricators facility .
submit all projectrelated records to the engineer .
mark the weight on members weighing more than three tons in a visible location .
num match marking of members and assemblies match mark all connecting members or parts that have been reamed or drilled while assembled .
the fabricator shall submit a diagram showing all marks and clearly indicate the location of all the marks on the shop drawings .
use painted marks attached metal tags other durable methods which do not degrade the finish of the piece or lowstress type steel die stamps to identify and match mark pieces .
if steel die stamps are used they must be blunt nosed or interrupted dot dies manufactured to produce impressions that are rounded at the bottom of the impression .
remark coated type markings as necessary to maintain continuity in traceability .
mark splice plates and girders so that upon erection the mark on the splice plate is located opposite a matching mark on the girder .
place the mark on web splice plates midway down the long side of the plate on either the right or left side to correspond with the girder to which the splice plate will be temporarily attached for shipping to the erection site .
make a matching stamp on the girder web opposite the mark on the splice plate .
place the mark on top or bottom flange splice plates on the right or left end of the plate corresponding to the girder to which the plate will be attached for shipment to the erection site .
place a corresponding mark on the girder flange opposite the mark in the splice plate .
as an alternate location for tub girder bottom flange splice plates place the mark midway down the long side of the plate on either the right or left side to correspond with the girder to which the splice plate will be temporarily attached for shipping to the erection site .
make a matching mark on the girder flange opposite the mark on the splice plate .
mark girders and beams on the left end according to the orientation shown in the shop drawings near the top flange .
mark diaphragms in the middle upper portion of the web .
mark crossframes in the middle of the top or bottom horizontal member .
when heat numbers and other identification marking are applied by die stamping to fracture critical members low stress dies shall be used .
lowstress die stamp markings applied to fracture critical members shall be placed in locations or zones shown or described in the approved shop drawings .
lowstress or compression areas are preferred .
ensure that during fabrication the heat number is maintained on each primary loadcarrying component by paint until the component is permanently joined into a piece marked member or assembly .
num workmanship num cutting shearing and machining cutting including burning and sawing shearing and machining shall be accomplished in accordance with the aashtoaws num bridge welding code and the following requirements plane mill grind or thermally cut the sheared edges of main loadcarrying member plate components greater than num inch thick to a depth of num inch .
cut and fabricate steel plates so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the member or component main stress .
for flanges and webs the num return to table of contents direction of rolling is parallel to the flanges unless noted otherwise in the contract documents .
web splice plates may be rolled parallel to their length .
num bending num cold bending fracture critical and non fracture critical plates and bars shall be cold bent unless otherwise permitted according to the provisions of section num .
the minimum bend radii measured to the concave face of the plate shall be taken as numt for all grades and thicknesses of steel conforming to structural steel for bridges aashto mnummm num astm anumanumm where t is the thickness of the plate in inches .
for crossframe or diaphragm connection plates up to num inches the minimum bending radii may be taken as numt .
for all other grades of steel the minimum bend radii recommendations from the plate fabricator shall be followed but the radii shall not be less than the minimums specified herein .
wherever possible bend lines shall be oriented perpendicular to the direction of final rolling of the plate .
if the bend lines are parallel to the direction of final rolling the minimum bend radii shall be increased to numt .
num hot bending fracture critical and nonfracture critical plates and bars may be bent hot subject to the approval of the engineer .
heatshrink methods as described in num are also permitted .
if hot bending is to be employed the heating and bending procedure shall be submitted for review and approval by the engineer .
the plates and bars shall be bent hot at a temperature above the blue brittle temperature of steel num f not to exceed the temperature limits in table num .
the minimum radii of the hot bend must satisfy the requirements of num .
num straightening member components such as plates angles or shapes are to be straightened before the parts are assembled .
perform straightening such that no cracking or other damage occurs in the part .
if heat is to be used for straightening follow the provisions of num .
num heat application num general at various points during the fabrication of structural steel applications of heat may be necessary for hotbending cambering curving or straightening .
use the temperature limits and guidelines given in this section unless alternate procedures have been approved by the engineer .
routine straightening of material other than quenched and tempered material shall be done in accordance with the temperature limits and guidelines as specified herein but do not require a submitted procedure .
heat curving may be used in conjunction with a cutcurve procedure in which a portion of the curvature is obtained by cutting the plates to all or part of the required radius except as limited by num .
num heating process and equipment num maximum temperatures the maximum allowable temperature to which the material can be heated is given in table num maximum temperature limits for heat applications .
table num maximum temperature limits for heat applications astm a num grade maximum temperature f num num nums numw hps numw num num return to table of contents table num maximum temperature limits for heat applications hps numw hps numw num num timing of heat applications conduct heating operations prior to the application of coatings .
num allowable preload stresses preload compressive stresses will be permitted up to num times the minimum specified yield strength fy of the material .
this stress limit is applicable to all steels covered by this specification as listed in table num .
if jacks are used energize and lock off prior to the application of heat .
num heating tips apply heat using orifice tips only .
select tip sizes proportional to the thickness of the heated material .
num torches manipulate the heating torches to guard against general and surface overheating .
in addition place heat reflective sheet material against the web before applying heat to the inside flange surface .
when heating the inside flange surface point the torches to prevent applying heat directly to the web .
num heating patterns fundamental heating patterns such as vee line edge spot and strip may be used separately or in combination .
mark vee and strip heat patterns on the material surfaces prior to heating .
when heating bring the steel within the planned pattern to the specified heating temperature as rapidly as possible without overheating the steel .
apply heat in accordance with the approved procedure .
num thin wide plates prevent buckling of thin wide plates by not applying excessive heat .
num verification of temperatures use temperature sensitive crayons pyrometers or infrared noncontact thermometers for verifying temperatures during heating operations .
when heating patterns are used make regular verifications of the temperatures throughout the pattern .
remove the heating flame from the material before taking measurements .
num cooling prior to the use of any artificial cooling allow steel to cool below numf .
use only dry compressed air .
do not quench with water or a water and air mixture .
num reheating reheat only after the material has cooled below numf .
num over heating the engineer may reject the product if any portion of the material is exposed to heating higher than the allowable temperature .
num heatcurving of bridge members weak axis shaping num general rolled beams and girders may be heat curved at the job site provided that the heating is performed in accordance with the engineers approval .
num sequence of operations heat curve members prior to the attachment of longitudinal stiffeners .
num web position when the radius is less than num feet heat curve members with the web in the horizontal position or preloaded to induce stress prior to heating .
otherwise members may be heatcurved with the web in either the vertical or horizontal position .
num return to table of contents num subsequent heats if multiple locations are to be heated do not reheat the same location until after at least three heats at other locations .
num locating heating patterns space the heating patterns along the full length of each flange to produce a circular not parabolic curvature .
adjust the heating patterns to produce the necessary curvature .
compensate for differences in flange thickness and width as necessary .
use enough heating patterns in each piece to eliminate chording effects .
num minimum radius for heatcurving heatcurving of beams and girders is allowed when the horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of the member web is greater than both values calculated by equations num and num below and greater than num feet at any and all cross sections throughout the length of the member .
do not heat curve steels with a minimum specified yield strength greater than num ksi other than astm anum grade hps numw .
t f bd r y num in .
equation num fy b r num in .
equation num where fy specified minimum yield point of member web ksi  ratio of the total cross section area to the crosssectional area of both flanges b width of the widest flange inch d clear distance between flanges inch t web thickness inch r radius inch .
in addition to the above requirements do not heat curve if the radius is less than num feet when the flange thickness exceeds num inches or the flange width exceeds num inches .
num heatcambering strong axis shaping num general procedures for cambering of builtup plate girders shall be submitted as a part of the producer quality control qc plan .
in the procedures address any proposed preloading and heat application and control .
minor heat adjustments in camber at the finishing stage of the girder do not require approval if the patterns and temperatures are followed in accordance with the approved procedures .
do not utilize heatcambering as the primary source of vertical camber in horizontally curved main loadcarrying members cut the web plate to the required position .
only use heatcambering on horizontally curved main members to adjust cut cambering with the approval of the engineer .
num web position support members to be heat cambered with the web vertical .
space supports to take maximum advantage of dead load in the member prior to the application of heat .
num return to table of contents num subsequent heats if multiple locations are to be heated do not reheat the same location until after at least three heats at other locations .
num rolled beams rolled beams may be heatcambered to provide the required curvature at the producing mill .
attach all detail material such as connection plates bearing stiffeners and gusset plates after the beam has been heatcambered .
num heatstraightening damaged structural steel num general submit procedures for heatstraightening for the engineers review prior to beginning the work .
describe in detail the distortion to be corrected and all details for preloading heating cooling verifying final dimensions and nondestructive testing .
num cracking as a minimum visually examine all heat straightened areas .
notify the engineer when suspected areas of cracking are found .
examine these areas by one or more of the following methods as directed by the engineer num .
visual examination num .
liquid penetrant examination num .
magnetic particle examination num .
ultrasonic examination num .
radiographic examination num restraining forces restraining forces usually jacks shall be set to restrain the steel during heating but allow free contraction during cooling .
in addition apply the restraining forces in a direction tending to restore the member and limit the magnitude so that the material is not overstressed during heating .
num heating heat the steel in a single pass following the specified pattern and allow it to cool to below numf prior to reheating .
select heating patterns and sequences appropriate for the type of damage and shape of the cross section .
simultaneous vee heats may be used provided the clear spacing between vees is greater than the width of the plate element .
num subsequent repair heat cambered members damaged after cambering may be repaired .
however do not repair previously heatstraightened members in the same region of damage without the approval of the engineer .
num heat treatment num general when any special form of heat treatment is required it will be described in the contract documents .
perform heat treatments prior to any boring machining or straightening operations .
num stress relief where required perform thermal stress relief in accordance with the procedure outlined in the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
provide welding materials consistent with the stress relieving process utilized .
num normalizing and annealing where required by the contract documents perform normalizing and annealing as defined in astm anum .
maintain temperatures uniformly throughout the furnace during heating and cooling so that the temperatures at any points on the member do not differ by more than numf .
num contact and bearing surfaces provide surface finishes of bearings base plates and other contact surfaces in accordance with the ansi surface roughness requirements as defined in ansi bnum surface roughness waviness and lay part i given in table num ansi surface roughness requirements .
num return to table of contents table num ansi surface roughness requirements steel slabs ansi num microinch heavy plates in contact with shoes to be welded ansi num microinch milled ends to compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners or rockers ansi num microinch bridge rollers and rockers ansi num microinch sliding bearings ansi num microinch pins and pin holes ansi num microinch num cleaning and coating including galvanizing num general clean and coat the work in accordance with num andor num and sections num and num .
num removal of lubricants remove lubricants from the exposed surfaces of installed fastener assemblies and other surfaces in accordance with the approved producer qc plan or the paint manufacturers recommendations prior to painting .
demonstrate the procedures to the engineer prior to preparations for painting .
bring to the engineers attention any manufacturers processes or procedures that conflict with those specified in the contract documents .
num bolt holes num general unless shown otherwise in the contract documents the bolt hole geometry is to be as shown in table num bolt hole geometry .
table num bolt hole geometry bolt diameter d inch standard diameter inch oversize diameter inch shortslotted width inch by length inch longslotted width inch by length inch num num num num x num num x num num num num num num x num num x num num num num num num x num num x num num num num num num num x num num num x num num num num num num num num num x num num num num x num num num num d num d num d num x d num d num x num x d note except as shown elsewhere in the contract documents bolt holes in the connections of primary members are to be standard size .
num holes tolerances and quality make bolt and anchor rod holes using any method suitable to the fabricator and as specified below except holes for high strength fasteners in main or primary loadcarrying members which are not to be punched full size but may be thermally cut in accordance with num and ground smooth with the approval of the engineer .
the misalignment of holes in a bolt group relative to the same holes in the component or components it is joined to in a connection shall not exceed num inch for num of the bolt holes in that group .
bolt holes are to be normal to the work and have no tears num return to table of contents cracks fins dirt loose rust burrs or other anomalies and the surface is to be flat within a slope of num .
bolt holes are to be round within plus or minus num inch and within plus or minus num inch of the specified size .
for subsize holes a pin num inch smaller than the subsize holes must be able to pass through all assembled plies in at least num of the locations prior to reaming .
holes inclined more than num degrees to a surface in any direction must have a hardened beveled washer provided at that face .
unless specified elsewhere in the contract documents it is not required to coat the inside of the bolt holes .
num slotted holes slots may be made by a single punch or by joining two adjacent drilled or punched holes when punching is permitted .
when joining holes thermal cutting is to follow the common tangent to the two holes and this cut is to be ground .
do not make slotted holes more than num inch in width nor num inch greater in length than specified .
grind smooth any flame cut portions of the slot to ansi num microinches .
num holes in plates not subjected to tensile stress large diameter holes in heavy plates not subjected to tensile stress such as bearing plates and slotted holes in materials not subject to tensile stress may be thermally cut followed by appropriate grinding to smooth the periphery .
stop the practice if gouges or other defects occur or if directed by the engineer .
these holes are to meet the following criteria do not thermally cut holes in astm anum gradehps numw steel .
provide hole centerlines aligned within plus or minus num inch of theoretical .
the inside cut faces of the hole are to be perpendicular to the plane of the plate .
eightyfive percent of the open hole diameter is not to exceed that specified in the contract documents plus or minus num inch .
local notches gouges or the maximum diameter shall not exceed that specified in the contract documents plus or minus num inch .
num punching material forming parts of a member composed of five thicknesses or less of metal may be punched fullsize .
when more than five thicknesses of material are joined material shall be subdrilled or subpunched and then reamed fullsize or drilled fullsize while in assembly .
subpunched or subdrilled holes when required must be at least num inches smaller than the finished hole size .
holes in cross frames lateral bracing components and the corresponding holes in connection plates between girders and cross frames or lateral components may be punched full size .
holes in longitudinal main loadcarrying members transverse floorbeams and any components designated as fracture critical fcms shall not be punched fullsize .
num edge distance provide minimum asfabricated distance from the center of a bolt hole to an edge as given in table num edge distances unless otherwise shown in the contract documents .
table num edge distances fastener size inch sheared edge inch rolled edges of plates or shapes or gas cut edges inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents num bolted splice gaps unless shown elsewhere in the contract documents the tolerance for bolted splice gaps open distance faceofwebflange to faceof webflange shall be from zero no gap between faces to a maximum of num inch greater than the gap shown on the contract plans .
if no gap is shown in the contract plans assume that a nominal gap of num inch is required .
in addition meet the edge distance requirements provided above .
num maximum edge distance unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the maximum fabricated distance from any edge to the center of the hole shall be num times the thickness of the thinnest outside plate not to exceed num inches with no additional tolerance allowed .
num spacing of bolt holes space bolt holes within plus or minus num inch of that shown in the contract documents .
num holding of plies when drilling or reaming is accomplished through multiple plies of material do not hold the materials together by welds not specified in the contract drawings .
num member geometry num general num tolerances provide dimensional tolerances as follows num .
rolled shapes plates bars wide flange sections and miscellaneous steel in accordance with astm anum num .
fabricate girders in accordance with the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code and as described below num .
for builtup members not specifically covered by aashtoaws dnum apply aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code except as noted below or as directed by the engineer .
num camber and sweep tolerances for camber and sweep of continuous and simply supported girders of any shape shall be as described in the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
the camber and sweep tolerances for steel pier caps shall be the same as those specified for girders .
measure sweep for horizontally curved members from the theoretical centerline for comparison to the aforementioned requirements .
num alternate sections rolled sections or fabricated sections of equal or slightly greater dimensions than the section specified may be proposed for the engineers approval .
changes that reduce fatigue resistance or significantly affect splice design or deflection will require complete design calculations .
num web flatness maximum deviation from flatness for webs of curved andor cambered sections shall be the same as for straight builtup girders .
measure curved girder web flatness using a straightedge oriented perpendicular to the flanges vertical flange to flange .
num girder length if measuring girder length with a device that is free of thermal effects appropriately adjust the measurements to the reference temperature shown in the contract documents .
measure the length of horizontally curved girders along the arc .
num specialty structures num box members as bent caps num tolerances unless otherwise shown in the contract documents submit tolerances for bearing planes and box twist to the engineer for review and num return to table of contents approval .
prior to submitting these tolerance values for approval coordinate between the erector and the fabricator .
num bearings unless otherwise specified in the contract documents each bearing is to be true to a tolerance of num inch across its entire width in either direction .
num beam trueness unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the plane of beam supports on the box girder the bearing area specifically attached to the box girder is to be true to the box girder bearing within num inch in the short direction and true to the vertical axis of the nesting girders those girders attached to or resting on the box girder within num inch .
num trapezoidal bridge members as a minimum trapezoidal bridge members tub or box girders shall meet aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code dimensional tolerances .
camber may be verified with the girder in its upright position supported to avoid dead load deflections .
num pinholes unless shown elsewhere in the contract documents bore pinholes num .
true to the specified diameter num .
smooth to ansi num num microinches num .
at right angles with the axis of the member num .
parallel with each other and num .
with a diameter of the pinhole not exceeding that of the pin by more than num inch for pins num inches or less in diameter or num inch for larger pins .
num truss chord joints abutting joints in truss chords not specified to be milltobear shall have openings of num inch plus or minus num inch .
abutting joints in truss chords specified to be milltobear shall be faced and brought into bearing .
when assembled provide num or more of the abutting surfaces in full contact .
allowable visible gaps shall not exceed num inch .
num horizontally curved beams and skewed steel girders account for torsion induced deflections for horizontally curved beams and skewed steel girders .
unless otherwise defined in the contract documents a horizontally curved beam or girder is a longitudinal or transverse bridge component with a radius less than num feet anywhere along its continuous length .
num shop assembly num general ensure the fit of all connections and the geometry of all components .
unless specified elsewhere in the contract documents check the fit of all longitudinal girderbeam lines in accordance with num .
perform this prior to transporting the pieces in question to the site for erection .
num progressive girder or truss assembly assemble the structure for a minimum of three spans panels field sections segments or longitudinal chords of the structure .
successive assemblies shall consist of at least one longitudinal segment of the previous assembly repositioned as necessary for accurate alignment plus two or more longitudinal segments added at the advancing end .
for entire structures less than num feet in length or less than three segments assemble the entire longitudinal line .
meet the requirements of num when utilizing computernumericallycontrolled drilling equipment .
when a transverse structural steel member or members is required for the continuation of the uninterrupted girder or beam line truss arch rib bent tower face or num return to table of contents rigid frame and is designated elsewhere in the contract documents to be shop assembled the fabricator may include this member or component in a separate subassembly and not the three segment longitudinal assembly discussed above .
if combined in a different subassembly include the longitudinal members or components as designated elsewhere in the contract documents to be shop assembled that frame directly into the transverse structural member .
do not include the transverse members in the longitudinal assembly unless directed so elsewhere in the contract documents or by the engineer .
account for end rotations and deflections as necessary and submit the procedure to the engineer for review .
num progressive chord assembly when specified elsewhere in the contract documents assemble the truss chords for a minimum of three panels or longitudinal segments of the structure .
successive assemblies shall consist of at least one longitudinal segment of the previous assembly repositioned as necessary for accurate alignment plus two or more longitudinal segments added at the advancing end .
for entire structures less than num feet in length or less than three segments assemble the entire longitudinal line .
meet the requirements of num when using computernumericallycontrolled drilling equipment .
account for transverse members indicted elsewhere in the contract documents to be included in the shop assembly as in num .
when assembled in accordance with this subsection the holes of the connections will be so located that they will be drilled to the final geometric angles .
this will require that the truss members when erected under the no load or practically no load or stress condition must be bent and forced to fit the end conditions .
this condition will introduce an initial reverse secondary stress that will theoretically wane when the structure assumes the loading for which it is cambered .
submit the procedure to the engineer for review .
num special complete structure assembly when specified elsewhere in the contract documents this type of shop assembly will include assembling the entire structure including the diaphragms cross frames integral steel substructure and floor components .
miscellaneous components are not included unless directed elsewhere in the contract documents .
establish procedures for each structure or structure type including consideration of incremental erection temporary field support locations stage construction and final tightening of field connections .
submit the procedures for review by the engineer .
num computernumericallycontrolled cnc drilling associated with progressive girder truss or chord assembly if the fabricator chooses to drill the holes in all plies of all connections of the continuous main girder or beam line truss arch rib bent tower face or rigid frame and any intersecting transverse members utilizing computercontrollednumerical drilling procedures piecewise assembly of the entire continuous girder or beam line truss arch rib bent tower face or rigid frame is not required if the following requirements are met prior to transporting to the site perform a check fit of the first three spans panels field sections segments or longitudinal chords or entire first bent tower face or rigid frame of the structure to ensure the accuracy of the cnc procedures and equipment .
as selected by and at the discretion of the engineer and prior to transporting to the site perform another check fit of a different assembly of three spans panels field sections segments or longitudinal chords or another entire bent tower face or rigid frame of the structure to ensure that the accuracy of the cnc procedures and equipment is maintained .
if either of the above fails to meet the contract requirements assemble the entire girder or beam line truss arch rib bent tower face or rigid frame as originally prescribed in num or num num return to table of contents num as prescribed elsewhere in the contract documents .
account for transverse members indicated elsewhere in the contract documents to be included in the shop assembly as in num num .
num evaluation of work the engineer will evaluate and accept materials and work conforming to the contract documents .
these evaluations may take place prior to or following delivery of the materials to the site of the structure .
materials or work that fails to meet contract requirements will be rejected .
the engineer may at his sole discretion permit further inspections and testing of materials or work that fail to meet contract requirements for acceptance .
the cost of such inspections and tests shall be borne by the contractor .
bring to the attention of the engineer all nonconforming work and or materials that can not be brought into conformance with the contract documents using preestablished procedures as outlined in the department approved producer qc plan .
submit the following information to the engineer a cover letter prepared on the contractors letterhead and addressed to the engineer briefly describing the nonconforming work and the proposed credit to the contract proportionate to the nonconformance .
for each fabricating facility and for each project within that fabrication facility submittals must be numbered consecutively beginning with the number num at the start of each project .
erectors will start with one for each individual project .
a completed department nonconforming structural steel and miscellaneous metal component data sheet prepared by the contractor and countersigned by the engineers designated representative to indicate agreement between the contractor and the department regarding the nonconformance not any solution resolution or credit .
if the contractor and the engineers designated representative are not in agreement regarding the nonconformance the engineers designated representative will either reject the submittal indicating the reasons for the rejection or modify the submittal and forward to the engineer .
in the event of modification the contractor will initial the submittal before being forwarded to the engineer thereby indicating the contractors concurrence with the modification .
a list of supporting information such as sketches documentation calculations pictures etc .
must be included in the appropriate space on the nonconforming component data sheet .
supporting information regarding contract document noncompliance in the form of separate documents is only necessary when space on the department nonconforming structural steel and miscellaneous metal component data sheet is inadequate for the required data .
all of the supporting information required for the form must be prepared by or under the supervision of the specialty engineer who will sign and seal the supporting information .
if requested by the engineer submit a structural and durability evaluation of the proposed repair andor remediation .
this evaluation must be conducted under the supervision of a specialty engineer and the submittal is to bear the specialty engineers signature and seal .
num member or component certification coordinate with the engineer to schedule final inspection of the completed work within two weeks prior to shipment or erection to verify that all contract document requirements have been met .
after verification that all contract document requirements have been met and all necessary repairs have been satisfactorily completed the quality control manager shall certify by initials andor signature such materials components or members .
the record shall include certification for num return to table of contents num.items being shipped or stored prior to final assembly .
affix a certification in the form of a stamp or tag in accordance with num and as indicated in the producer q c plan and with a copy of the certification placed in the contractors permanent project records num .
work being placed into its final position .
document in the contractors permanent project records .
submit a summary certification at the least once a month or with each payment request that includes the following or similar wording .
the undersigned being a responsible official of insert contractor identification certifies that the materials components or members listed herein have been produced under strict quality control and meet the requirements of the contract documents include a positive identification in the certification such that the applicable materials components andor members can be uniquely identified utilizing just the summary certification document .
the quality control manager shall sign this summary certification .
num bolted connections .
num general high strength bolts are described as follows num .
astm fnum grade anum or as grade anum num .
astm fnum grade anum or as grade anum use bolts as follows num .
use galvanized grade anum type num bolts in all field installed bolted structural steel connections for painted steel .
num .
use either black or galvanized grade anum type num bolts in all shop installed bolted structural steel connections that will be shop painted .
num .
use black grade anum type num bolts in all bolted structural steel connections for weathering steel that is to remain unpainted .
num .
use the bolts as specified for connected assemblies or parts that are designated as miscellaneous components where the fastener type is specified elsewhere in the contract documents .
tighten grade anum bolts in accordance with the procedures specified below for turnofnut or directtensionindicator dti tightening .
lubricate and maintain consistency in lubrication of fastener assembly during rotational capacity rc testing and installation .
assemblies that exhibit a loss of lubrication as determined by the engineer may be relubricated and retested prior to installation .
use grade anum bolts only with the approval of the engineer .
submit procedures in accordance with astm fnum grade anum for the handling lubrication installation tightening and testing of such bolts .
do not install grade anum bolts without prior approval of the procedures by the engineer .
when the engineer approves astm anum bolts for use in miscellaneous components tighten them such that the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
use three to five impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a person using an ordinary spud wrench to obtain a snug connection .
fasten aluminum other materials or assemblies of dissimilar materials in accordance with the contract documents .
install ordinary rough or machine bolts and nuts in accordance with the contract documents .
num testing num rotational capacity rc tests at the location of and prior to installation of permanent highstrength fasteners in main or primary loadcarrying member num return to table of contents connections perform rc tests in accordance with fm num for long bolts or fm num for short bolts to ensure that the fasteners are capable of developing the specified strength and that the fasteners are properly lubricated .
as a minimum test two assemblies per lot designation .
the bolt nut and washer shall come from the same lot and be packed in the same container or group of containers assigned the same lot except in special cases where nuts and washers have only one production lot number for each size .
short bolts may also be tested using fm num with dtis calibrated with long bolts installed in a tension measuring device .
washers are required for rc tests even though they may not be required for jobsite installation .
where washers are not required for jobsite installation lot identification is not required .
the washer coating shall be the same as that for the bolt and nut .
if any of the required tests fails the entire lot will be rejected .
num verification of direct tension indicator dti device performance on a daily basis when dti devices are being installed and at the location of installation perform dti verification tests in accordance with fm num .
perform this test on a minimum of two highstrength fastener assemblies from each fastener assembly lot and position of the dti prior to production installation .
if either assembly fails test additional fastener assembly lotdti combinations as requested by the engineer to verify that the requirements of the contract documents have been satisfied .
these two tests are in addition to the rc tests required in num .
if after additional testing the dti fails to meet the requirements of fm num the lot will be rejected by the engineer .
num reuse and retightening do not reuse grade anum bolts or galvanized grade anum bolts .
black grade anum bolts with free spinning nuts may be reused one time with the engineers approval .
previously tightened bolts that may have been loosened by the tightening of adjacent bolts can be further tightened from the original position .
ensure proper lubrication prior to retightening .
discard and replace fractured or damaged bolts .
num assembly of bolted connections num general verify that the faying surfaces are in accordance with the contract documents are free of dirt or other foreign materials and that the geometry of the bolt holes and the connection meets the requirements of num .
install fastener assembly components of the same lot and of the size and quality specified in the contract documents .
provide final bolts cylindrical erection pins or other fitup bolts as indicated in the erection plan .
when it is impractical to turn the nut tighten the fastener by turning the bolt while preventing the nut from rotating .
during this tightening operation do not allow the rotation of the part of the fastener assembly not turned by the wrench .
num preparation of faying surfaces provide coated and noncoated faying surfaces in accordance with the contract documents .
faying surfaces specified as blast cleaned must satisfy sspc spnum nearwhite blast cleaning .
when painting of the slipcritical faying surface of bolted connections is required use only the prime coat .
prepare and coat the faying surfaces prior to installation of the fasteners .
provide certification of the slip critical classification required in the contract documents .
submit certification to the engineer that galvanized faying surfaces meet or exceed a class c slip critical classification unless a different classification is required num return to table of contents elsewhere in the contract documents .
mechanically roughen galvanized faying surfaces in accordance with the galvanizers recommendations .
num reaming do not over size bolt holes by reaming or any other method without the approval of the engineer .
num drifting do not over size stretch or otherwise damage bolt holes by improper and excessive drifting .
num splice plate filler material unless otherwise specified in the contract documents provide filler material edges within num inch of the adjacent splice material edge .
where required for proper alignment at a bolted flange splice additional filler material may be added provided that the total thickness of filler plates is less than num inch .
num installation of fastener assemblies unless shown otherwise in the erection plan install the bolts of the connection by progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges .
install bolts in all holes of the connection and bring them to a snug tight condition .
following the sequence indicated in the erection plan further tighten all the bolts in the connection .
for grade anum bolts obtain the required bolt tension as shown in table num minimum required fastener tension in accordance with the turnofnut method specified in num or when dtis are used the dti tightening method specified in num .
for connections such as large main loadcarrying members or truss joints in which previously tightened high strength bolts become loose and require retightening upon the tensioning of others install into a minimum of ten percent of the holes fully tensioned bolts prior to final tensioning of the permanent bolts .
distribute these first bolts randomly throughout the connection .
if directed by the engineer remove the initial bolts and install permanent bolts at each location otherwise retighten in accordance with num .
table num minimum required fastener tension bolt size inch tension grade anum bolts kips num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bolt tension provide a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or other equivalent bolt tension measuring device wherever final connections are being made .
confirm the accuracy of the tension measuring device by having it calibrated by an approved testing agency once a year .
num turnofnut tightening for each work shift perform tests utilizing a representative sample of five fastener assemblies from each lot to be installed that shift .
perform the tests using the tension measuring device following the same procedure to be used for actual installation of the fastener assemblies to a snugtight tension and corresponding num return to table of contents torque which when the additional turns required in table num nut rotation from the snug tight condition are added will result in at least num times the minimum required fastener installation tension as shown in table num .
place a washer under the part turned in the tightening of the bolt .
consider the job inspection snugtight torque as the average of three test values determined after rejecting the high and lowtest values .
for fastener assemblies too short to fit in the tension measuring device modify the determination of the job inspection snugtight torque in accordance with fm num .
num snugtight condition in the turnofnut method first bring all the fastener assemblies of the connection to a snugtight condition to ensure that all parts of the connection are in firm contact with each other .
for the purposes of this specification firm contact shall mean the condition that exists on a faying surface when the plies are solidly seated against each other but not necessarily in continuous contact .
regard snugtight as the tightness required to produce the bolt tension which following the final applied rotation produces at least num times the minimum required bolt tension in accordance with table num minimum required fastener tension .
in the presence of the engineer and on a daily basis determine the job inspection snugtight torque as specified herein .
num final tightening after verification of the snugtight condition in accordance with num by the engineer tighten all fastener assemblies in the joint by applying the applicable amount of nut rotation specified in table num nut rotation from the snugtight condition .
once snugtight bring all fasteners to the required tension within the same work shift .
table num nut rotation from the snugtight condition bolt length measured from underside of head to end of bolt both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num.bevel washer not used .
both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis .
bevel washers not used .
up to and including four num diameters num turn num turn num turn over four num diameters but not exceeding eight num diameters num turn num turn num turn over eight num diameters but not exceeding twelve num diameters num turn num turn num turn notes num .
nut rotation is relative to the bolt regardless of the element being turned .
num .
tolerance for bolts installed by num turn or less is num degrees .
for bolts installed by num turn or more the tolerance is num degrees .
num .
nut rotations given are only applicable to connections in which all material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
num .
for bolt lengths exceeding num diameters establish the required rotation by performing actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating the actual conditions .
submit procedures to the engineer for review .
num directtensionindicator dti tightening after complying with the requirements of num install and tighten dti devices following the procedures num return to table of contents described in the dti verification test .
do not permit the dti to turn during installation and tightening .
provide washers in accordance with num .
num snugtight condition install the bolts as specified through step num snugtight condition of the dti verification test .
if the num inch feeler gage is refused in more gaps than shown in the table in step num of the test or the dti device becomes loose and can be spun by hand remove the bolt and dti device discarding the dti device .
provide a new dti device and reinstall the assembly and bring to the snugtight condition .
num final tightening after verification by the engineer that the snugtight condition for all bolts has been met tighten all fastener assemblies in the joint such that the number of spaces in which the num inch thickness gauge is refused is equal to or greater than the number shown in table num dti device tightening criteria .
once snugtight bring all fasteners to the required tension within the same work shift .
table num dti device tightening criteria number of spaces in dti num num num num num num minimum spaces in which gage is refused num num num num num num do not tighten the assembly beyond the smallest gap permitted in step num of fm num .
remove and replace bolts discarding the dti which have a dti with a smaller gap or no gap .
num washers num general provide astm fnum hardened steel washers as follows num .
for connections and all associated testing using grade anum bolts use a hardened washer under each element .
num .
for connections using grade anum bolts use hardened washers under the turned element .
num .
use hardened steel washers as part of the rotational capacity tests .
num .
where the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of greater than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a hardened beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
num .
where bolts are to be installed in a oversized or slotted hole in an outer ply provide a single washer satisfying astm fnum or continuous bar satisfying astm anum for grade anum bolts provide a thickness of at least num inch and for grade anum bolts provide a thickness of num inch .
provide these washers or bars to completely cover the slot after installation .
provide a finish consistent with the bolt specified .
num .
in nondirecttensionindicator dti applications clip washers on one side to a point not closer than num of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer if necessary .
num use of washers with directtensionindicators dtis devices when dtis are used use astm fnum hardened washers as follows num .
when the nut is turned and the dti is located under the bolt head a hardened washer is to be located under the nut .
num return to table of contents num .
when the nut is turned and the dti is located under the nut a hardened washer is to be located between the nut and the dti .
num .
when the bolt head is turned and the dti is located under the nut a hardened washer is to be located under the bolt head .
num .
when the bolt head is turned and the dti is located under the bolt head a hardened washer is to be located between the bolt head and the dti .
num inspection num turnofnut tightening num .
once the snugtight condition is achieved for all of the fastener assemblies of the connection within num hours of snugging the first bolt in the connection and in the presence of the engineer verify for a minimum of three num bolts two num for two bolt connections or num of the fastener assemblies that the job inspection snugtight torque has been attained .
these fasteners are to have a snugtight torque equal to or exceeding that specified in num .
perform this check using the same torque wrench used in num .
for bolts tested in accordance with fm num or when multiple torque wrenches are required provide a calibrated torque wrench or wrenches .
num .
if the tested fasteners do not obtain the job inspection snugtight torque test all remaining untested fastener assemblies using the torque wrench in the connection in question .
following testing of all assemblies bring to snugtight all assemblies and retest as stated above .
resnug and retest as necessary using the calibrated torque wrench until the minimum testing stated above is performed favorably .
num .
following confirmation of the snugtight condition as performed by the contractor and in the presence of the engineer match mark the fastener assemblies on the end of the bolt thread and on the nut and then tighten the nut the amount of rotation specified in table num nut rotation from the snugtight condition .
the engineer will accept the connection as fully tightened when all of the following conditions are met a. the rotation specified in table num has been achieved b. there are no loose assemblies in the connection c. all plies of the connection are in firm contact d. there are no indications that excessive stretching or yielding has occurred in the fastener assembly e. bolt stickthrough is consistent per lot .
num directtensionindicator dti tightening prior to bringing the connection to a snugtight condition verify in the presence of the engineer that the dimples of the dti are not deformed or damaged .
bring the connection to a snugtight condition and tighten in accordance with the requirements of num .
the engineer will accept the connection as fully tightened when all of the following conditions are met num .
the requirements of num have been achieved num .
there are no loose assemblies in the connection num .
all plies of the connection are in firm contact num .
there are no indications that excessive stretching or yielding has occurred in the fastener assembly num .
bolt stickthrough is consistent per lot .
num return to table of contents num welding .
num general perform all shop and field welding in accordance with the applicable aws welding code .
this requirement includes the use of qualified welders qualified weld procedures and qualified inspection personnel .
num welding on nondynamically loaded elements perform welding on miscellaneous components and other statically nondynamically noncyclically etc .
loaded structural elements in accordance with the aws dnum structural welding code or the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num electroslag welding perform ngiesw welding in accordance with the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num welding of hollow structural steel sections pipes and tubes except as noted in the contract documents perform all shop and field welding of hollow structural shapes in accordance with the aws dnum structural welding code as amended herein .
num highway sign lighting and traffic signal support structures for structural steel supports for signs lighting and traffic signals comply with the aws dnum structural welding code as amended by the following .
unless otherwise shown in the plans perform ultrasonic testing ut or radiographic testing rt on full penetration groove welds at the following frequency use the aws dnum tubular connections class r criteria for ut and cyclically loaded criteria for rt .
one hundred percent of each joint subject to tension or reversal of stress .
twentyfive percent of each joint subject to only compression or shear .
if discontinuities are found in the joint the remainder of the joint shall be tested .
perform magnetic particle testing at the following frequencies a minimum of num of all fillet or partial penetration groove welds in main members use the aws dnum tubular connections criteria .
if discontinuities are found the remainder of the welds on the members shall be tested .
num tubular bridge or overhead sign structures comply with the requirements of the aws dnum structural welding code as amended by the following unless otherwise shown in the plans perform ultrasonic testing ut or radiographic testing rt on full penetration groove welds at the following frequency use the aws dnum tubular connections class r criteria for ut and cyclically loaded criteria for rt .
one hundred percent of each joint subject to tension or reversal of stress .
twentyfive percent of each joint subject to only compression or shear .
if discontinuities are found in the joint the remainder of the joint shall be tested .
perform magnetic particle testing at the following frequencies a minimum of num of all fillet or partial penetration groove welds in main members use the aws dnum tubular connections criteria .
if discontinuities are found the remainder of the welds on the members shall be tested .
num field welding field weld only with the approval of the engineer .
num tack welds do not weld or tack any fill plates brackets clips shipping devices or other materials not required by the contract documents or allowed by the aashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num erection .
num preerection requirements num return to table of contents num erection quality control qc plan submit an erection qc plan for review and approval of the engineer .
num submittals meet the requirements of sections num and num for any required submittals .
provide submittals to the engineer for review by the department in accordance with section num and the contract documents .
num erection plan submit for the engineers review an erection plan locating all primary members lifting equipment and temporary supports or braces and bolting pattern tightening procedures not considered routine .
ensure that the plan includes the specialty engineers signature and stamp .
include supporting calculations indicating that the design unit stresses indicated in the contract documents have not been exceeded .
submit this plan or plans to the engineer three weeks before erecting the piece or pieces .
include the following information in the erection plan num .
a plan of the work area showing all substructure units and foundations surface roads and railroads all streams creeks and rivers all overhead utilities and any underground utilities that could possibly impact or be adversely affected by erection operations as determined by the specialty engineer .
num .
the erection sequence for all primary loadcarrying members and all primary loadcarrying member bracing .
note any and all permanent or temporary support andor bracing locations including craneholding positions .
num .
the center of gravity locations pick weight and delivery orientation for all primary loadcarrying members .
num .
identify any bolting requirements not considered routine .
num .
locate all pick crane work points .
num .
identify all temporary works and staging areas such as barges mats and temporary excavation support .
num .
include capacity charts on the drawings for each crane configuration and boom extension utilized .
num .
details of all temporary bracing falsework towers and shoring .
num .
submit any procedures requested by the engineer and not contained in the erection plan .
num special requirements for uncoated weathering steel num general do not use marking materials grease sticks crayons that leave behind a residual film that may affect the weathering process of the steel .
store the girders as required for nonweathering steels .
num steel preparations prior to erection perform the following as appropriate blast clean the exposed fascia of the exterior girders both i and box to meet sspcspnum criteria blast clean the remaining exposed surfaces of steel trapezoidal girders not required to be prepared otherwise to meet sspcspnum criteria for steel igirders if a non uniform mill scale finish has developed as determined by the engineer blast clean all remaining exposed surfaces not required to be prepared otherwise to sspcspnum criteria coat the inside of box members including but not limited to all bracing members cross frames and diaphragms in accordance with section num .
coat the exterior face of box girder end diaphragms and all interior surfaces of box girders extending beyond the end diaphragm with an inorganic zinc coating system in accordance with section num .
num concrete substructure preparations num return to table of contents num substructure areas not receiving class num finish prior to erection of the girders cover all exposed substructure concrete surfaces to protect them against staining from the weathering steel components .
leave the covering in place until after placement of the concrete deck .
as directed by the engineer clean all visible stains on concrete in areas not receiving a class num finish by sandblasting and followon cleaning using a stain remover or commercial cleaner after completion of the structure in accordance with section num .
num substructure areas receiving a class num finish if the class num finish is to be applied prior to the placement of the concrete deck cover all finish concrete surfaces after application and curing of the class num finish to protect them from staining from the weathering steel components .
leave the covering in place until after placement of the concrete deck .
upon removal of the covering reapply the class num finish to cover any stains which may be present .
if the class num finish is to be applied after placement of the concrete deck no substructure covering will be required .
num structure and site clean up upon the completion of construction remove all oil dirt grease or other foreign material including excessive or uneven mill scale from the steel .
remove lubricants from the exposed surfaces of installed fastener assemblies and other surfaces in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
follow procedures specified in section num as appropriate .
final surface finish is to be an even mill scale as approved by the engineer .
num coordination with substructure prior to the erection of primary loadcarrying members conduct a survey to document the vertical longitudinal and transverse position of all substructure units and anchor rod locations .
appropriately account for ambient temperature in the survey .
should a discrepancy be identified with the contract documents submit the necessary details to the engineer for resolution .
num placing anchor rods locate and place anchor rods within the tolerance shown in the contract documents or within num inch of the theoretical location shown .
if anchor rods can not be located to the specified tolerance place only with the approval of the engineer .
unless shown otherwise in the contract documents provide galvanized anchor rods nuts and washers as follows num .
set the anchor rods in preformed holes vertical to the plane of the bridge seat .
num .
provide num inch diameter holes .
num .
provide nonshrink groutmortar of a strength greater than or equal to that of the substructure concrete strength or as shown elsewhere in the contract documents .
num .
install the rods in accordance with the groutmortar manufacturers recommendations .
num .
clean the threads of the anchor rods as necessary without damaging the coating .
num preparation of bearing areas and setting of bearings prior to placing superstructure bearing units including but not limited to neoprene pads and masonry plates prepare the top of concrete pad bearing area in accordance with section num .
if a discrepancy is identified report it to the engineer for resolution .
for expansion bearings with slotted holes for anchor rods which allow movement of the superstructure with respect to the substructure vary the location of the slotted plate in relation to the anchor rods in accordance with the prevailing temperature at the time of setting .
num return to table of contents for fixed bearings at multiple adjacent piers if necessary horizontally jack the substructure units to correctly set the centerline of bearing .
adequately account for temperature .
unless specified elsewhere in the contract documents locate the theoretical centerline of bearings to within num inch transverse to longitudinal girder lines and in the direction parallel to the longitudinal girder line locate the theoretical centerline of bearing within num inch of the theoretical centerline of bearing .
after setting the bearings and installing anchor rod nuts washers and any other associated hardware specified in the contract documents clean the protrudingexposed surfaces of the assembly of all deleterious material .
finishcoat metal parts in accordance with num num .
num tightening of anchor boltrod nuts num fixed and expansion pot bearing tighten anchor bolts or rod nuts to a snug tight condition such that the different mating surfaces such as the top of concrete neoprene and steel are in firm contact .
the nut or bolt is to be tight enough to develop friction between surfaces to prevent sliding but not overtightened that bulging or damage occurs in any of the mating materials .
num fixed and expansion bearings with elastomeric bearing pads draw down the lower nut such that a total gap of num inch exists between the nut and bearing plate .
tighten a second nut of the same specification to a snug tight condition against the lower nut maintaining the required gap .
num bolted connections for splice connections of primary members as well as connections of diaphragms or crossframes fill at least num of the holes prior to crane release .
the num may be either erection bolts in a snug tight condition or full size erection pins but at least half num of all holes shall be bolts and sufficient pins shall be used near outside corners of splice plates and at member ends near splice plate edges to ensure alignment .
filled holes should be uniformly distributed between the web and flange connections for primary members such that approximately num of the web connections are filled and approximately num of the flange connections are filled .
for diaphragms or crossframes the filled holes should be uniformly distributed between all the bolt groups connecting the diaphragm or crossframe to the primary member .
the num requirement may be waived if a reduced percentage is calculated as sufficient and shown on the approved erection plan .
primary member splice connections that are made up on the ground prior to erection shall be num percent complete prior to any lifting operation .
fully tighten all bolts prior to installation of deck forming for each unit .
num final position of girder webs unless shown elsewhere in the contract documents detail the girders and cross frames as directed by the engineer .
the final condition is to be defined as with the deck and parapets cast but without any future wearing surface .
a web will be considered plumb if it is within a tolerance horizontally between the top and bottom of the web of num inch per foot of web depth compared against the theoretical position as required in the contract documents .
measure the outofplumb perpendicular to the face of the web .
erect trapezoidal girders to the geometry shown in the contract documents to the same num inch per foot of web depth tolerance .
num inspection and final acceptance num general perform quality control inspections of all phases of the work .
the inspection frequency and depth shall be sufficient to ensure that all materials and workmanship incorporated into the work meet the requirements of the contract documents and that the processes are controlled to ensure that the final finished products conform to the num return to table of contents physical characteristics and dimensions required by the contract documents .
the quality control manager shall be responsible for all inspection operations .
an adequate number of quality control inspectors shall be available to ensure review of all materials and fabrication processes are preformed in accordance with the producer qc plan .
weekly meetings shall be held with the engineer to review inspection findings .
the review of this information is to identify any refinements andor improvements in the process being utilized in the work .
the frequency of the meetings may be altered by the engineer .
num inspectionfinal acceptance ensure the final alignment profile and fastening of the erected steel is in accordance with the contract documents .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantities to be paid for will be the items covered by this section following acceptance by the engineer .
partial payments may be made for fabricated components yet to be assembled into larger components members and assemblies as allowed for elsewhere in the contract documents .
num deductions and allowances no deductions from the computed weight of rolled or fabricated structural steel or miscellaneous components will be made for sheared edges punchings holes milling plaining or other items of waste associated with the finished components or parts .
num weights of structural steel and miscellaneous materials the weights of structural steel will be taken as nominal weights as reported in the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications and astm specifications in that order of precedence using the dimensions shown in the contract documents .
num structural steel and miscellaneous metals the quantity of structural steel and miscellaneous metals becoming part of the completed structure and accepted by the engineer will be paid for at the plan quantity shown in the contract documents or as modified by the engineer measured in pounds or by the contract lump sum price for structural steel .
num highstrength fastener assemblies the weight of highstrength fastener assemblies including nuts and washers installed by the contractor and accepted by the engineer will be computed on the basis of an average length in accordance with table num table num weights of highstrength fastener assemblies diameter of high strength fasteners inch num inch num inch num inch num num inch num num inch weight per num pounds num num num num num the weight of highstrength fastener assemblies will be included in the determination of the weight of the completed structure in determining the quantity paid when payment is not by lump sum .
the engineer will determine values for sizes of highstrength fastener assemblies not shown .
num welding and welds fasteners not designated as highstrength anchor rods nuts bolts and associated washers transporting handling and erection welding and welds fastener assemblies not designated as highstrength anchor rods nuts bolts num return to table of contents and associated washers transporting handling and erection are considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num shims and fill plates the quantity of shims and fill plates will be included in the determination of the weight of the completed structure in determining the quantity paid when payment is not by lump sum .
num coatings the preparation application cleanup and the consumables used in the coatings process are considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num weathering steel preparation handling andor cleanup the preparation handling andor cleanup of weathering steel or the rust marks on other items concrete units etc .
caused by the development of the patina are considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num shear connectors shear connectors are considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num span jacking fixed bridge jacking of substructure units of adjacent fixed piers required to set bearing in accordance with the contract documents is considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num basis of payment .
num general prices and payments will be for full compensation for all work specified in this section completed and accepted including but not limited to testing bolting welding cleaning and coating temporary works and erection .
no separate payment will be made for falsework or other erection expense .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num structural steel rehab per pound .
item no .
num num structural steel newwidening lump sum .
item no .
num num ladders platforms lump sum or per pound .
item no .
num num metal traffic railing per linear foot .
item no .
num num rivet or highstrength bolt replacement each .
item no .
num num structural steel repair per pound .
item no .
num num pipe hanger each .
item no .
num anchor bolt replacement each .
num return to table of contents section num multirotational bearings num description .
furnish and install multirotational bearings in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer and details shown in the plans .
obtain all multirotational bearings on each bridge from the same manufacturer .
this section covers the following types of multirotational bearings num. pot bearings num. disc bearings .
num materials .
provide materials in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and as follows .
num structural steel furnish structural steel conforming to astm anum grade numw .
num stainless steel furnish stainless steel conforming to astm anum type num num gage minimum thickness .
num metalizing wire furnish metalizing wire in accordance with astm bnum having an num zincnum aluminum znum composition .
num anchor rods nuts and washers furnish galvanized anchor rods nuts and washers in accordance with section num .
num design .
design bearings in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
design bearings to be replaceable without removing the masonry plate or sole plate .
design guided bearings for the lateral load shown in the plans or num of the vertical load capacity of the bearing shown in the plans whichever is greater .
for disc bearings provide steel limiting rings around the top and bottom of the polyether urethane disc .
num shop drawings .
submit shop drawings in accordance with section num .
include design calculations signed and sealed by a specialty engineer confirming that all components are in conformance with the requirements of this section .
include the following information on the shop drawings num .
the name and address of the bearing manufacturer including the physical address where the fabrication will be performed .
num .
the bearing manufacturers instructions for proper installation including the proper positioning settings for a minimum numf temperature range .
num .
a list of all materials project specific details and dimensions the bearing model number and the movement range .
num return to table of contents num fabrication .
fabricate bearings in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications and the following requirements .
shop metalize and seal all steel surfaces except ptfestainless steel sliding surfaces the insides of pots and the bottoms of pistons in accordance with sspccsnumaws cnummnace no .
num specification for the application of thermal spray coatings metalizing of aluminum zinc and their alloys and composites for the corrosion protection of steel .
prepare surfaces prior to metalizing to a near white metal condition in accordance with sspcspnum using abrasives meeting the requirements of num .
achieve a sharp angular blast anchor profile meeting the requirements of astm dnum method c num mils plus or minus num mil num m plus or minus num m .
provide a metalizing thickness of num mils minimum and num mils maximum .
prepare a sample coupon using the same processes used to prepare the surfaces and apply the coating to the bearing .
test the coating bond strength on the coupon in accordance with astm dnum .
the bond strength must be a minimum of num psi .
if the bond strength of the coating on the coupon is deficient test the coating on the bearing .
if the required bond strength is achieved repair the coating on the bearing .
num testing and certification .
test the materials used to fabricate the bearings and the completed bearings themselves in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications using the reactions rotations and movements shown in the plans for each type of bearing .
conduct the longterm deterioration test and the longterm proof load test on full size bearings on a per lot basis .
num installation .
store multirotational bearings delivered to the bridge site under cover on a platform above the ground surface .
protect bearings at all times from damage and ensure they are clean dry and free from dirt oil grease or other foreign substances before placement .
install the bearings in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer contract drawings and as may be directed by the engineer .
if there is any discrepancy between the recommendations of the manufacturer these specifications and contract drawings the engineer will be the sole judge in reconciling any such discrepancy .
obtain the services of a qualified technical representative employed by the manufacturer of the bearings to supervise the first installation of each type of bearing expansion pot fixed pot expansion disc fixed disc or other type as defined by the engineer but for only one size of each type .
submit to the engineer a certified statement from the manufacturer that its representative has the necessary technical experience and knowledge to supervise bearing installations and to train contractor personnel about proper bearing installation procedures and methods .
do not install the bearings before the engineer receives the certification and the representative is on the job site .
assume this responsibility at no further expense to the department .
perform any required touchup repair and field metalizing as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
quantities for fixed and expansion bearings will be the plan quantity number of each type of bearing constructed and accepted .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
num basic items of bearings the contract unit price per each for bearings will be full compensation for all work and materials necessary for the complete installation .
such price and payment will include but not limited to the following specific incidental work num. testing num. tools and equipment required for installation num. any work to replace rejected bearings num. any repairs to the metalized coating on the bearings num. all costs associated with the manufacturers installation technician .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num multirotational bearing assembly fixed each .
item no .
num multirotational bearing assembly expansion each .
num return to table of contents section num posttensioning num description .
num .
furnish transport store handle and install all components of posttensioning pt systems in accordance with the requirements of this section and the component manufacturers recommendations .
constituent components of pt systems include but are not limited to anchorage assemblies filler containment assemblies filler material and related steel reinforcement .
use the most stringent requirements as determined by the engineer of those specified in this section or the component manufacturers recommendations for protecting components from damage due to environmental exposure improper handling or improper installation .
num .
with the exception of mild reinforcing and prestressing steel furnish all pt system components from a single supplier .
a .
use only approved pt systems meeting the requirements of section num and selected from the structures design office sdo website for approved posttensioning systems .
b .
use only pt systems of appropriate type and size required to construct tendons shown in the contract documents .
c. with the exception of local zone reinforcement do not substitute modify or delete any components of an approved pt system .
inclusion of all possible subcomponents is required for pt system and component testing however subcomponents of approved systems may be eliminated from final installations based on projectspecific requirements provided all componenttocomponent interface hardware are included as necessary to maintain connections and pt system integrity .
num .
install the pt tendon e.g .
strands wires or bars in ducts .
stress the pt tendon to a predetermined load and anchor ends directly against hardened concrete .
after anchoring the pt tendon install permanent anchorage caps inject ducts with filler to completely fill voids and install protection at anchorages .
num .
submit all required documents in accordance with this section and section num to the engineer for review and written approval .
num .
cable stays and extradosed bridges are not covered by this specification .
num .
install duct filler in accordance with the requirements of this section .
provide fully filled duct and anchorage assemblies free from leaks blockages and voids .
submit test data to the engineer to verify that the work meets the requirements of this section .
perform filler injection operations in accordance with num .
num materials .
num general approval of any material by the engineer will not preclude subsequent rejection if material is damaged or otherwise found to not meet the requirements of this section or section num .
num steel reinforcing num mild num .
provide reinforcing steel per section num .
num return to table of contents num .
final design and details of local zone reinforcement are project specific and are the responsibility of pt system supplier .
design project specific local zone reinforcement for the number of strands or wires a particular approved pt system can accommodate at maximum allowable strand or wire force do not design project specific local zone reinforcement for a reduced system capacity .
num .
submit signed and sealed project specific local zone reinforcement details to the engineer for review and written approval .
num prestressing num strand num .
provide prestressing strands per section num .
num .
strand couplers are not permitted .
num bar num .
provide prestressing bars per section num .
num .
for permanent applications use and location of bar couplers is subject to written approval by the engineer .
num parallel wire num .
provide prestressing parallel wire assemblies per section num .
num .
wire couplers are not permitted .
num duct filler use only grout and flexible filler meeting the requirements of section num and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num grout num .
select grout for use in pt system by application repair horizontal or vertical .
num .
mix grout per manufacturers instructions with potable water meeting requirements of section num .
num .
do not combine different grout products .
num flexible filler prepare flexible filler for installation in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
do not combine different flexible filler products .
num other material references meet the requirements of this section as well as the following class num applied coating section num elastomeric coating system section num epoxy compound section num magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete section num methacrylate section num water section num use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num component samples num prestressing steel num .
furnish samples per section num from each manufacturer of prestressing strand wire and bar to be used on project .
num .
the engineer will collect sample materials from prestressing steel used for pt operations on the project .
num .
samples properly identified and tagged per num will be stored by the engineer .
num grout num return to table of contents num .
the engineer may sample grout packages at random not to exceed a total quantity of one bag per lot or shipment .
num .
grout sample may be virgin package mix liquefied state or solid state engineer will determine at what frequency interval sample phase powder liquid or solid and location those samples will be recovered from the project .
num .
sample properly identified and tagged per num will be stored by the engineer .
num flexible filler num .
the engineer may sample flexible filler at random not to exceed a total quantity of one gallon per lot .
a lot is defined as a quantity of material from a single production batch or shipment not to exceed num gallons .
num .
sample may be virgin product in liquefied state or solid state .
the engineer will determine at what frequency interval sample phase liquid or solid and location those samples will be recovered from the project .
num .
sample properly identified and tagged per num will be stored by the engineer .
num alternate pt system designs .
designs using a pt scheme different from that shown in the contract documents may be submitted for the engineers approval provided proposed scheme fulfills the design requirements and the contractor demonstrates compliance with these requirements num .
pt system type and size meets all requirements of this section .
num .
net compressive stress in the concrete after all prestress losses is equivalent to or greater than that provided by the pt scheme shown in original contract documents .
num .
distribution of individual tendons at each cross section generally conform to the distribution shown in original contract documents .
num .
proposed pt scheme meets the ultimate strength requirements of the american association of state highway and transportation officials load and resistance factor design aashto lrfd bridge design specifications section num and is equivalent to or greater than service and strength limit states provided in original contract documents .
num .
stresses in concrete and pt steel at all sections and at all stages of construction meet requirements of the design criteria shown in original contract documents .
num .
all design criteria provisions noted in original contract documents are satisfied .
num .
show complete design and detail of all elements for proposed locations of alternate pt scheme .
num .
submit the following for the engineers approval a. design calculations including short and long term prestress losses b. complete shop drawings including pt scheme and system reinforcing steel and concrete cover num .
any alternate pt system approved by the engineer resulting in a change in quantity from that shown in the contract documents is paid based on comparison of the following a. quantity actually used and accepted or original plan quantity whichever is less and b. unit bid price .
num return to table of contents if approved alternate pt scheme or system is under a cost savings initiative proposal csip method of payment will be in compliance with csip agreement .
num .
submit alternate pt scheme signed and sealed by the contractors engineer of record .
num qualifications .
provide all project personnel and crew foreman in accordance with section num .
num submittals .
num shop and working drawings num .
submit to the engineer all necessary information plans shop and working drawings and manuals in accordance with this section and section num .
submit to the engineer signed and sealed pt related shop drawings designed by the contractors engineer of record .
num .
prepare shop drawings addressing all requirements stated in the contract documents and requirements of this section .
indicate preapproved pt systems to be used as shown on the sdo website for approved posttensioning systems .
show details of tendon geometry and locations complying with the contract documents and limitations of selected pt system .
include all inlets outlets high point inspection port details anchorage inspection details permanent anchorage caps protection system materials and application limits .
num transport handling and storage .
num general store all materials in a weatherproof building shed covering or container until time of use .
num lot identification num .
assign an individual lot number and tag items shipped to project in a manner that allows each lot to be clearly identified at project site for all pt system components filler bars of each size from each mill heat of steel and all strands from each manufactured reel .
num .
submit records to the engineer identifying assigned lot numbers with heat or reel of material represented if applicable .
num .
all unidentified prestressing components strands wires bars or filler received at the site will be rejected .
num .
loss of positive identification of these items at any time will be cause for rejection .
num .
submit filler quality control data sheets from the manufacturer to the engineer for each lot of filler on the project .
num .
material with a total time from manufacture in excess of six months must be retested and certified by supplier before use or be removed from project and replaced with new material .
num prestressing steel num .
protect all prestressing steel against physical damage and corrosion at all times .
a .
package prestressing steel in containers for protection against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
b .
place a corrosion inhibitor which prevents rust in package or incorporate it into a corrosion inhibitor carrier type packaging material .
c. corrosion inhibitor must have no deleterious effect on steel filler concrete or bond strength of steel to concrete .
num return to table of contents d. inhibitor carrier type packaging material must conform to provisions of federal specification milpnum .
e. immediately replace or restore damaged packaging to original condition .
f. clearly mark shipping package with a statement that package contains highstrength prestressing steel care to be used in handling include type kind and amount of corrosion inhibitor used date when placed safety orders and instructions for use .
num .
the engineer will reject prestressing steel that has sustained physical damage .
num .
remove and discard lengths of strand found to contain broken wires .
num .
wire must be bright and uniformly colored with no foreign matter or pitting on its surface .
num filler num .
maintain filler in environmental exposure conditions e.g .
temperature humidity in strict conformance with manufacturers recommendations at all times from manufacture to installation .
num .
storage in the open must be on a raised platform and with adequate waterproof covering to protect the filler .
num .
on site storage of grout filler is limited to a maximum period of one month .
num .
do not use stored filler that has exceeded the manufacturers recommended usage date .
remove all such filler from the jobsite .
num duct and pipe num .
protect ducts against ultraviolet degradation crushing excessive bending dirt contamination corrosive elements or any other damage or contamination during transport storage and handling .
num .
furnish ducts with end caps to prevent contamination inside duct .
do not remove duct end caps until duct is incorporated into the bridge component .
num .
ship capped duct in bundles that are covered during transport and storage .
num .
store on a raised platform and completely covered to prevent contamination .
num .
if contamination is discovered immediately flush duct with potable water per num before use .
num construction .
num general num .
submit to the engineer written certification from pt supplier vendor that pt system chosen for the project meets requirement of this section section num and is a department approved pt system prior to installing any pt hardware .
num .
submit a list of pt system components and reference drawings to the engineer .
num .
use methods to place and consolidate concrete that will not displace or damage any pt ducts anchorage assemblies splices and connections reinforcement or other embedded items .
num .
conduct all stressing and filler injection operations in the presence of the engineer .
num system installation accurately and securely fasten all pt anchorages ducts inlet and outlet pipes miscellaneous hardware reinforcing bars and other embedded items at locations shown in the contract documents or on approved shop or working drawings or as otherwise approved by the engineer in writing .
num return to table of contents num ducts num .
construct tendon ducts using the minimum number of splices as practical .
num .
accurately position and align ducts at locations shown in the contract documents or according to approved shop or working drawings or as approved in writing by the engineer .
num .
securely fasten all internal ducts at regular intervals not exceeding num inches for steel pipes num inches for round plastic ducts and num inches for flat ducts to prevent movement displacement or damage from concrete placement and consolidation operations .
num .
show method and spacing of duct supports on appropriate shop drawings .
num .
ensure external tendon ducts are straight between connections to internal ducts at anchorages diaphragms and deviation saddles and are supported at intermediate locations according to the contract documents including approved shop drawings .
num .
ensure all alignments including curves and straight portions are smooth and continuous with no lips kinks or dents .
this also applies to curves in prebent steel pipe .
num .
check and repair all ducts in accordance with num as necessary before placing any concrete .
num .
ensure ducts at end connections to anchorages splices inlets outlets drains and all other duct openings are sealed at all times after installing ducts and until tendon installation is complete .
briefly open low point drains just prior to tendon installation and again just prior to filler injection to allow for drainage of any water that may be present within the duct .
num .
provide an absolute seal of anchorage and duct termination locations per the preapproved system drawings .
num .
use of tape is not permitted to make connections or sealing for any reason .
num .
use heat welding techniques in accordance with duct manufacturers instructions to make splices between sections of smooth plastic duct or make connection with electrofusion duct coupler meeting the material requirements of section num and approved system drawings .
num .
when connecting steel pipe to plastic pipe with a boot use a num inches wide power seated band and clamps in accordance with num on each end of a duct boot to seal against filler leakage .
install band per manufacturers instructions .
num .
ducts for prestressing used exclusively for temporary erection where pt will be removed from structure are not required to be coupled across segment joints .
num installation tolerances num .
ensure final position of pt ducts is within the tolerances in the following table table num duct installation tolerances type vertical position inches horizontal position inches horizontal tendons in slabs or in slab regions of larger members num num longitudinal draped superstructure num num num return to table of contents table num duct installation tolerances tendons in webs tendon over supports or in middle third of span tendon in middle half of web depth num num longitudinal generally horizontal superstructure tendons usually in top or bottom of member num num horizontal tendons in substructures and foundations num num vertical tendons in web longitudinal position num transverse position num vertical tendons in pier shafts num num all other cases num num num .
ensure entrance and exit angles of tendon paths at anchorages duct joints andor at faces of concrete are within plus or minus num degrees of desired angle measured in any direction .
num .
accomplish any deviations in alignment with smooth unkinked transitions .
num .
locate anchorages within plus or minus num inches of desired position laterally and plus or minus num inch along tendon except that minimum cover requirements must be maintained .
num .
position anchorage confinement reinforcement in the form of spirals multiple ushaped bars or links centered around duct and starting within num inches of the back of the main anchorage plate .
num .
if conflicts exist between reinforcement and a pt duct position of duct prevails .
adjust local reinforcement with the engineers written approval .
num splices and joints num .
all splices joints couplings connections inlet and outlet and valves are part of approved pt system .
num .
fabricate all duct splices to prevent duct kinks during concrete placement .
num .
use mandrels as needed to maintain duct alignment and shape .
num inlets outlets drains and ports num .
place filler inlets outlets drains and ports at locations shown in the contract documents including approved shop drawings .
num .
equip all filler inlets outlets drains and ports with approved positive shutoff devices e.g .
valves .
num .
at a minimum place filler inlets outlets or ports in the following positions and those shown in standard plans index num a .
top of tendon anchorage b .
top of anchorage cap c. at high points of duct profile when vertical distance between highest and lowest point is more than num feet d. at major change in duct cross section and e. at other locations required by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num .
for all tendons other than grouted top slab transverse tendons in box girders place drains at the geometric low points of all duct profiles or as close as is practical to the geometric low points of all duct profiles except where an inlet outlet or anchorage that can serve as a drain is located at a low point .
locate drains and inlets and outlets serving as drains at the bottom of the duct cross section .
num .
extend filler and drain tubes a sufficient distance out of concrete member to allow for proper closing of valves .
num .
direct inlets outlets drains and ports exiting on vertical or predominantly vertical surfaces of box and igirders toward the inside face of exterior igirders or toward the interior of box girders .
num tendons num .
do not exceed num calendar days between first installation of prestressing steel within duct and completion of the stressing and filler injection operation for pt bars located in superstructure and all strands and wires regardless of location .
num .
do not exceed num calendar days between the first installation of prestressing steel within duct and completion of the stressing and filler injection operations for pt bars located in substructure .
num .
any light surface corrosion forming during the period of time described in num or num will not be cause for rejection of prestressing steel .
num .
failure to inject filler into duct within the number of calendar days specified will result in stoppage of work except when waived by the engineer in writing .
num .
flushing of filler is not permitted without written approval of the engineer and is only permitted as defined in this article .
num .
vacuum injection is required to repair all voids and blockages as subject to provisions of num .
num .
for tendon ducts subjected to contamination with chlorides e.g .
uncapped ducts that have been subjected to salt spray flush duct with potable water containing slack lime i.e .
calcium hydroxide or quicklime i.e .
calcium oxide in the amount of num pounds per gallon .
a .
test for presence of chlorides and oils in discharged water before placing tendon .
b .
if chloride levels in flush water outflow exceed num ppm continue to flush duct until chloride level in flush water outflow is below num ppm .
c. dry duct interior by blowing oilfree compressed air by vacuuming or by other means deemed acceptable to the engineer .
remove excess water trapped in duct corrugations .
the engineer may require use of a borescope or other visual inspection means at no additional cost to the department to ensure duct interior is water free .
num .
push or pull strands and wires through ducts to make up a tendon using methods that will not snag on any lips or joints in ducts .
num .
round off end of strands and wires that are pushed or fit advancing end with smooth protective cap .
num .
do not intentionally rotate strands or wires by any mechanical means during installation of pt strand into duct .
num .
for superstructure tendons provide sufficient strand and wire length beyond dead end anchorages to allow for second end stressing as needed for reconciliation of jacking force versus measured elongation .
num return to table of contents num .
alternatively tendons may be pulled through duct using a special steel wire sock or other device attached to advancing end .
strands may be brazed together for pulling as long as one foot of strand from the brazed end is removed by cutting after installation .
do not electric arc weld strand ends together for this purpose .
num .
cut tendons in accordance with num .
num .
strand installation aids i.e .
wirenylon ties around strand bundle strand spacers etc .
must be removed prior to stressing num .
do not install permanent tendons before completion of testing as required by this section or the contract documents .
the only two exceptions are a. tendon to be tested by theoretical elongation verification may be installed for test and b. transverse tendons may be preinstalled in precast segmental boxes prior to concrete casting such that they meet num .
num posttensioning operations num .
do not apply pt forces until concrete has attained compressive strength specified in the contract documents .
num .
conduct all stressing operations in presence of the engineer .
num .
with the written approval of the engineer revise pt operations so final tendon force is in agreement with the contract documents .
num stressing equipment only use equipment furnished by supplier of pt system .
num jacks and gauges equip each jack with pressure gauge for determining jacking pressure that has a minimum dial diameter of six inches .
num calibration num .
calibrate each jack and its gauges as a unit .
num .
calibration must consist of three test cycles with cylinder extension of jack in various positions e.g .
twoinch fourinch eightinch stroke .
num .
at each pressure increment average forces from each test cycle to obtain an average force .
num .
perform calibration with equipment e.g .
jack pump hoses etc .
setup in same configuration intended for use on project .
num .
jack and gauge calibration is to be initially performed by pt supplier or an independent laboratory .
num .
use load cells calibrated within the past num months to calibrate stressing equipment .
num .
supply documentation denoting the load cells calibration date and tractability to national institute of standards and technology nist along with jackgauge calibration .
num .
submit to the engineer certified calibration charts and curves for each jack and gauge unit used on the project prior to start of work and every six months thereafter or as requested by the engineer .
num .
calibrations subsequent to initial calibration with a load cell may be accomplished with use of a master gauge .
supply master gauge to the engineer in a protective waterproof container capable of protecting calibration of gauge during shipment to a laboratory .
provide a quickattach hydraulic manifold to enable quick and easy installation of num return to table of contents master gauge to verify permanent readings .
master gauge will remain in the possession of the engineer for duration of project and will be returned to the contractor after final acceptance of project by the engineer .
num .
any jack repair such as replacing seals or changing length of hydraulic lines requires recalibration using a load cell .
num .
no extra compensation will be allowed for initial or any subsequent calibrations or use of master gauge required by the engineer .
num stressing tendons num .
tension all pt steel so pt force is not less than that required by the contract documents or as otherwise approved by the engineer in writing .
num .
do not use monostrand jacks to stress tendons with five or more strands or wires .
num .
use of curved stressing noses or chairs is not permitted .
num jacking maximum stress maximum temporary stress i.e .
jacking stress in pt steel must not exceed num of guaranteed ultimate tensile strength guts .
num initial and permanent stresses num .
pt steel must be anchored at initial stresses resulting in long term retention of permanent stresses or forces of no less than those shown in the contract documents .
num .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer in writing initial stress after anchor set must not exceed num of guts at anchorages and num of guts at all other locations between anchorages .
num .
permanent stress and permanent force are stress and force remaining in pt steel after all losses including long term creep and shrinkage of concrete elastic shortening of concrete relaxation of steel losses in pt steel from sequence of stressing friction and unintended wobble of ducts anchor set friction in anchorages and all other losses particular to the specific pt system .
num stressing sequence num .
permanent pt tendons must be stressed from both ends except as noted in the contract documents .
num .
required force may be applied at one end and subsequently at other end or simultaneously at both ends .
num elongation num .
ensure forces being applied to tendon and resulting elongation of tendon can be measured at all times .
num .
measure elongations to nearest num inch .
num .
for required tendon force observed elongation must agree within num of theoretical elongation or entire operation must be halted checked and source of error determined and remedied to satisfaction of the engineer before proceeding .
num .
do not overstress tendon to achieve theoretical elongation .
num .
in event that agreement between observed and theoretical elongations at required force falls outside acceptable tolerances the engineer may at his discretion and without additional compensation to the contractor require additional tests for tendon modulus of elasticity andor in place wobble and friction test .
num friction num return to table of contents num .
provide actual expected friction and wobble coefficients and anchor set in the shop drawings submit calculations and show a typical tendon force diagram on shop drawings based upon expected actual coefficients and values for the pt system to be used .
num .
graphite may be used as a lubricant when friction must be reduced subject to written approval of the engineer .
num tendon wire failure num .
multistrand pt tendons with wires which fail by breaking or slipping during stressing may be accepted provided these conditions are met a .
completed structure has a final pt force of at least num of original total design pt force b. pt force across a mating joint is at least num of pt force required by the contract documents for that mating joint for that stage of construction for precast or castinplace segmental construction .
this num minimum pt force requirement applies to segmental construction or any similar construction that has members posttensioned together across a common joint face at any stage of construction and c. any single tendon must have no more than a num reduction in crosssectional area of pt steel due to wire failure .
num .
when conditions permit the contractor to propose acceptable alternative means of restoring pt force lost due to wire failure any of the above conditions may be waived at discretion of and with approval of the engineer in writing .
num cutting of pt steel num .
cut pt steel using an abrasive saw or plasma torch within num inches to num inches away from the anchorage .
num .
flame cutting of pt steel is not permitted .
num .
do not cut tendon to final length prior to acceptance .
num posttensioning operations record num .
keep a record of these pt operations for each tendon installed a .
project name financial project id fpid b .
contractor andor subcontractor c. tendon location size and type d. date tendon was first installed in duct e. reel number for strands and wires and heat number for bars f. tendon crosssectional area g. modulus of elasticity h. date stressed i. jack and gauge numbers per tendon end j .
required jacking force k. gauge pressures at the pump and at the inlet l. elongations theoretical and actual m. anchor sets anticipated and actual n. stressing sequence i.e .
sequential order of tendon stressing by number o. stressing mode singleend dualend simultaneous p. witnesses to stressing operations contractor and inspector num return to table of contents q .
any other relevant information .
num .
submit to the engineer a complete set of stressing operation records within five days of completed tendon installation .
num system protection num tendon num .
seal all other duct openings other than installing anchorage caps within four hours after tendon stressing .
num .
install anchorage caps after tendon has been accepted .
if acceptance of tendon will be delayed more than four hours after stressing immediately provide temporary weatherproofing of tendons at open ends of anchorages .
if tendons and anchorages are temporarily weatherproofed install anchorage caps within num day of tendon being accepted .
num .
if tendon contamination occurs and if directed by the engineer remove tendon flush duct with potable water per num and replace with new tendon .
num anchorage num .
provide the following at anchorages as shown on standard plans index num a .
temporary drain holes at the bottom of open top blockouts .
b .
temporary weatherproof plugs for upwardly oriented access or vent holes .
num .
cap all filler inletsoutlets with plugs meeting the requirements of section num .
num .
construct anchorage pourbacks and place elastomeric coatings at anchorages as indicated in the contract documents and as shown on standard plans index num within seven days of completing filler injection operations see num for filler injection operations .
construct anchorage pourbacks using reinforced concrete magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete or a type q epoxy grout meeting the requirements of section num. a .
remove all laitance grease curing compounds surface treatments coatings and oils by grit blasting or water blasting .
flush surface with water and blow dry .
surfaces must be clean sound and without any standing water .
test substrate at all pourback locations using aci num and develop a minimum of num psi tension e.g .
pulloff value .
testing frequency may be reduced as determined by the engineer after the contractor has demonstrated an ability to prepare substrate surfaces for bonding as indicated by the result of the aci num test .
b .
mix and apply epoxy grout and magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete in accordance with the manufacturers current standard technical guidelines .
construct all pourbacks in leak proof forms creating neat lines .
epoxy grout may require pumping for proper installation .
construct forms to maintain a liquid head to ensure intimate contact with concrete surface .
use vents as needed to provide for escape of air to ensure complete filling of forms .
num .
coat exposed surfaces of pourbacks and anchorage caps as shown on standard plans index num with an elastomeric coating system meeting the requirements of section num and having a thickness of num mils to num mils .
ensure concrete anchorage caps or other substrates are structurally sound clean and dry .
concrete must be a minimum of num days old .
remove all laitance grease curing compounds surface treatments num return to table of contents coatings and oils by grit blasting or water blasting using a minimum num psi nozzle pressure .
blow surface with compressed air to remove dust or water .
apply the elastomeric coating within num days of filler injection .
apply a manufacturers approved primer over the elastomeric coating before applying class num coating if required .
num .
prior to application of elastomeric coating construct a num foot x num foot concrete test block with a similar surface texture to surfaces to be coated .
coat a vertical face with chosen elastomeric coating system .
determine number of coats required to achieve the specified thickness without runs and drips .
mix and apply elastomeric coating as per manufacturers current standard technical specifications .
spray application is preferred roller application is permitted .
have coating manufacturer representative on site to supervise and comment on application of elastomeric coating onto test block .
apply coating using approved and experienced personnel with a minimum of three years experience applying similar polyurethane systems .
submit credentials of these persons to the engineer for review and consideration for approval .
num filler injection operations num grouting operations conduct all grouting operations in the presence of the engineer .
num plan num .
submit a grouting operations plan to the engineer for approval at least six weeks in advance of any scheduled grouting operation .
num .
written approval of grouting operations plan by the engineer is required before any grouting of permanent structure takes place .
num .
at minimum grouting operations plan will address and provide a .
names and proof of training for grouting crew and crew supervisor in conformance with this specification b .
type quantity and brand of materials to be used in grouting including all required certifications c. type of equipment to be used including capacity in relation to demand and working conditions as well as standby equipment and spare parts d. general grouting procedure e. duct pressure test and repair procedures f. method to be used to control rate of flow within ducts g. theoretical grout volume calculations h. mixing and pumping procedures in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations i .
direction of grouting accounting for grade andor slope of tendon j. sequence of inlet and outlet pipes use k. procedures for handling blockages l. procedures for possible post grouting repair .
num .
conduct a joint meeting of the contractor grouting crew and the engineer before grouting operations begin .
discuss grouting operations plan required testing corrective procedures and any other relevant issues at the meeting .
num .
prior to production grouting demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction successful grout injection by injecting fullscale mockups that are constructed with all associated pt system components using the mockup tendon profiles shown in the plans and the proposed num return to table of contents grouting operations plan .
utilize smooth duct and associated couplers and fittings meeting the requirements of section num for all mockups .
utilize smooth duct for the mockups which has an inside diameter required for a given mockup tendon size .
place the mockup tendons specified in the plans inside the ducts to simulate the inplace pt tendons .
stress mockup tendons to the minimum values shown in the plans by using jacks or other methods approved by the engineer .
perform pressure tests on the mockups in accordance with num prior to grout injection .
for the grout injection operations utilize the same grout material and types and sizes of grout injection equipment that will be used on the project including but not limited to mixers pumps hoses valves and pressure gauges .
inject grout into the mockups using the proposed grouting operations plan .
allow the grout to harden a minimum of num hours after injection before inspecting the mockup .
inspect the mockup in accordance with the requirements of num and then carefully cut open the duct at all high points and other locations as directed by the engineer to check for voids .
prepare a report documenting the findings and submit it to the engineer .
if voids are found determine the cause and revise the proposed grouting operations plan accordingly .
if directed by the engineer construct additional mockups and repeat the grout injection operation using the revised grouting operations plan as many times as are required until the results are acceptable .
num inlets and outlets num .
ensure connections from grout pump hose to inlets are free of dirt and are airtight .
num .
inspect valves to ensure they can open and close properly .
num supplies provide an adequate supply of water and compressed air for clearing and testing ducts as well as mixing and pumping grout before grouting operations start .
num equipment num .
provide grouting equipment consisting of measuring devices for water a highspeed shear colloidal mixer a storage hopper e.g .
holding reservoir and pump with all necessary connecting hoses valves and pressure gauge .
num .
provide pumping equipment with sufficient capacity to ensure pt ducts can be filled and vented in not more than num minutes without interruption .
num .
provide an air compressor and hoses with sufficient output to perform required functions .
num .
have vacuum grouting equipment i.e .
volumetric measuring type and experienced operators available not less than num hours prior to the maximum number of calendar days allowed in num between first installation of prestressing steel within the duct and completion of the stressing and grouting operation for pt .
if the maximum number of days in num have been exceeded have available vacuum grouting equipment and experienced operators available within num hours notice .
num mixer and storage hopper num .
provide colloidal grout machinery with a charging tank for blending and a holding tank .
blending tank must be equipped with a high speed shear colloidal mixer capable of continuous mechanical mixing producing a homogeneous and stable grout free of lumps and undispersed cement .
holding tank must be kept agitated and at least num full at all times during pumping operations to prevent air from being drawn into duct .
num return to table of contents num .
add water during primary mixing phase in the colloidal mixer by use of a flow meter or calibrated water reservoir with measuring accuracy equal to num of total water volume .
num pumps num .
provide pumping equipment capable of a. continuous operation which includes a system for circulating and agitating grout when actual grouting is not in progress b. maintaining pressure on grouted ducts c. fitted with a valve that can be closed off without loss of pressure in duct .
num .
grout pumps will a. be positive displacement type b. provide a continuous grout flow c. be able to maintain a discharge pressure of at least num psi .
num .
use pumps constructed with seals to prevent oil air or other foreign substances from contaminating grout and prevent loss of grout or water .
num .
specify pump capacity adequate to maintain the specified grouting rate .
num .
place pressure gauges with full scale reading of no more than num psi at the pump and at the duct inlet .
num .
grout hoses to be compatible with pump output diameter and pressure rating .
num vacuum grouting provide vacuum grouting equipment meeting these minimum requirements num .
volumeter for measurement of void volume num .
vacuum pump with a minimum capacity of ten cubic feet per minute and equipped with a flowmeter graduated hopper or other acceptable means approved by the engineer capable of measuring the amount of grout being injected .
num .
manual colloidal mixers manual high speed shear mixers or other mixing methods recommended and approved by the grout manufacturer in writing for the specific project covered by this section for voids less than num gallons in volume .
however mix a minimum of one full bag of grout regardless of the size void to be grouted .
num .
standard colloidal mixers for voids num gallons and greater in volume .
num standby equipment provide a standby colloidal grout mixer and pump during grouting operations .
num grouting num .
maintain grout fluidity in strict compliance with grout manufacturers recommendations .
num .
in the presence of the engineer perform a test to confirm accuracy of grouting equipment volumemeasuring components each day of use before performing any grouting operations .
testing in a warehouse or similar condition is acceptable .
use either water or grout for testing using standard testing devices with volumes of num gallon and num gallon and an accuracy of equal to or less than four ounces .
perform one test with each device .
results must verify accuracy of grouting equipment void volumemeasuring component num return to table of contents within num of test device volume and must verify accuracy of grouting equipment grout volume component within num of test device volume for the num gallon test device .
when testing the num gallon device ensure an accuracy of num test device volume and num grout volume .
num .
do not use grout that tests outside allowable flow rates .
num .
perform grouting in accordance with procedures set forth in approved grouting operations plan .
num .
grout all ducts .
num temperature num .
at inlet end of grout hose the maximum limit for grout temperature is numf for normal grouting procedures and numf when performing repair operations with vacuum grouting .
num .
condition grout material to maintain mixed grout temperature below maximum limit .
num .
grouting operations are not permitted when ambient temperature is below numf or is expected to fall below numf within one day subsequent to grouting .
num .
postpone grouting operations if freezing temperatures are forecasted within two days subsequent to grouting .
num mixing and pumping num .
mix grout with a metered amount of water .
num .
mix materials to produce a homogeneous grout .
num .
continuously agitate grout until grouting operations are complete .
num .
reject bags of grout containing clumps .
num production test num .
test grout fluidity to verify it is within limits established by grout manufacturer during grouting operations .
target fluidity rate is established by manufacturers representative based on ambient weather conditions .
num .
determine grout fluidity in accordance with section num. a .
perform a fluidity test using flow cone on grout discharged from anchorage cap outlet immediately after uncontaminated uniform consistency discharge begins for each tendon greater than num feet in length .
for tendons num feet or less perform a fluidity test on a per batch basis .
for fluidity tests done on a per batch basis perform test after new batch has been transferred from mixing tank to holding tank and thoroughly mixed with remains of the previous batch to produce a new homogenous mixture .
during mixing process continually recirculate grout from hose into holding tank .
ensure measured grout efflux time is not less than efflux time measured at injection end of grout hose .
b. alternately check grout fluidity using wet density method contained in section num .
density at discharge outlet must not be less than grout density at inlet .
continuously discharge grout until density requirements are met .
discard grout used for testing fluidity .
num .
perform fluidity test for each tendon to be grouted without modifying watercement ratio .
num .
check temperature of grout at inlet end of grout hose hourly to verify conformance to this section .
num return to table of contents num .
obtain a sample from first production batch of grout and perform a wick induced bleed test on this sample in accordance with section num at beginning of each days grouting operation .
begin grouting operations after sample is obtained .
num .
once grouting has begun if zero bleed requirement is found to not have been achieved in the wick induced bleed test at any time during required test time period complete grouting of any partially grouted tendons currently being grouted but do not begin grouting any new or additional tendons .
immediately inform the engineer when grouting operations have ceased due to noncompliance of the wick induced bleed test .
num .
do not restart grouting operations until such time that testing shows grout meets specified requirements .
num operations num .
open all grout outlets before starting grouting operation .
num .
inject grout into duct in accordance with approved grouting operations plan .
num .
pump grout at the lowest possible pressure practical .
num .
conduct normal grouting operations at a pressure range of num psi to num psi measured at grout inlet .
num .
do not exceed a pumping pressure of num psi anywhere within the system .
do not exceed a pumping pressure of num psi at the grout inlet for flat ducts .
num .
use grout pumping methods that ensure complete filling of ducts and complete encasement of steel .
num .
grout must flow from first and subsequent outlets until any residual water or entrapped air has been removed prior to closing outlet .
num .
pump grout through duct and continuously discharge it at anchorage and anchorage cap outlets until all free water and air are discharged and consistency of grout is equivalent to that of grout being pumped into inlet .
close anchorage outlet and discharge a minimum of two gallons of grout from anchorage cap into a clean receptacle .
close anchorage cap outlet .
num .
elevate grout pressure to the equivalent realized pumping pressure while grouting the duct seal inlet valve and wait two minutes to determine if any leaks exist after all outlets have been bled and sealed .
if leaks are present repair all identified leaks using methods preapproved by the engineer and repeat steps until no leaks are present .
bleed pressure to num psi and wait a minimum of ten minutes for any entrapped air to flow to high points if no leaks are present .
increase pumping pressure not to exceed actual realized pumping pressure of duct and discharge grout at each high point outlet to eliminate any entrapped air or water after specified ten minute period has expired .
complete process by locking a pressure of num psi into tendon duct .
num .
if actual grouting pressure exceeds maximum allowed close inlet and pump grout at next outlet which has just been closed or is ready to be closed as long as a oneway flow is maintained .
do not pump grout into a succeeding outlet from which grout has not yet flowed .
fit outletinlet to be used for pumping with a positive shutoff valve as shown in the approved system drawings and pressure gauge if this procedure is used .
num .
stop grouting operation if complete grouting of tendon can not be achieved by the steps stated and in compliance with the approved grouting operations plan .
after waiting num hours vacuum grout duct in accordance with this section .
num vertical grouting num return to table of contents num .
provide a reservoir equivalent to a minimum of num of the total anticipated grout volume used on a particular tendon at upper end of tendon to store bleed water and grout maintain grout level above level of prestressing plate and anchorage for all vertical tendons .
design and size this device to maintain level grout at an elevation that ensures potential bleed will not drop below the highest point of upper anchorage device .
design reservoir to allow all bleed water if any to rise into reservoir .
num .
discharge grout and check grout fluidity as described in this section .
immediately add grout if level of grout begins to drop potentially allowing bleed water into the upper anchorage device and tendon duct .
remove reservoir after grout has hardened .
visually inspect for voids using a borescope or probe in presence of the engineer .
fill all voids found in duct using volumetric measuring vacuum grouting process in accordance with this section .
num .
allow grout to flow from each outlet until all air and water have been purged prior to using a higher elevation outlet for pumping .
pump grout at increasingly higher outlets which have been or are ready to be closed as long as oneway grout flow is maintained for vertical tendons within allowable grouting pressures .
num grouting operations report num .
submit grouting report signed by the grouting contractor within five days of each grouting operation for review by the engineer .
num .
record theoretical quantity of grout anticipated as compared to actual quantity of grout used to fill duct .
notify the engineer immediately of shortages or overages .
num .
information to be noted in this report must include at a minimum but not necessarily be limited to a. identification of tendon b. date grouted c. number of days from tendon installation to grouting d. type of grout e. injection end f. pressure gauge readings at the pump and at the inlet g. ratio of actual to theoretical grout quantity h. number of grout bags mixed i. total quantity of water used to mix grout j. summary of any problems encountered and k. corrective action taken l. description and results of the post grouting operations and inspection .
num flexible filler operations num .
inject flexible filler with or without using vacuum assistance for tendons with vertical or predominately vertical profiles as shown on standard plans index num num .
num .
inject flexible filler using vacuum assistance for all other tendon profiles shown on standard plans index num .
num microcrystalline wax conduct all wax injection operations repairs and inspections in the presence of the filler injection foreman filler injection qc inspector and the engineer .
num return to table of contents num wax injection operations plan num .
prepare a wax injection operations plan in cooperation with the pt system vendor and the pt wax manufacturer .
num .
submit the wax injection operations plan to the engineer for approval at least six weeks in advance of any scheduled injection operation .
num .
written approval of the wax injection operations plan by the engineer is required before any injection of permanent structure can begin .
num .
at a minimum the wax injection operations plan will address and provide the following a .
.names and qualifications for wax injection crew and crew supervisor in conformance with this specification b .
type quantity and brand of materials to be used in wax injection including all required certifications c. type of equipment to be used including capacity in relation to demand and working conditions as well as standby equipment and spare parts d. location and sequence of ducts to be injected e. calculation of temporary elongation of tendons due to wax injection temperature f. general wax injection procedure for all duct geometries and types g. duct pressure test and repair procedures h. method to be used to control rate of flow within ducts and anchorage assembly i .
theoretical wax volume calculations j. injection rate k. maximum injection pressure during injection and locking pressure l. vacuum gauge pressure requirements vacuum tests and repair procedures m. heating mixing and pumping procedures in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations n direction of wax injection accounting for grade andor slope of tendon o .
location of all high points and all low points accounting for grade andor slope of tendon p. sequence of valve operations at pt system inlets and outlets including minimum wax discharge quantities q .
procedures for handling blockages r. procedure for sealing duct after wax injection s. procedure for inspecting the pt system after wax injection filling voids created by inspection procedures and sealing duct after pt system inspection t. procedures for possible post injection repair u .
methods and materials that will be used to protect concrete surfaces from wax spills leaks etc .
during wax injection post injection inspection and post injection repair num return to table of contents v. safety and cleanup procedures num .
conduct a joint meeting of the contractor wax injection crew and the engineer before wax injection operations begin .
discuss wax injection operations plan required testing corrective procedures and any other relevant issues at the meeting .
num .
prior to production wax injection demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction successful wax injection by injecting fullscale mockups that are constructed with all associated pt system components using the mockup tendon profiles shown in the plans and the proposed wax injection operations plan .
utilize smooth duct and associated couplers and fittings meeting the requirements of section num for all mockups .
utilize smooth duct for the mockups which has an inside diameter required for a given mockup tendon size .
place the mockup tendons specified in the plans inside the ducts to simulate the inplace pt tendons .
stress mockup tendons to the minimum values shown in the plans by using jacks or other methods approved by the engineer .
perform pressure tests on the mockups in accordance with num prior to wax injection .
if vacuum assisted wax injection is required to be used perform vacuum tests on the mockups in accordance with num prior to wax injection .
for the wax injection operations utilize the same wax material and types and sizes of wax injection equipment that will be used on the project including but not limited to heaters pumps hoses valves and pressure gauges .
inject wax into the mockups using the proposed wax injection operations plan .
allow the wax to cool a minimum of num hours after injection before inspecting the mockup .
inspect the mockup in accordance with the requirements of num and then carefully cut open the duct at all high points and other locations as directed by the engineer to check for voids .
prepare a report documenting the findings and submit it to the engineer .
if voids are found determine the cause and revise the proposed wax injection operations plan accordingly .
if directed by the engineer construct additional mockups and repeat the wax injection operation using the revised wax injection operations plan as many times as are required until the results are acceptable .
num inlets and outlets num .
ensure connections from wax pump hose to inlets are free of dirt and are airtight .
num .
inspect valves to ensure they can open and close properly .
num .
provide clear hose and connections to outlet valves compatible with heated wax injection for discharging excess wax .
kinks and clogs in the vent hoses are not permitted during pumping operations .
num supplies num .
provide an adequate supply of compressed air for clearing and testing ducts before wax injection operations start .
num .
provide clean receptacles for collecting excess wax at outlet locations .
num .
provide supplies for stopping wax leaks including rags and buckets of cold water .
num equipment num .
provide equipment consisting of measuring devices for wax wax melting units wax mixer for maintaining uniform temperature a storage holding reservoir pump and volumetric flow rate and displacement volumetric meters with all necessary connecting hoses valves pressure gauges timer and temperature gauge .
num return to table of contents num .
provide pumping equipment with sufficient capacity to ensure pt ducts can be filled and vented in not more than time specified by the wax manufacturer and this specification .
num .
provide an air compressor and hoses with sufficient output to perform required functions .
num .
for filling of air voids in an incomplete wax injection have vacuum wax injection equipment i.e .
volumetric measuring type and experienced operators available not less than num hours prior to the maximum number of calendar days allowed in num between first installation of prestressing steel within the duct and completion of the stressing and wax injection operation for pt .
if the maximum number of days in num have been exceeded have available vacuum wax injection equipment and experienced operators available within num hours notice .
num .
for vacuum assisted injection provide vacuum pump equipment able to measure and have sufficient capacity to ensure a minimum of num vacuum in the pt system prior to filler injection .
provide a continuously running vacuum pump or vacuum reservoir capable of maintaining vacuum during the wax injection process .
num .
ensure that all injection and inspection equipment is maintained in accordance with equipment manufacturers instructions and is calibrated and in good working condition .
num .
provide equipment for dislodging congealed wax blockages .
num .
provide standby pumping and vacuum equipment on the project site during injection operations .
num storage reservoir and mixing num .
provide heated holding tanks for wax injection .
a .
holding tanks must be equipped with a heating system capable of producing a melted wax free of lumps within the temperature limits specified by the manufacturer .
b .
holding tanks must be kept at least num full at all times during pumping operations to prevent clogs and air from being drawn into duct c. holding tanks must have at time of injection a quantity of heated wax required to inject the pt system .
the quantity of heated wax required to inject the pt system is calculated as num more than the total quantity to fill the duct and anchorages to discharge wax at outlets to fill pumping equipment and hoses and to maintain the minimum amount of wax in the holding tanks during pumping operations .
num .
provide equipment to ensure uniform temperature of heated wax either by mixing or other methods .
num pumps num .
provide pumping equipment capable of the following a. continuous operation which includes a system for heating pump components when wax injection is not in progress b. maintaining pressure on wax injected ducts c. fitted with a valve that can be closed off without loss of pressure in duct .
num return to table of contents num .
wax pumps will a. be positive displacement type b. provide a continuous wax flow c. be able to maintain a discharge pressure of at least num psi d. provide an injection of filler into duct in a velocity range of num ftmin .
num .
use pumps constructed with seals to prevent oil air or other foreign substances from contaminating wax and prevent loss of wax .
num .
pumps with hoppers are not permitted .
num .
specify pump capacity adequate to maintain the wax injection rate .
num .
place pressure gauge with full scale reading of no more than num psi at pump and duct inlets .
num .
wax injection hoses to be compatible with pump output diameter pressure rating and temperature .
num vacuum wax injection num .
for filling voids in incomplete wax filling operations provide vacuum wax injection equipment meeting these minimum requirements a. volumeter for measurement of void volume b .
vacuum pump with a minimum capacity of ten cubic feet of air per minute and equipped with a flowmeter graduated reservoir or other acceptable means approved by the engineer capable of measuring the amount of wax being injected .
c. mixers and heaters or other mixing and heating methods recommended and approved by the wax manufacturer in writing for the specific project covered by this section .
num .
for vacuum assisted injection provide vacuum wax injection equipment meeting these minimum requirements a .
vacuum pump with a minimum capacity of ten cubic feet of air per minute free air with the capability of removing num of standard atmospheric pressure within the pt system and equipped with a vacuum pressure gauge b. hoses vacuum reservoirs and connections required for attachment to the pt system .
num heaters use a heater and temperature monitoring system capable of liquefying the entire mass of pt wax to be used for a given injection operation within the temperature limits specified by the pt wax manufacturer .
the heater systems must apply a uniform heat to the pt wax and avoid locally high temperatures that may damage the pt wax or container .
use a heater and temperature monitoring system which complies with the recommendations of the pt wax manufacturer .
num wax injection num .
maintain wax temperature in strict compliance with the wax manufacturers published product data sheet and within the limits of this section .
num .
perform wax injection in accordance with procedures set forth in approved wax injection operations plan .
num return to table of contents num .
inject hot wax into specified duct inlet .
num temperature num .
condition wax to maintain its temperature during injection between numf and numf .
num .
wax injection operations are not permitted when ambient temperature is below minimum temperatures specified by the wax manufacturer .
num production test num .
check wax temperature to verify it is within established limits during operations .
num .
do not start operations until such time that testing shows wax meets specified requirements .
num operations num .
open all inlets outlets drains and ports before beginning wax injection operation to remove standing water from duct .
num .
protect concrete surfaces from wax spills leaks etc .
num .
inject wax in accordance with approved wax injection operations plan .
num .
use pumping methods that ensure complete filling of ducts and anchorage assembly with wax .
num .
ensure the entire mass of wax is fully liquefied prior to and throughout injection operations .
establish a nonturbulent laminar system circulation by continuously recirculating the wax between the pump and the storage container prior to injecting the wax into the duct .
pump components must be at wax injection temperature prior to wax injection into duct .
do not allow wax to free fall during recirculation or injection operations .
maintain a positive head of liquid wax above all withdrawal and recirculation ports and do not allow air intrusion into the pumping system .
do not pour liquid wax into an open pump or hopper .
num .
inject pt wax at a continuous and steady rate in accordance with the approved wax injection operations plan at a flow rate through duct at a velocity between num and num feet per minute and pressure limited to num psi at the duct inlet and num psi at the pump .
num .
for tendons in which vacuum assisted injection is used provide a minimum of num vacuum in the duct prior to injection .
connect both the anchorage outlet and the cap outlet to the vacuum system .
after the vacuum is established lock off the air supply to the duct and monitor the vacuum for num minute .
if the loss of vacuum after num minute exceeds num repair leaks as directed by the engineer and retest the duct .
if the results are acceptable reestablish and maintain a minimum num vacuum using the outlets at the higher end anchorage shown on standard plans index num while injecting wax using the inlet at the lower end anchorage shown on the same standard .
close all outlets inlets and ports other than at injection and vacuum locations during injection procedure .
pump wax into inlet and continuously vacuum air at the outlet until duct is fully injected with wax .
close outlet valve at anchorage when filled with wax .
close inlet valve with locking pressure between num psi and num psi .
do not reuse discharged wax .
num .
for tendons in which vacuum assisted injection is not used inject wax under pressure at locations shown on standard plans index num .
allow num return to table of contents wax to flow from duct and anchorage discharge points until a steady flow of wax free from air is continuously discharged .
collect a minimum of two gallons of continuously flowing wax free from air at discharge point before closing outlet valve .
do not reuse discharged wax .
after all outlets are closed close the inlet valve at locking pressure between num and num psi .
num .
record the total volume of wax injected into the system .
num .
upon completion of wax injection seal the duct in accordance with the approved pt system drawings .
remove all excess wax from exposed surfaces .
num wax injection operations report num .
submit the wax injection report signed by the wax injection contractor within five days of each wax injection operation for review by the engineer .
num .
record theoretical quantity of wax anticipated as compared to actual quantity of wax used to fill duct .
notify the engineer immediately of shortages or overages .
num .
information to be noted in this report must include at a minimum but not necessarily be limited to a .
identification of duct b .
date of duct pressure test c. date wax injected d. number of days from tendon installation to wax injection e. wax product identification f. pressure gauge readings at the pump and at the inlet g. final locking pressure of wax in pt system h. reservoir temperature at time of initiation of wax injection i .
theoretical volume of wax required to completely fill the duct j .
volume of wax injected into duct k. volume of wax collected at discharge points l. injection rate including timing of duct inlet opening and closing m. ambient temperature n. summary of any problems encountered and any deviations from the wax injection operations plan o. corrective action taken p. description and results of the post wax injection operations and inspection q .
vacuum gauge pressure and percent vacuum in duct prior to injection num return to table of contents num .
maintain daily wax injection operations reports at the job site for review by the engineer .
submit all daily reports to the engineer on a weekly basis or as directed by the engineer .
num manufacturers installation technician provide for a pt system vendor installation technician certified by the vendor as having sufficient knowledge and expertise to oversee the wax injection personnel .
the vendors technician shall be under the direct employ of the vendor and shall be present for all wax injection activities for a minimum of the first two days of wax injection for each of the contractors wax injection crews .
the vendors technician shall submit written certification to the engineer that the contractors installation process is in conformance with the approved wax injection operations plan .
num repair perform no remedial or repair work without the engineers approval in writing .
num lifting and access holes num .
repair all holes with magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete meeting requirements of section num or type q epoxy grout meeting requirements of section num .
immediately before casting concrete i.e .
within num hours mechanically clean and roughen the mating concrete surfaces to remove any laitance and expose small aggregate .
use grit blasting or water blasting using a minimum num psi nozzle pressure .
flush surface with water and blow dry .
form mix place and cure material in strict compliance with manufacturers recommendations .
num .
coat repaired holes blockouts and an area extending six inches outside perimeter of repair with a high molecular weight methacrylate hmwm listed on the apl upon completion of deck grooving .
prepare surface to be coated and apply hmwm in accordance with section num .
friction skid tests per section num are not required .
num inlets outlets drains and ports num .
place threaded plastic plugs in all inlet outlet drain and port locations required in the contract documents .
num .
fill inlet outlet drain and port recesses as shown in the contract documents using a type q epoxy compound type e epoxy compound or type fnum epoxy compound meeting requirements of section num .
num .
prepare surface to receive epoxy compounds in compliance with manufacturers recommendations .
num duct num .
repair the following ducts using heatshrink wrap material designed for duct repair a .
smooth plastic ducts that will be encased in concrete b .
corrugated plastic ducts c. external smooth plastic ducts after the flexible filler injection procedure has been completed .
install heatshrink wrap in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
num .
repair external smooth plastic ducts before the flexible filler injection procedure has been completed using elastomer sleeves and stainless steel band clamps .. num acceptance and testing .
num contractor material testing num return to table of contents num .
the following tests are not required on posttensioned precast flat slab bridges and doubletee bridges but are required on all other pt applications .
num .
include cost for contractor tendon modulus of elasticity test and inplace wobble and friction test in price of pt system .
num tendon modulus of elasticity test perform a tendon modulus of elasticity test in accordance with the following procedure if required in the contract documents or ordered by the engineer .
num .
bench test two samples of each size tendon prior to stressing tendons to determine modulus of elasticity for purpose of accurately determining tendon elongations while stressing .
num .
bench length between anchorages must be at least num feet and tendon duct at least two inches clear of tendon all around for purpose of this test .
num .
test procedure must consist of stressing tendon at an anchorage assembly with a load cell at dead end .
num .
tension test specimen num of guts in ten increments and then detention from num of guts to zero in ten decrements .
num .
record gauge pressure elongations and load cell forces for each increment and decrement .
num .
note elongations of tendon for both ends and the central num feet measured to an accuracy of plus or minus num inches .
num .
correct elongations for actual anchor set of dead end .
num .
calculate modulus of elasticity as follows e pladl where p force in tendon l distance between pulling wedges and dead end wedges or exact length in the center num feet of tendon a cross sectional area of tendon dl tendon elongation within length l for load p num .
submit revisions to theoretical elongations to the engineer for approval if bench test varies from modulus of elasticity used for shop or working drawings by more than num .
num .
additional tendon modulus of elasticity tests may be required when observed tendon elongations in erected structure fall outside acceptable tolerances or to otherwise settle disputes to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
additional test series of substantiation from previous projects not to exceed two per source will be required if source of prestressing steel changes during project .
num .
apparatus and methods used to perform the test must be submitted to the engineer for approval in writing .
num .
tests must be conducted in the engineers presence .
num inplace wobble and friction test num .
test inplace a minimum of one tendon per tendon group performing the same function for tendons in excess of num feet long .
num return to table of contents num .
functional tendon groups are cantilever tendons continuity tendons draped external tendons or continuous profiled tendons passing through one or more spans .
num .
selected tendon will represent the size and length of tendon group being tested .
num .
inplace test is not required on projects with straight tendons used in flat slabs or precast voided slabs .
num .
test procedure consists of stressing tendon at an anchorage assembly with a load cell or a second certified jack at dead end .
num .
stress test specimen to num of guts in eight equal increments .
num .
for each increment record gauge pressure elongations and load cell force if a load cell is used .
num .
take into account any wedge seating in both live end i.e .
back of jack and dead end i.e .
back of load cell and any friction within anchorages wedge plates and jack as a result of slight deviations of strands or wires through these assemblies .
num .
keep an accurate account of elongation at jacking end allowing for intermediate wedge seating and slip of the jacks wedges for long tendons requiring multiple jack pulls with intermediate temporary anchoring .
num .
if elongations fall outside the plus or minus num range compared to anticipated elongations investigate reason and make detailed calculations confirming final tendon forces are in agreement with requirements of the approved contract documents .
num .
do not vary value of expected friction and wobble coefficients by more than plus or minus num in reconciling theoretical and actual elongations .
num .
submit for written approval by the engineer a plan to correct or compensate for elongation discrepancies if necessary .
num .
the engineer will require one successful test for each tendon group for the project .
num .
the engineer may require additional inplace tests if there are irreconcilable differences between forces and elongations or other difficulties during the course of routine stressing operations .
num .
submit apparatus and methods used to perform test to the engineer for approval in writing .
num .
conduct all inplace tests in the engineers presence .
num required reports num .
submit the test report for tendon modulus of elasticity test to the engineer at least num days before installing tendon .
num .
submit the test report for inplace wobble and friction test to the engineer within two weeks after successful installation of tested tendon .
num test results application num .
reevaluate theoretical elongations shown on pt shop or working drawings using results of tendon modulus of elasticity test and inplace wobble and friction test as appropriate and correct calculations as necessary .
num .
submit revisions to theoretical elongations to the engineer for approval in writing .
num contractor field tests num prior to concrete placement num all tendons except as noted num return to table of contents num .
test all pt system components utilized on the project except those used for internal longitudinal tendons in boxgirder segments .
num .
in the formwork pressure test each duct with all assemblies used in a single structural component e.g .
segment beam etc .. num .
test assemblies in their final position just prior to concrete placement by sealing them at their anchorages or construction joint termini and then applying compressed air in accordance with this section to determine if assembly connections are pressure tight .
num .
in presence of the engineer pressurize duct to num psi and lock off outside air source .
record pressure loss for one minute .
if pressure loss exceeds num psi or num find and repair leaks in duct assembly using repair methods approved by the engineer and retest .
num tendons for which vacuum assisted filler injection will be used num .
test all pt system components utilized on the project except those used for internal longitudinal tendons in boxgirder segments .
num .
in the formwork perform a vacuum test for each duct with all assemblies used in a single structural component e.g .
segment beam etc .. num .
test assemblies in their final position just prior to concrete placement by sealing them at their anchorages or construction joint termini and then applying a vacuum in accordance with this section to determine if assembly connections are pressure tight .
num .
in presence of the engineer apply a num vacuum and lockoff outside air source .
record vacuum loss for five minutes .
if vacuum loss exceeds num find and repair leaks in duct assembly using repair methods approved by the engineer and retest .
num post concrete placement num .
after stressing and before injecting filler into duct install all anchorage caps inlets and outlets and test the duct with compressed air in accordance with this section to determine if duct connections require repair .
num .
in the presence of the engineer pressurize duct to num psi and lockoff outside air source .
record pressure loss for one minute .
a pressure loss less than num psi or num is acceptable for ducts with a length of equal to or less than num feet and a pressure loss less than num psi is acceptable for ducts longer than num feet .
num .
if the pressure loss exceeds allowable repair leaking connections using methods approved by the engineer and retest .
num contractor inspections num post concrete placementprior to filler injection operations num .
upon completion of concrete placement and except as otherwise described prove pt ducts are free and clear of any obstructions or damage and are able to accept intended pt tendons by passing a torpedo through ducts .
num .
use a torpedo having same crosssectional shape as duct that is num inches smaller all around than clear nominal inside dimensions of duct .
make no deductions to torpedo section dimensions for tolerances allowed in manufacture or fixing of ducts .
for straight ducts use a torpedo at least two feet long .
for curved ducts determine length so that when both ends touch outermost wall of duct torpedo is num inches clear of innermost wall .
the engineer will reject member if torpedo will not travel completely through duct and workable num return to table of contents repair can not be made to clear duct .
torpedo must pass through duct easily when pushed through by hand without resorting to excessive effort or mechanical assistance .
num .
alternatively four strand tendons in flat ducts used for transverse pt of segmental boxgirders may be preplaced prior to concrete casting .
prove pt ducts are free and clear of any obstructions or damage by moving the group of strands back and forth in duct for a minimum distance of one foot in each direction .
move strands easily by hand without resorting to excessive effort or mechanical assistance .
num post filler injection operations num post grouting operations num .
inspect all tendons .
complete the inspection of a given tendon within num hours after grouting of that tendon .
num .
do not open or remove inlets outlets drains or ports until grout has cured for a minimum of num hours .
num .
perform inspections within one hour after removal of all inlets and outlets and drains located at anchorages and points along the tendon .
num .
drill into grout ports at all high points along tendon as well as inlets or outlets located at anchorages for inspection .
drill through hardened grout to penetrate fulllength of grout port access piping to top of trumpet or duct .
if drilling of inlets or outlets is not feasible with conventional equipment propose an alternative method of tendon inspection for approval by the engineer in writing .
use drilling equipment that will automatically shutoff when steel is encountered .
do not drill into anchorage cap unless anchorage caps are determined to have voids by sounding .
num .
perform all inspections using borescopes or probes and in presence of the engineer .
num .
fill voids using volumetric measuring vacuum grouting process not less than num hours prior to the maximum number of calendar days in num allowed between first installation of prestressing steel within duct and completion of the stressing and grouting operation for pt .
if the maximum number of days in num have been exceeded have vacuum grouting equipment and experienced operators available within num hours notice .
num .
seal and repair all anchorage and inletoutlet voids that are produced by drilling for inspection purposes as specified within four hours of completion of inspections if no additional voids are detected in tendon ducts or anchorages .
num .
remove inletoutlet to a minimum depth of two inches below face of concrete and seal the surface as specified within num hours of inletoutlet removal .
use an injection tube to extend to bottom of holes for backfilling with epoxy grout .
num .
drill into duct and explore voided areas with a borescope if grouting operations were prematurely terminated prior to completely filling duct .
probing is not allowed .
determine location and extent of all voided areas .
fill voids using volumetric measuring vacuum grouting equipment in accordance with this section .
num post flexible filler injection operations num microcrystalline wax num .
inspect all tendons .
complete the inspection of a given tendon within num hours after injecting that tendon with wax .
num .
do not open or remove inlets outlets drains or ports until wax has cooled for a minimum of num hours .
num return to table of contents num .
perform inspections within one hour after removal of all inletsoutlets located at anchorages and high points along the tendon .
num .
visually inspect existing ports at all high points along tendon as well as inlets and outlets located at anchorages .
repair wax leaks according to the wax injection operations plan .
num .
between num and num hours following wax injection perform the following inspection operations for each tendon a .
sound external ducts with a rubber mallet to ensure the system is free from voids b .
remove all inspection port caps and visually inspect to ensure the system is free from voids c. if a void is detected and the void is deeper than num inch or if the strands are exposed and uncoated address the void using this section and methods described in the approved wax injection operations plan d. fill voids created by inspection procedures and replace all inspection port caps and seal in accordance with the approved wax injection operations plan .
num .
fill voids using volumetric measuring vacuum wax injection process not less than num hours prior to the maximum number of calendar days in num num allowed between first installation of prestressing steel within duct and completion of the stressing and wax injection operation for pt .
if the maximum number of days in num have been exceeded have vacuum wax injection equipment and experienced operators available within num hours notice .
num .
seal and repair all anchorage and inlet outlet and port voids that are produced for inspection purposes as described in the approved wax injection operations plan within four hours of completion of inspections if no additional voids are detected in tendon ducts or anchorages .
num .
inspect duct and explore voided areas with a borescope if wax injection operation was prematurely terminated prior to completely filling duct .
determine location and extent of all voided areas .
fill voids using volumetric measuring vacuum wax injection equipment in accordance with this section .
num method of measurement .
num .
quantity of pt tendons to be paid for under this section will be computed weight in pounds of permanent pt steel tendons installed in the completed structure and accepted .
num .
quantity is determined by theoretical plan length measured from anchorage to anchorage measured from front face of bearing plate with no allowance made for waste or extension past bearing faces .
num .
no measurement will be made for temporary pt which is considered incidental to pay item num post tensioning tendons .
num .
use these unit weights for quantity determination table num pt strand and bar weight per unit length prestressing system weight per unit length lbft num inch diameter numwire strand num num inch diameter numwire strand num num return to table of contents num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num num inch high strength deformed bar num note weight per unit length of high strength deformed bars is based on values given in astm anum .
num basis of payment .
num general num .
pt tendons will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound of steel tendon completed and accepted .
num .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing stressing and filler injection of all temporary and permanent internal and external ducts .
payment also includes anchorage assemblies and associated supplemental reinforcing steel required by supplier pt system hardware not embedded in concrete ducts grout and grouting operations flexible filler and filler injection operations all testing including construction of and filler injection into mockups tendon modulus of elasticity test and inplace wobble and friction test protection of pt anchorages inlets outlets drains and all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals necessary for completing the work in accordance with the contract documents .
this payment also includes lubricants in tendon ducts for friction control and flushing lubricants or contaminants from ducts .
num .
anchorage components ducts and similar items of pt system hardware embedded within precast components or castinplace concrete will be deemed to be included in cost of precast component or castinplace concrete in which it is embedded .
num .
payment is based on unit price bid extended by either quantities shown in the contract documents or actual quantities used and accepted whichever is less if the contractor constructs structure with an accepted alternate not detailed in the contract documents .
num .
permanent pt strand wire or bar tendons which are an integral part of individual precast concrete segments or units will be measured and paid for under this item and will not be considered incidental to cost of those precast concrete segments or units .
num .
payment for pt will be made following successful placement stressing filler injection inspection repair protection and written approval by the engineer .
num .
full payment for pt tendons within precast segmental concrete structure units may occur prior to erection of segments into final position when ducts have been injected and anchorage protection system applied and the segmental unit otherwise approved in writing for placement by the engineer .
num pay items payment will be made under item no .
num num posttensioning tendons per pound num return to table of contents section num timber structures num description .
furnish and erect treated timber into various structures .
num materials .
meet the following requirements timber section num preservative section num use timber as specified in the plans .
num timber handling .
handle treated timber with rope slings without sudden dropping breaking of outer fibers bruising or penetration of the surface with tools .
do not use cant dogs hooks or pike poles .
num cutting and framing .
before treatment cut and frame all timbers which are shown by the plans to be furnished in special lengths or framed to detailed dimensions .
limit the cutting of treated timber to minor fitting which might be necessary and that is authorized by the engineer .
for all places where the surface is broken by cutting or otherwise thoroughly coat with the preservatives and by the methods specified in awpa mnum .
num bolt holes .
the contractor may drill holes in the field .
for timbers originally treated with pentachlorophenol creosote creosote solutions or waterborne preservatives field treat all cuts abrasions bolt holes and recesses that occur after treatment with two liberal applications of a compatible preservative in accordance with the requirements specified in awpa standard mnum standard for the care of pressuretreated wood products .
num pile caps .
ensure that pile caps have full even bearing on all piles in the bent and secure them to each pile by a num inch diameter drift bolt extending at least num inches into the pile .
where so shown in the plans cover the tops and ends of pile caps with num ounce minimum weight copper sheet meeting the requirements of astm bnum .
num floors .
attach the planks to each joist or nailing strip with at least two num inch nails for num inch planks or two num inch nails for num inch planks .
use nails that are at least num inch in diameter .
for treated timber floors where a bituminous wearing surface is to be applied lay the planks with the best side up and with adjacent edges in contact .
grade the planks as to thickness before laying and lay the planks so that no two adjacent planks vary in thickness more than num inch .
cut the floor to straight lines along the side of the roadway and walkway .
num return to table of contents num framing .
cut and frame truss and bent timbers to a close fit in such manner that they will have even bearing over the entire contact surface of the joint .
do not perform blocking or shimming of any kind in making the joints .
the engineer will not accept open joints .
num holes for bolts dowels rods and lag screws .
bore holes to the diameters shown in the following table hole use hole diameter drift bolts and dowels num inch less in diameter than the bolt or dowel to be used machine bolts same diameter as the bolt rods num inch greater in diameter than the rod lag screws not larger than the body of the screw at the base of the thread num stringers .
the contractor may use butt joints for outside stringers but shall frame interior stringers to bear over the full width of floor beam or cap at each end .
separate the ends at least num inch to allow circulation of air and securely fasten the ends to the timber on which they rest .
num railings .
construct railings of treated dressed lumber .
num hardware .
num general use hardware including bolts drift pins dowels rods nuts washers spikes nails and all similar incidental metal items necessary to complete the work in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
use common wire nails as commercially manufactured .
use ogee washers of cast or malleable iron .
the contractor may use other hardware of steel iron or any similar material ordinarily used in the manufacture of such articles .
num cca acqd and cac treated timber structures use the fasteners and connectors as described in the following table table hardware requirements for treated timber environmental condition where structure will be located fasteners connectors permanent wood foundations andor where salt spray if prevalent num or num stainless steel num or num stainless steel structures that will be exposed to standing water or rainwater num or num stainless steel num or num stainless steel structures that will be situated indoors and remain dry in service num or num stainless steel hotdipped galvanized fasteners meeting astm anum requirements num or num stainless steel hotdipped galvanized connectors meeting the requirements of astm anum class gnum sheet or better num return to table of contents do not use aluminum in direct contact with treated wood .
num bolts use bolts of the sizes shown in the plans with square heads and nuts and with screw threads that make close fits in the nuts .
upon completion of the installation check all nuts for tightness and cut off protruding bolt ends so that not more than num inch extends beyond the nut .
num inspection the engineer will inspect the hardware for quality of manufacture and accuracy of size prior to use on wood structures .
num countersinking .
perform countersinking wherever the heads of screws or bolts would otherwise interfere with the assembly of the work .
fill recesses formed by countersinking with hot asphalt .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in feet board measure of such timber actually incorporated in and forming a part of the completed structure .
num method of calculation for calculating the quantity of timber the width and thickness will be taken as the actual sizes shown in the plans or ordered by the engineer .
where special sizing is required the width and thickness to be used will be that of the smallest commercial size from which the special piece could be cut .
lengths to be used in the calculations will be the overall lengths of the pieces as shown in the plans except that where the lengths actually incorporated in the structure are less than the lengths shown in the plans the lengths actually incorporated will be used in the calculations .
deductions will not be made for copes scarfs or crownings .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all the work specified in this section including all copper covering over pile heads caps etc .
as shown in the plans all hardware except such plates lag screws and other metal parts as may be shown in the plans to be paid for as structural steel and all paint materials and all excavation painting and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num treated structural timber per thousand board measure .
num return to table of contents section num fiber reinforced polymer fender systems num description .
construct fiber reinforced polymer frp fender systems using components in accordance with this section and the plans .
submit a design for the frp fender system in accordance with num .
num materials .
meet the following requirements fiber reinforced polymer composites piles wales spacerblocks decking splice plates section num concrete used to fill hollow piles section num use only sae type num stainless steel metallic fastening and connection hardware .
num product acceptance .
obtain fender system components from a producer that is currently on the list of producers with accepted quality control program for fiber reinforced polymer composites .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of num .
submit to the engineer the manufacturers certification in accordance with section num that the fender system components meet the material requirements of section num .
num shop drawings and design calculations .
num shop drawings submit shop drawings in accordance with section num .
include the following as a minimum in the shop drawings num .
general notes .
num .
energy absorption capacity eac of the fender system in units of kipft .
num .
fender system deflection in units of feet .
num .
minimum pile tip elevation .
num .
the name and address of the manufacturer for each component including the physical address where the fabrication is performed .
num .
pile configuration and layout based on and compatible with the geometry shown in the plans .
num .
pile and wale material properties including fill material used for hollow piles and required admixtures .
if the material properties are defined in the standard specifications a reference to the applicable sections .
num .
pile and wale section properties used in the design e.g .
ultimate moment capacity stiffness etc .. num .
piletowale and piletopile connection details .
num .
sections views details and dimensions required to successfully complete the construction of the fender system .
num .
any supplier required limitations regarding pile installation techniques or other typical construction practices permitted by section num e.g .
full length pile driving versus jettingdriving combination .
num design calculations design fender piling wales and connections in accordance with the latest edition of the fdot structures design guidelines sdg and the fdot structures detailing manual based on the desired energy capacity rating .
design calculations num return to table of contents may be either by hand or by a computer program with hand calculations verifying the program output .
submit the following design information num .
written certification that the fender system meets the requirements of this section .
num .
a report from an independent lab verifying the flexural properties of the piling as derived from astm dnum using characteristic values in accordance with astm dnum with the following modifications a .
supports shall be located to provide a minimum span to depth ratio of num and a maximum span to depth ration of num. b. threepoint bending tests are acceptable .
c. test a minimum of num samples .
num .
detailed material specifications showing material type quality certifications acceptance and rejection criteria and placement procedures .
num .
other information pertinent to the design and performance of the fender system as necessary .
num design criteria .
num wales wales must meet the following minimum design criteria num .
be structurally continuous across a minimum of two spans .
num .
recess all attachment hardware .
num .
provide sufficient creep resistance to prevent loosening of attachments over time .
num .
provide adequate stiffness to distribute vessel impact loading so as to achieve the maximum efficiency of the system .
num .
for hollow wale sections provide a minimum bolt pullthrough and crushing resistance greater than or equal to the maximum connection reaction force .
pullthrough and crushing resistance is defined at the point of first yield andor the load at which an audible crack occurs .
num .
hollow wale sections must be capable of resisting crushing loads perpendicular to the axis of the member as required for the impact force applied to fender in the analysis used to determine the associated energy absorption capacity of the system .
this impact force may be equally distributed between two lines of wales and over a longitudinal distance of five feet .
num .
provide black wales unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num .
wales must meet the minimum requirements in section num table num .
num piles piles must meet the following minimum design criteria num .
recess all attachment hardware .
num .
provide sufficient creep resistance to prevent loosening of attachments over time .
num .
for hollow pile sections provide a minimum bolt pullthrough and crushing resistance greater than or equal to the maximum connection reaction force .
pullthrough and crushing resistance is defined at the point of first yield andor the load at which first crack occurs .
num .
provide black piles unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num return to table of contents num storage handling and installation .
unless otherwise shown in the manufacturers approved field construction manual use the following construction details .
protect materials at all times against exposure to extreme heat or impact .
transport products in a manner that will minimize scratching or damage to the outer surfaces stack on dunnage above ground so that it may be easily inspected and store in a manner that will avoid damage .
handle and lift products with nylon slings .
do not use sharp instruments in handling the product .
products damaged in shipping or handling will be rejected .
products containing cracks in the reinforcing rods or cracks or splits partial or full depth across the section will be rejected .
cut bevel drill countersink and otherwise install products in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
set all material accurately to required levels and lines with members plumb and true and accurately cut and fitted .
securely attach all materials to substrate by anchoring and fastening as shown in the shop drawings .
perform all cutting and drilling in a manner that allows for the collection of all debris and dispose of properly .
install piles in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity for the entire fender system to be paid will be lump sum .
num basis of payment .
num price and payment for fender system will be full compensation for the work specified in this section including all labor equipment and materials required to furnish and install the piles to the pile cutoff elevations shown in the plans and all wales dimensional lumber material storage costs disposal of unused material and waste transportation costs fasteners and other necessary items required for completing the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num fender system polymeric ls .
num return to table of contents incidental construction section num shear connectors num description .
furnish and install welded shear connectors on steel beams and girders at locations shown in the contract documents .
field weld shear connectors located on the top flange only after the deck forms are in place .
installation of shear connectors in the fabrication plant is not permitted .
num general requirements .
num design provide shear connector studs of a design suitable for endwelding to steel beams and girders with automatically timed stud welding equipment .
provide the type size or diameter and length of stud as specified by the contract documents and as approved by the engineer .
meet the allowable tolerances on dimensions as specified in num .
num arcshield furnish an arcshield ferrule of heatresistant ceramic or other suitable material with each stud .
use material that is not detrimental to the welds does not cause excessive slag and has sufficient strength not to crumble or break due to thermal or structure shock before the weld is completed .
num flux furnish flux for welding with each stud either attached to the end of the stud or combined with the arcshield for automatic application in the welding operation .
num coatings do not paint or galvanize studs .
num qualification use only qualified studs passing the tests prescribed in num .
use the same arcshield in production as used in the qualification tests .
num data to be submitted before placing orders for studs submit to the engineer for approval the following information on the studs to be purchased num .
the name of the manufacturer .
num .
a detailed description of the stud and arcshield to be furnished .
num .
a certification from the manufacturer that the stud is qualified as specified in num .
num .
the qualification test report as certified by the testing laboratory .
num freedom from defects after welding ensure that the studs are free from any defect or substance that would interfere with their function as shear connectors .
num materials .
num metal for shear connector studs meet the requirements of astm anum cold drawn bar grades num num or num either semikilled or fullykilled .
if using fluxretaining caps use caps of a lowcarbon grade steel suitable for welding and meeting the requirements of astm anum .
num mechanical properties for tensile properties as determined by tests of bar stock after drawing or of finished studs meet the following requirements tensile strength num psi minimum yield strength num psi minimum num return to table of contents elongation num in num inches minimum reduction of area num minimum as determined by num offset method .
determine tensile properties in accordance with astm anum .
perform tensile tests of finished studs on studs welded to test plates .
if fracture occurs outside of the middle half of the gage length repeat the test .
num quality and finish provide finished studs of uniform quality and condition free from injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends and other injurious defects .
produce a finish by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
num certification ensure that the manufacturer certifies that the studs as delivered are in accordance with the materials requirements of this subarticle .
submit certified inplant quality control test reports to the engineer upon request .
num construction requirements .
num equipment end weld stud shear connectors to steel beams or girders with automatically timed stud welding equipment connected to a suitable power source .
num interlocking if two or more stud welding guns are to be operated from the same power source interlock them so that only one gun at a time can operate and the operating gun finishes each weld before starting another weld .
num condition of studs at the time of welding ensure that the studs are free from rust rust pits scale oil and other deleterious matter which would adversely affect the welding operation .
num weather limitations do not weld when the base metal temperature is below numf or when the surface is wet or exposed to rain or snow .
num position of welding gun while operating hold the welding gun in position without movement until the weld metal has solidified .
num preparation of areas prepare the surface where studs are to be welded by wire brushing peening prickpunching grinding or other approved methods to remove paint scale rust oils or other deleterious matter which would adversely affect the welding operation .
num spacing ensure that longitudinal and lateral spacing of studs with respect to each other and to edges of beam or girder flanges does not vary more than num inch from the dimensions shown in the plans .
however the engineer will allow a variation of num inch where required to avoid interference with other attachments on the beam or where welding a new stud to replace a defective stud .
provide a minimum distance of num inch from the edge of a stud to the edge of a beam but where possible provide at least num inches .
num testing after allowing them to cool bend the first two studs welded on each beam or girder num degrees by striking the stud with a hammer .
if failure occurs in the weld of either stud correct the procedure and weld and test two successive studs successfully before welding any more studs to the beam or girder .
inform the engineer of any changes in the welding procedure at any time during construction .
when the temperature of the base metal is below numf bend one stud in each num studs welded num degrees in addition to the first two bent as specified above .
num return to table of contents num repair of welds the contractor may repair studs on which a full num degrees weld is not obtained in accordance with the procedures of ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
num reduction in height if the reduction in the height of studs as they are welded becomes less than num inch immediately stop welding and correct the cause .
do not resume welding until the cause has been corrected .
num replacing studs before welding the replacement stud remove the defective stud grind the area smooth and flush or in the case of a pullout of metal fill the pocket with weld metal using the shielded metalarc process with lowhydrogen welding electrodes and then grind flush .
in compression areas of flanges the contractor may weld a new stud adjacent to the defective area in lieu of repair and replacement of the existing weld .
num inspection requirements .
num bend test if visual inspection reveals any stud which does not show a full num degrees weld any stud which has been repaired by welding or any stud in which the reduction in height due to welding is less than normal strike such stud with a hammer and bend num degrees off the vertical .
for studs showing less than a num degrees weld bend the stud in the direction opposite to the lack of weld .
replace studs that crack in either the weld or the shank .
the engineer may select additional studs to be subjected to the bend test specified above .
the contractor may leave the tested studs that show no sign of failure in the bent position .
num unsatisfactory work if during the progress of the shear connectors work inspection and testing indicate that the shear connectors being obtained are not satisfactory make such changes in welding procedure welding equipment and type of shear connector as necessary to secure satisfactory results at no expense to the department .
num requalification if the engineer requests require the manufacturer of the studs to submit sample studs for requalification in accordance with the procedures of num at no expense to the department .
num qualification procedure .
num purpose the purpose of this procedure is to prescribe weldability tests which will qualify a shear connector stud for welding under shop or field conditions .
the contractor may have a university independent laboratory other testing authority or agency perform the tests .
ensure that the agency performing the tests submits to the manufacturer of the stud a certified report giving procedures and results for all tests including the information listed under num .
num duration of qualification once a type and size of stud with arcshield has been qualified the engineer will consider the stud qualified until the manufacturer makes any change in the base of the stud the flux or the arcshield which affects the welding characteristics .
num preparation of specimens prepare test specimens by welding representative studs to the center of square specimen plates num to num inch thick of structural steel astm anum .
the manufacturer may weld studs to a large plate and cut the specimen plates to a size suitable for test equipment used .
num welding procedure weld studs with manufacturer recommended power source welding gun and control equipment .
measure welding voltage current and time by num return to table of contents suitable instrumentation and record these measurements for each specimen .
ensure that lift and plunge are at the manufacturerrecommended optimum setting .
num number of test specimens num .
weld num test specimens consecutively with time held constant at optimum but with current num below optimum .
num .
weld num test specimens consecutively with time held constant at optimum but with current num above optimum .
num qualification tests num tensile tests subject num of the specimens welded in accordance with num num in accordance with num to a tensile test .
the engineer will consider a stud qualified if all test specimens have a tensile strength above the minimum specified in num .
num bend tests place num of the specimens welded in accordance with num num num in accordance with num in a bend testing device and bend alternately num degrees in opposite directions until failure occurs .
the engineer will consider a stud qualified if on all test specimens fracture occurs in the shank of the stud and not in the weld .
num retest if weld failure occurs in any of the tensile or bend test groups the contractor may retest that group .
if weld failure repeats consider the stud as having failed to qualify .
num qualification for a manufacturers studs and arcshields to be qualified ensure that each group of num studs by test or retest meets the requirements prescribed in num .
num report of tests include the following in the laboratory report num .
drawings which show shapes and dimensions with tolerances of studs arc shields and flux .
num .
a complete description of materials used in the studs and arcshields including the quantity and analysis of the flux .
num .
a certification that the studs and arcshields described in the report are qualified in accordance with num .
num dimensions and tolerances .
meet the following dimensions and tolerances c l h t num num inch num num inches num num inches num num num inch num inch minimum num num inch num num inches num num inches num num num inch num inch minimum num inches length is standard .
the contractor may obtain other lengths by special order .
where c shaft diameter l total stud length measured from top of head to base of shaft h diameter of head t thickness of head num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
for the purpose of payment shear connectors will be classified as structural steel .
the quantity to be paid for will be determined in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing and installing shear connectors .
payment will be made in accordance with section num .
num return to table of contents section num steel grid floors num description .
furnish and erect opentype steel grid roadway and sidewalk floors on the movable spans of bridges and at other locations shown in the plans .
where specified in the plans completely fill the floor with concrete .
num materials and construction methods .
num general meet the following requirements portland cement concrete section num structural steel and miscellaneous metals section num shop field and maintenance painting of structural steel section num num roadway floor construct the roadway floor as an open steel grid with rectangular openings .
place and weld the grid to the floor stringers as shown in the plans .
if the flooring requires secondary or supplemental stringers the department will consider these stringers and their fastenings a part of and included in the materials to be furnished and erected under this section .
num sidewalk floor erect sidewalk flooring consisting of a system of main bars and secondary bars arranged in a system of rectangular reticulum or ushaped openings .
do not allow the clear distance in any opening to exceed num inch in one direction .
do not allow the longest dimension of any opening to exceed num inches .
place and weld the floor to the supporting members in accordance with the details shown in the plans or in accordance with the manufacturers directions as approved by the engineer .
num conformance with manufacturers specifications meet the manufacturers specifications for the material and construction methods as approved by the engineer for any type of steel floor used .
num use of trade names where the plans refer to the type of floor by manufacturers designation or trade name the contractor may use a similar floor providing equivalent section modulus per unit width and equivalent surface qualities if approved by the engineer .
num painting .
apply to all exposed areas of steel grid floors the same number type and thicknesses of paint coatings as are specified for painting structural steel .
prepare the surface the same as required for painting structural steel .
although not required the contractor may apply paint on areas to be covered by concrete .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square feet installed complete and accepted .
proper deductions for open joints in the floor will be made in calculating plan quantity .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing and installing the complete floor above the tops of the main floor members shown in the plans furnishing and installing any secondary joists which are required in addition to the main floor members filling any specified portion with concrete furnishing paint materials painting and welding .
payment will be made under item no .
num num steel roadway floor per square foot .
item no .
num num sidewalk floor steel rehab per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num bridge drainage system num description .
construct drainage facilities and accessories to collect and dispose of water from drains on the bridge structures in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
num materials .
use materials as specified or required in the plans .
for aluminum materials submit a certified mill analysis along with a certificate from the producer stating that the materials used meet all requirements of these specifications .
submit such reports to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity for bridge drainage system to be paid for will be at the contract lump sum price .
if bridge drainage piping is included in the contract the quantity to be paid for will be at the length in feet .
if bridge drains are included in the contract the quantity to be paid for will be at the contract unit price for each .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work equipment and materials specified in this section or shown in the plans including the complete installation of the drainage system for the bridge structure .
payment will be made under item no .
num num bridge drainage system lump sum .
item no .
num num bridge drainage piping per foot .
item no .
num num bridge drains each .
num return to table of contents section num navigation lights for fixed bridges num description .
furnish and install navigation lighting systems including all wiring conduit wiring devices transformers enclosures grounding system controls protective devices lights etc .
as shown in the plans and in compliance with code of federal regulations cfr title num part num which is further clarified in u.s. coast guard uscg publication a guide to bridge lighting .
navigation lights must operate from sunset to sunrise and during periods of low visibility .
num coordination of electrical work .
use experienced personnel in the type of work required by the contract documents to provide a complete and satisfactory fitting and fully operational installation .
perform all electrical work either by or under the immediate supervision of an electrical journeyman .
schedule and arrange electrical work in a neat wellorganized manner without interference with the work scheduling of other trades .
num materials and equipment .
meet the equipment and material requirements as shown in the contract documents .
furnish and install only materials and equipment of new stock meeting ansi nec nema and ul requirements and approved by the engineer except where the contract documents allow or specify the use of other than new equipment .
furnish and install marine type products manufactured of corrosion resistant materials .
furnish and install only fasteners manufactured from astm num stainless steel with yield strength num psi or higher .
furnish and install astm num series stainless steel conduit straps or hangers held at not less than two points .
furnish and install framework for supporting boxes switches and other externally mounted electrical devices fabricated from astm anum grade num hotdip galvanized structural steel .
num navigation lights and aids .
num navigation lights equip all navigation lights with a led array with a minimum of num hour life and bright enough to meet the visibility requirements of cfr title num part num .
mount led arrays on an internal shock and vibration isolator .
provide in the circuit a lightning surge suppressor capable of absorbing multiple strikes without replacement .
provide special power supply to provide current limited dc voltage to the led array .
furnish and install fixtures with unpainted housings of heavy duty cast aluminum or bronze construction with a num to num inch threaded conduit opening on the bottom .
use only marine type mounting boxes with minimum num inch conduit opening .
furnish and install fixtures with lenses that are standard marine molded singlepiece fresnel type rigid heat resistant glass or u.v .
resistant polycarbonate and inside diameter of num to num inch .
furnish all stainless steel closure bolts lens tie rods and attachment hardware for a complete and accepted installation .
num return to table of contents furnish and install pierfender lights center channel lights and channel margin lights with cast aluminum or bronze swivel assembly and mounting bracket complete with stainless steel pivot watertight o ring seal bronze bearings cable entrance fitting and stainless steel service chain rated for a minimum num pounds load .
use a num or num inch galvanized pipe or stainless steel pipe as a hanger stem with automatic lock at service and operating positions .
furnish and install a num counterweight if stem exceeds num feet in length .
ensure the pierfender light is equipped with a red num degree lens the center channel light is equipped with a green num degree lens and the channel margin light is equipped with a red num degree lens .
num clearance gauge lights furnish and install onepiece diecast aluminum fixture housing fitted with watertight gasket stainless steel hinges and fasteners and adjustable aiming capability equipped with a num vac num watt highpressure sodium lamp .
use a heavy cast aluminum connection box body and cover with stainless steel swing bolts watertight gasket and provisions for mounting to a platform with four stainless steel lag bolts or screws .
num disconnect switches .
furnish and install switches that are hp rated and meet federal and nema specifications with nema type numx stainless steel enclosures and with metal factory nameplates that are front cover mounted and contain a permanent record of switch type catalog number and hp rating .
provide switch with visible blades reinforced fuse clips and non teasible positive quick makequick break mechanisms .
provide switch assembly plus operating handle as an integral part of the enclosure base .
use switches with defeat able door interlocks that prevent the door from opening when the operating handle is in the on position and whose handle position is easily recognizable and is padlockable in the off position .
use heavyduty switches with line terminal shields .
num fusible switch assemblies furnish and install nema ks num type load interrupter enclosed knife switch .
provide fuse clips that are designed to accommodate class r fuses .
num nonfusible switch assemblies furnish and install nema ks num hd type load interrupter enclosed knife switch .
num enclosures furnish and install nema ks num type enclosure as shown in the contract documents .
num installation install disconnect switches where indicated in the contract document or where required by the engineer .
use separate conduits for line and load conductors .
install fuses in fusible disconnect switches .
num supporting and mounting devices .
ensure the sizes and types of anchors fasteners and supports used are adequate to carry the load of the equipment and conduit including the wire in the conduit .
space conduit supports to avoid conflicts with reinforcing steel at num feet maximum .
for concrete mounting use anchor bolts and all matching parts and tools recommended by and provided by the same manufacturer as well as suitable for dynamic loading caused by vibration due to traffic .
to mount conduit supports and pull boxes use num inch diameter anchor system .
to mount channel lights use minimum num inch diameter anchor system with num inch embedment and num inch edge distance .
num return to table of contents use astm num series stainless steel conduit straps or hangers held at not less than two points .
do not use powderactuated anchors .
do not drill or weld structural steel members .
do not use bolts smaller than num inch in diameter except as may be necessary to fit the mounting holes in small and light devices .
install surfacemounted boxes with minimum of three anchors .
num conduit .
num general furnish and install conduit in the quantities and sizes required to complete the work as shown in the plans and as required by nec .
use products listed and classified by ul as suitable for purpose specified and shown .
do not use nonmetallic flexible conduit aluminum or electrical metallic tubing emt .
num liquidtight flexible metal conduit furnish and install liquidtight flexible metal conduit of interlocked steel construction with pvc jacket and fittings meeting the requirements of ansinema fb num .
num pvc conduit furnish and install schedule num pvc num inch minimum diameter conduit meeting the requirements of astm dnum and nema tc num and fittings and conduit bodies meeting the requirements of astm dnum and nema tc num .
num fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit furnish and install rigid nonmetallic fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit and fittings manufactured in accordance with the applicable standards of ansi and nema tcnumb .
ensure the conduit has a bell and spigot type coupling and the coupling seal is made rigid by using an adhesive that will provide a water and vapor tight joint with a tensile strength equal to that listed for the conduit .
an alternative type assembly may be used by applying a triple seal ribbed gasket of water resistant rubber material .
ensure the gasket is held firmly in place with a compatible adhesive .
ensure that all fittings adapters and bends are manufactured from the same materials as the conduit and conform to the dimensional requirements of nema tcnum .
use only fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit and fittings made by the same manufacturer to insure proper fit and assembly listed on the ul approved list and labeled for type i service sizes num to num inches .
ensure that each piece of conduit and fitting is clearly marked with durable contrasting ink stenciled with the following num .
nominal size num .
bends to show the degree and radius of curvature num .
type sw or hw num .
manufacturers name or trademark .
num installation install conduit in accordance with national electrical contractors association neca standard of installation and manufacturers instructions .
arrange supports to prevent misalignment during wiring installation .
support conduit using straps layin adjustable hangers clevis hangers and split hangers .
do not support conduit with wire or perforated pipe straps plastic straps or plastic hangers .
ensure that all wire used for temporary supports is removed upon completion of installation .
install an expansion fitting for specified pvc conduit at all structure expansion joints or where movement between adjacent sections of conduit is expected .
submit certification to the engineer from the manufacture that the expansion fitting meets the following minimum num return to table of contents requirements compatibility with the connected conduits water proof uv protected and allows longitudinal movement equal to that of the expansion joint or movement expected .
route exposed conduit parallel and perpendicular to walls and concrete barriers or route conduit in traffic railings .
install conduits to be continuous and watertight between boxes or equipment .
protect conduits at all times from the entrance of water and other foreign matter by being capped or well plugged overnight and when the work is temporarily suspended .
cut conduit square using saw or pipe cutter deburr cut ends .
bring conduit to shoulder of fittings fasten securely .
use conduit hubs to fasten conduit to metal boxes .
do not install more than the equivalent of three num degree bends total num degrees between boxes .
use conduit bodies to make sharp changes in direction such as around diaphragms .
join pvc conduit using cement recommended by manufacturer .
wipe pvc conduit dry and clean before joining .
apply full even coat of cement to entire area inserted in fitting .
allow joint to cure for a minimum of num minutes before pulling conductors .
do not use flexible conduit extensions greater than num inches in length .
ensure that all flexible conduit extensions are equipped with bonding jumpers .
do not allow moisture traps provide pull box with drain fitting at low points in exposed conduit system .
num wiring .
num general do not use aluminum conductors .
use only se or rhw on incoming service and use single conductor with xhhw insulation unless otherwise noted in the plans .
do not use wire smaller than no .
num awg .
furnish insulated conductors of seven or nineteen strand copper with a minimum num conductivity and connector accessories for copper in sufficient quantities for a complete installation .
num installation use pull boxes wherever necessary to facilitate the installation of the conductors .
do not use condulets for pulling more than ten conductors or for branching conductors .
splice only in accessible boxes .
make lug connections with high pressure indent connector tools as recommended by the lug manufacturer .
make splices and taps to carry full ampacity of conductors without perceptible temperature rise .
tighten all connections to manufacturers recommendations .
tape uninsulated conductors and connectors with electrical tape to num of the insulation value of conductor .
ensure all splices are waterproof .
use solderless pressure connectors with insulating covers for no .
num awg and smaller wire splices and taps .
use split bolt connectors for no .
num awg and larger wire splices and taps .
pull all conductors into a raceway at the same time .
use soap base wire pulling lubricant for pulling no .
num awg and larger wire .
num testing test each circuit for continuity and shortcircuits for its complete length before being connected to its load .
inspect wire and cable for physical damage and proper connection .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be at the contract lump sum price completed and accepted .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num navigation lights lump sum .
num return to table of contents section num plastic filter fabric geotextile num description .
install a plastic filter fabric .
num material .
meet the plastic filter fabric requirements as specified in section num .
num construction methods .
num general place the plastic filter fabric fabric in the manner and locations as shown in the plans in accordance with the manufacturers directions and as specified in these specifications .
place the fabric on areas with a uniform slope that are reasonably smooth free from mounds windrows and any debris or projections which might damage the fabric .
loosely lay the material .
do not stretch the material .
replace or repair any fabric damaged or displaced before or during placement of overlying layers to the satisfaction of the engineer and at no expense to the department .
when overlapping is necessary the contractor may sew the seams to reduce overlaps as specified in num .
schedule work so that covering the fabric with the specified material does not exceed the manufacturers recommendations for exposure to ultraviolet light or five days whichever is less .
if the engineer determines the exposure time was exceeded the contractor shall replace the fabric at no expense to the department .
num subsurface drainage when indicated in the plans place the fabric with the long dimension parallel to the trench .
place the fabric to provide a minimum num inch overlap for each joint .
do not drop the filter material from heights greater than num feet .
num stabilization and reinforcement overlap adjacent strips of fabric a minimum of num inches .
num riprap filter overlap adjacent strips of fabric a minimum of num inches and anchor them with securing pins as recommended by the manufacturer inserted through both strips of fabric along a line through the midpoint of the overlap and to the extent necessary to prevent displacement of the fabric .
place the fabric so that the upstream upper strip of fabric overlaps the downstream lower strip .
stagger vertical laps a minimum of num feet .
use full rolls of fabric whenever possible in order to reduce the number of vertical laps .
do not drop bedding stone or riprap from heights greater than num feet onto the fabric .
num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for the work specified in this section .
the cost of furnishing placing and sewing or overlapping the fabric will be included in the contract price for the items to which it is incidental .
num return to table of contents section num metal pedestrianbicycle railings guiderails and handrails num description .
furnish and install metal pedestrianbicycle railings including bullet rails guiderails and handrails in accordance with the plans and standard plans .
obtain rail components from producers currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
meet the following requirements concrete section num anchor bolts rods nuts and washers section num adhesive anchors section num aluminum section num bearing pads num epoxy mortar section num steelsection num do not use expansion anchors .
use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num construction requirements .
num general space posts to clear obstacles without exceeding maximum post spacing and maintain a uniform spacing with reasonable consistency .
place splices in approximately the same place within a railing section .
railings must be free of burrs and sharp edges and all plug welds ground smooth .
num welds nondestructive testing of welds is not required unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num aluminum railing welds must be in accordance with section num .
filler material for seal welds plug welds and bend splices may be ernum .
num steel railing meet the requirements of section num except weld connections must be in accordance with aws dnum structural welding code using enumxx weld material unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num coatings num aluminum railing coating is not required unless otherwise shown in the plans .
finished product must have a smooth uniform appearance .
when a colored coating is required use a fluoropolymer based powder coating system complying with american architectural manufacturers association aama specification no .
num .
num steel railing components must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication in accordance with section num unless otherwise shown in the plans .
when a colored coating is required meet the requirements of num .
num shop drawings .
submit shop drawings and obtain approval prior to fabrication in accordance with section num .
show project specific geometry line and grade post type and locations expansion joint and splice locations .
num return to table of contents include other project specific details such as tapered end transitions continuity or transition details post and panel infill type and anchor bolt general details .
num installation .
num general place a num inch thick bearing pad with dimensions matching the base plate between the base plate and concrete surface .
num bullet railings install rail posts perpendicular to the profile grade longitudinally and plumb transversely .
num pedestrian bicycle railings and guiderails for locations other than bridges fabricate and install posts plumb .
on bridges fabricate and install posts perpendicular to the profile grade line longitudinally and plumb transversely .
use aluminum shim plates to make necessary adjustments .
bond stacked shim plates with adhesive bonding material and field trim shim plates to match the foundation contours .
beveled shim plates may be used in lieu of trimmed flat shim plates .
if shims greater than num inch total thickness are required provide longer anchor bolts .
bolts must be long enough to secure washers and nuts and meet the minimum embedment length .
post tolerance from plumb is plus or minus one inch measured at num inches above the foundation .
rails must form a smooth continuous line without hills or dips greater than num inch between any three posts or side sway greater than num inch between post assemblies .
num anchoring num general secure nuts to a snug tight condition .
tack weld nuts to stem or distort bolt threads to prevent nut loosening and removal .
coat damaged galvanizing on bolt stems nuts and tack welds in accordance with section num .
num adhesive anchors install anchors in accordance with section num .
num cip and thrubolt anchors use galvanized hex head anchor bolts .
when thrubolting is used coat cut reinforcing steel inside the drilled hole with a zinc galvanizing compound in accordance with section num prior to installing bolts .
num embedded guiderail posts core holes into the foundation concrete then clean holes in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
at a minimum use oil free compressed air to remove loose particles brush the inside surface to free loose particles then use compressed air again to remove any remaining particles .
use a type ab or f epoxy compound to secure guiderail posts into the cored holes .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of railing to be paid for will be the plan quantity in linear feet installed and accepted .
the quantity will be measured along the centerline of the top rail .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials hardware labor and incidentals required to complete the installation .
for relocation of existing railing price and payment will be full compensation for the removal and reinstallation including all materials hardware labor and incidentals required to complete the installation .
payment will be made under the following item no .
num num pipe handrailguiderail per linear foot .
item no .
num num pedestrianbicycle railing per linear foot .
num return to table of contents item no .
num num handrail retrofit to existing railing per linear foot .
item no .
num num aluminum bullet railings per linear foot .
num return to table of contents section num concrete gutter curb elements and traffic separator num description .
construct portland cement concrete curb .
curb will include concrete curb and gutter concrete traffic separator valley gutter special concrete gutter curb for sidewalk curb ramps and driveways and any other types of concrete curb not specified in other sections .
num materials .
num concrete use concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
num reinforcement for all steel reinforcement required by the plans meet the requirements of section num .
num joint materials meet the requirements of section num .
num forms .
num form materials construct forms for this work of either wood or metal .
provide forms that are straight free from warp or bends and of sufficient strength when staked to resist the pressure of the concrete without deviation from line and grade .
for all items constructed on a radius use flexible forms .
num depth of forms ensure that forms have a depth equal to the plan dimensions for the depth of concrete being deposited against them .
num machine placement the contractor may place these items by machine methods with the approval of the engineer provided that the contractor consistently produces an acceptable finished product true to line grade and cross section .
num excavation .
excavate to the required depth and compact the foundation material upon which these items are to be placed as specified in num .
num placing concrete .
place the concrete in the forms and tamp and spade it to prevent honeycombing and until the top of the structure can be floated smooth and the edges rounded to the radius shown in the plans .
num joints .
num contraction joints except for machine placed items the contractor may form joints by using dummy joints either formed or sawed or by using sheet metal templates .
if using sheet metal templates ensure that they are of the dimensions and are set to the lines shown in the plans .
hold templates firmly while placing the concrete .
leave templates in place until the concrete has set sufficiently to hold its shape but remove them while the forms are still in place .
saw contraction joints for machine placed items unless the engineer approves an alternate method .
saw the joints as soon as the concrete has hardened to the degree that excessive raveling will not occur and before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking begins .
space contraction joints at intervals of num feet except where closure requires a lesser interval but do not allow any section to be less than num feet in length .
num return to table of contents num expansion joints construct expansion joints at all inlets at all radius points and at other locations indicated in the plans .
locate them at intervals of num feet between other expansion joints or ends of a run .
ensure that the joint is num inch in width .
num finishing .
num repair of minor defects remove the forms within num hours after placing the concrete and then fill minor defects with mortar composed of one part portland cement and two parts fine aggregate .
the engineer will not allow plastering on the face of the curb .
remove and replace any rejected curb curb and gutter or valley gutter without additional compensation .
num final finish finish all exposed surfaces while the concrete is still green .
in general the engineer will only require a brush finish .
for any surface areas however which are too rough or where other surface defects make additional finishing necessary the engineer may require the contractor to rub the curb to a smooth surface with a soft brick or wood block using water liberally .
also if necessary to provide a suitable surface the engineer may require the contractor to rub further using thin grout or mortar .
num imprinted concrete install imprinted concrete as shown in the plans .
num curing .
num general continuously cure the concrete for a period of at least num hours .
commence curing after completely finishing and as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit application of the curing material without marring the surface .
immediately replace any curing material removed or damaged during the num hour period .
after removing the forms cure the surfaces exposed by placing a berm of moist earth against them or by any of the methods described below for the remainder of the num hour curing period .
num wet burlap method place burlap as specified in num over the entire exposed surface of the concrete with sufficient extension beyond each side to ensure complete coverage .
overlap adjacent strips a minimum of num inches .
hold the burlap securely in place such that it will be in continuous contact with the concrete at all times and do not allow any earth between the burlap surfaces at laps or between the burlap and the concrete .
saturate the burlap with water before placing it and keep it thoroughly wet throughout the curing period .
num membrane curing compound method apply clear membrane curing compound or white pigmented curing compound as specified in num by a hand sprayer meeting the requirements of num in a single coat continuous film at a uniform coverage of at least one gallon per num square feet .
immediately recoat any cracks checks or other defects appearing in the coating .
thoroughly agitate the curing compound in the drum prior to application and during application as necessary to prevent settlement of the pigment .
num polyethylene sheeting method place polyethylene sheeting as specified in num over the entire exposed surface of the concrete with sufficient extension beyond each side to ensure complete coverage .
overlap adjacent strips a minimum of num inches .
hold the sheeting securely in place and in continuous contact with the concrete at all times .
num backfilling and compaction .
after the concrete has set sufficiently but not later than three days after pouring refill the spaces in front and back of the curb to the required elevation with suitable material .
place and thoroughly compact the material in layers not thicker than num inches .
num return to table of contents num surface requirements .
test the gutter section of curb and gutter with a num foot straightedge laid parallel to the centerline of the roadway and while the concrete is still plastic .
perform straightedging along the edge of the gutter adjacent to the pavement or along other lines on the gutter crosssection as directed by the engineer .
immediately correct irregularities in excess of num inch .
num method of measurement .
for curb or curb and gutter the quantity to be paid will be plan quantity in feet measured along the face of the completed and accepted curb or curb and gutter .
curb for sidewalk curb ramps or driveways will be paid at the contract unit price for the adjacent curb type .
for valley gutter or shoulder gutter the quantity to be paid will be plan quantity in feet measured along the gutter line of the completed and accepted valley gutter or shoulder gutter .
for concrete traffic separator of constant width the quantity to be paid will be plan quantity in feet measured along the center of its width completed and accepted including the length of the nose .
for concrete traffic separator of varying width the quantity to be paid will be plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
num concrete gutter curb elements and traffic separator price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including reinforcement steel joint materials and asphalt curb pad .
num excavation excavation for new installations will be paid for as roadway excavation in accordance with num .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num concrete curb and gutter per foot .
item no .
num num concrete curb per foot .
item no .
num num concrete valley gutter per foot .
item no .
num num concrete traffic separator per foot .
item no .
num num concrete shoulder gutter per foot .
item no .
num num concrete traffic separator per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num concrete barriers traffic railings and parapets num description .
construct precast or cast in place concrete barriers traffic railings and parapets herein referred to as rigid barrier in accordance with the standard plans and the details shown in the plans .
use stationary removable forms or sliding forms to construct the rigid barrier .
do not use permanent precast concrete rigid barrier on bridge or box culvert structures .
submit written certification from the manufacturer of the precast rigid barrier that the barrier meets the requirements of this section .
rigid barrier is produced using certification acceptance therefore assume responsibility for performance of quality control testing and inspections required by sections num and num .
perform all quality control testing and inspections using ctqp qualified testing personnel .
perform compressive strength testing in a laboratory inspected by ccrl or cmec .
ensure that each shipment of products to the job site includes a list of products shipped and the required written certification statement for each product .
submit this list and certifications to the engineer .
num materials .
meet the following requirements portland cement concrete section num reinforcing steel section num joint materials num joint materials num and num barrier delineators num sections num and num use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num mount delineators on the barriers by adhesive or mechanical means as per the manufacturers recommendations and in accordance with the details shown in the plans and the standard plans .
num precast temporary concrete barrier .
meet the requirements of num .
num construction .
num general the contractor may use stationary removable forms or slip form construction methods provided a completed rigid barrier with acceptable alignment and finish is obtained .
do not use forms which are damaged or are not in alignment .
at no expense to the department remove and replace sections of rigid barrier having unconsolidated concrete surface blemishes deviations in alignment or profile which exceed tolerances or other defects which can not be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num stationary form construction provide precast or cast in place concrete rigid barrier constructed using stationary forms in accordance with section num and provide a general surface finish .
align and erect the stationary form so that all plane surfaces of the finished barrier will have no deviation greater than num inch measured as an ordinate between the concrete and a num foot straightedge .
correct all alignment deviations greater than num inch .
straightedge by half lapping the straightedge for the full length of all plane surfaces .
num return to table of contents num slip form construction when electing to use the slip form method in lieu of the stationary forming method place the concrete with a slip form machine approved by the engineer .
the concrete cover tolerance is plus or minus num inches from the plan dimensions except the minimum concrete cover as constructed must not be less than num inches .
provide a finished texture to the slip formed rigid barrier by hand troweling brushing or both to eliminate pockmarks blemishes and any other discontinuities in surface texture .
ensure that the final finish has a fine texture and is free of pinholes pockmarks and blemishes .
remove and recast or repair sections of slip formed rigid barrier having areas of unconsolidated concrete having surface blemishes andor having pockmarks greater than num inch in diameter after hand troweling and brushing .
repair areas of unsatisfactory surface finish by hand methods using mortar screened from the concrete used to construct the rigid barrier .
use the mortar screened from the rigid barrier concrete only to fill holes and surface blemishes below the slip formed surface of the concrete .
do not use mortar as a surface overlay coating on the rigid barrier concrete .
during the finishing operation while the concrete remains plastic straightedge all plane surfaces of the slip formed rigid barrier with a num foot straightedge .
straightedge by half lapping the straightedge for the full length of the plane surfaces .
correct any deviation found during straightedging greater than num inch measured as an ordinate between the concrete surface and the straightedge in an approved manner at no expense to the department .
do not use surface overlay coatings of mortar screened from the concrete or surface overlay coatings of concrete to correct alignment deviations .
num curing .
meet the requirements of section num .
num joints .
num general place expansion and contraction joints in concrete rigid barrier either mounted on or adjoining rigid structures in a manner similar to the type and method of jointing used in the supporting or adjoining structure or as shown in the contract documents .
place expansion and contraction joints in concrete rigid barrier supported by soil or flexible foundation materials in the manner detailed in the plans .
num contraction joints in rigid barrier supported by or adjoining rigid structures the contractor may form or saw contraction joints .
when sawing contraction joints saw them as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without raveling and before uncontrolled cracking occurs but in no case later than num hours after casting .
match contraction joints to adjacent contraction joints in the structure .
space contraction joints at num to num foot intervals .
for rigid barrier on bridge structures or approach slabs space contraction joints as shown in the contract documents .
num expansion joints in rigid barrier supported by or adjoining rigid structures construct expansion joints at right angles to the face and extend them through the entire crosssection of the rigid barrier .
construct expansion joints at the same location and width as the expansion joints in the structure on which the rigid barrier rests and at other locations shown in the contract documents .
form expansion joints with an expansion filler material or removable forming materials and secure to the forms as required to provide proper position .
num return to table of contents num repairs and rejection .
for permanent precast concrete rigid barrier that has not been installed evaluate cracks spalls and other deficiencies in accordance with num .
repair deficiencies in accordance with num or the plants approved repair methods that are included as part of the quality control qc plan .
ensure that the original performance and durability of the repaired rigid barrier is maintained .
use materials for concrete repair that will meet or exceed the strength requirement for the class of concrete used .
materials meeting the requirements of section num may be substituted for nonshrink grout when required by num .
concrete rigid barrier is subject to rejection if it fails to conform to any of the specification requirements after repair .
the disposition of concrete cracks in rigid barrier after installation shall be in accordance with num num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for under this section will be the plan quantity in feet completed and accepted .
the quantity will be measured along the top of the rigid barrier from begin to end station including transitional and end sections with no deduction for expansion joints or open joints .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all reinforcing steel materials soil stabilization and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num median concrete barrier per foot .
item no .
num num concrete traffic railing bridge per foot .
item no .
num num concrete parapet per foot .
item no .
num num concrete barrier with junction slab per foot .
item no .
num num shoulder concrete barrier per foot .
num return to table of contents section num concrete sidewalk and driveways num description .
construct concrete sidewalks and driveways .
sidewalk will include sidewalk curb ramps .
num materials .
meet the requirements specified in num .
num forms .
provide forms as specified in num .
num foundation .
compact fill areas including cut areas under the sidewalk that have been excavated more than num inches below the bottom of sidewalk to a minimum of num of aashto tnum density .
the area to be compacted is defined as that area directly under the sidewalk and num foot beyond each side of the sidewalk when rightofway allows .
num joints .
num expansion joints form num inch expansion joints between the sidewalk and the curb or driveway or at fixed objects and sidewalk intersections with a preformed joint filler meeting the requirements specified in num .
num contraction joints num types the contractor may use open type or sawed contraction joints .
num opentype joints form open type contraction joints by staking a metal bulkhead in place and depositing the concrete on both sides .
after the concrete has set sufficiently to preserve the width and shape of the joint remove the bulkhead .
after finishing the sidewalk over the joint edge the slot with a tool having a num inch radius .
num sawed joints if electing to saw the contraction joints cut a slot approximately num inch wide and not less than num inches deep with a concrete saw after the concrete has set and within the following periods of time joints at not more than num feet intervals within num hours after finishing .
remaining joints within num hours after finishing .
num placing concrete .
place the concrete as specified in num .
num finishing .
num screeding strikeoff the concrete by means of a wood or metal screed used perpendicular to the forms to obtain the required grade and remove surplus water and laitance .
num surface requirements imprint concrete as detailed in the plans otherwise provide a broom finish .
ensure that the surface variations are not more than num inch under a num foot straightedge or more than num inch on a num foot transverse section .
finish the edge of the sidewalk with an edging tool having a radius of num inch .
num return to table of contents num curing .
cure the concrete as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid will be plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
ramps reconstructed sidewalks walk around sidewalks sidewalk landings sidewalk curb and driveways will be included in the area to be paid .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
excavation for new installations will be paid for under the items for the grading work on the project .
payment will be made under item no .
num concrete sidewalks and driveways per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num patterned pavement num description .
install patterned pavement on asphalt or concrete pavement areas at locations and with the color and pattern as specified in the plans .
use products listed on the approved product list apl as approved for use in areas subject to vehicular traffic or nonvehicular traffic respectively as specified herein .
install products in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
for the purpose of this specification patterned pavements are defined as a post applied surface marking overlay to either the pavement surface or to an imprinted pavement surface .
vehicular traffic areas are defined as those subject to vehicles within the traveled way shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
nonvehicular travel areas include medians islands curb extensions sidewalks borders plazas and other areas typically subject to foot traffic only .
install overlay products in areas subject to vehicular traffic to a thickness not exceeding num mils .
do not use products requiring removal of pavement or requiring blockouts or trenches below the top of pavement .
variations within a pattern shall comply with ada requirements .
num materials .
num general use only patterned pavement products approved for use in vehicular and nonvehicular areas as appropriate and listed on the apl .
meet manufacturers specifications for all patterns textures templates sealers coatings and coloring materials .
material coatings used to achieve the pattern and color shall produce an adherent weather resistant skid resistant wear resistant surface under service conditions .
color shall be integral and consistent throughout the installation .
the composition of materials is intended to be left to the discretion of the manufacturer .
materials shall be characterized as nonhazardous as defined by resource conservation and recovery act rcra subpart c table num of num cfr num toxicity characteristic .
materials shall not exude fumes which are hazardous toxic or detrimental to persons or property .
num approved product list apl manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num along with the following documentation num .
manufacturers recommendations for applicability of use on concrete or asphalt surfaces .
num .
manufacturers recommendation for applicability of use in vehicular or nonvehicular travel areas .
num .
manufacturers specifications and procedures for materials and installation for each use above .
num .
for products proposed for use in vehicular traffic areas independent test data verifying the material meets the requirements of this section including verification that the product installed in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and procedures has been tested in accordance with either num return to table of contents a. astm enum skid resistance of paved surfaces using a standard ribbed full scale tire at a speed of num mph fnnumr and has a minimum fnnumr value of num or b. astm enum measuring paved surface frictional properties using the dynamic friction tester dft at a speed of num mph dftnum and has a minimum dftnum value of num .
num .
for products proposed for use in nonvehicular traffic areas independent test data verifying the material meets the requirements of this section including verification that the product installed in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and procedures has been tested in accordance with astm enum using the british pendulum tester and has a british pendulum number bpn of at least num .
num .
for products proposed for use as a bike lane application independent testing verifying that the material can meet the color as identified in the april num num interim approval for optional use of green colored pavement for bike lanes interim approval ianum memorandum valid under the num mutcd httpsmutcd.fhwa.dot.govresourcesinterim_approvalianumindex.htm .
num performance requirements for products in vehicular travel areas in addition to the submittal requirements of num apl approval will be contingent on a field service test demonstrating that the patterned pavement product meets the following performance measures at the end of three years from opening to traffic num .
the average thickness shall be a minimum of num of the original thickness .
num .
wearing of the material coating shall not expose more than num of the underlying surface area as measured within the traveled way .
num .
friction performance of patternedtextured pavement materials shall meet or exceed one of the following test method values a. fnnumr value of num in accordance with astm enum or b. dftnum value of num in accordance with astm enum manufacturers shall provide a field service test installation of each product within a marked crosswalk on a roadway with an adt of num to num vehicles per day per lane on a site approved by the department .
the test installation shall be a minimum six feet wide and extend from pavement edge to pavement edge across all traffic lanes and shoulder pavement at the crosswalk location .
the test installation shall be tested by the manufacturer in accordance with fm num .
num construction .
num product submittals prior to installation submit pattern and color samples to the engineer for confirmation that the product meets the pattern and color specified in the plans .
do not begin installation until acceptance by the engineer .
num pavement cuts complete all utility traffic loop detector and other items requiring a cut and installation under the finished surface prior to product installation .
num surface protection protect treated surfaces from traffic and environmental effects until the product is completely installed including drying and curing according to the manufacturers instructions .
num installation acceptance for installation on new asphalt roadways apply patterned pavement a minimum of num days after placement of the adjacent pavement .
num return to table of contents upon completion of the installation the engineer will check the area at random locations for geometric accuracy .
if any of the chosen areas are found to be deficient correct the entire patterned area at no additional cost to the department .
submit certification that the patterned pavement was installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid will be the plan quantity in square yards of patterned pavement completed and accepted .
no deduction will be made for areas occupied by landscaping manholes inlets drainage structures or by any public utility appurtenances within the area .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num patterned pavement vehicular areas per square yard .
item no .
num num patterned pavement nonvehicular areas per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num concrete ditch and slope pavement num description .
construct concrete pavement in the flow channel of drainage ditches and on slopes in accordance with the notes and details shown in the plans .
num materials .
concrete section num preformed expansion joint material and hot poured sealer section num filter fabric section num reinforcing steel section num num forms .
provide forms as specified in num .
num foundation .
shape and compact the foundation materials upon which the pavement is to be constructed to a firm even surface true to grade and crosssection .
dispose of surplus material .
num joints and weep holes .
num joints form open or tooled dummy type joints as shown in the plans .
form open joints by staking a metal bulkhead in place and placing the concrete on both sides of it .
when the concrete has set sufficiently to preserve the width and shape of the joints remove the bulkhead .
upon finishing the pavement over the joint open and edge the slot with a tool having a num inch radius .
num method of placing slope pavement place slope pavement in vertical strips num feet plus or minus num inch wide except taper radii strips from the num foot width at the bottom to a minimum width of num foot at the top .
score the strips horizontally at intervals of num feet plus or minus num inch with a tool having a double num inch radius .
edge construction joints between strips with a tool having a num inch radius .
the engineer will allow construction joints at horizontal scorings .
num weep holes locate and construct weep holes as shown in the plans .
construct weep holes at the toe of slope for all slope pavements .
num filter fabric locate and construct filter fabric as shown in the plans and standard plans .
num placing concrete .
place the concrete in the forms tamp and spade it to prevent honeycombing and until the top of the structure can be floated smooth and the edges rounded .
num return to table of contents num finishing .
roughen the surface of ditch pavement after screeding concrete unless otherwise specified to the approximate shape and grade by a rake or other suitable tool drawn perpendicular to the direction of flow .
ensure that the furrows are at least num inch deep .
strike off slope pavement or smooth surfaced ditch pavement when specified true to line and crosssection and remove all surplus water and laitance from the surface .
lightly broom the finish .
num curing .
cure the concrete as specified in num .
num method of measurement .
num concrete ditch and slope pavement the quantities to be paid for concrete ditch pavement and concrete slope pavement will be the plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted .
where the plans show headers or cutoff walls at the end or edge of the pavement the volume of the additional thickness of pavement that constitutes the headers calculated in accordance with plan dimensions will be converted into equivalent square yards of standard thickness pavement and included in the quantity to be paid for .
no deduction will be made for any areas occupied by manholes inlets or other drainage structures or by public utility appurtenances within the pavement area .
the square yard quantity includes any ditch blocks with ditch or slope pavement on top .
when steel reinforcement is called for in the plans payment will be included in the square yard item .
num concrete core ditch blocks the quantity to be paid for concrete core ditch blocks will be the plan quantity of concrete in cubic yards completed and accepted .
when steel reinforcement is called for in the plans payment will be included in the cubic yard pay item .
the cubic yard pay item includes any ditch block within a grass or earth ditch without other pavement on top .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all earthwork skimmers and incidental materials necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num concrete ditch pavement per square yard .
item no .
num num concrete slope pavement per square yard .
item no .
num num concrete core ditch block per cubic yard .
num return to table of contents section num asphalt concrete curb num description .
construct an asphalt concrete curb on a previously laid pavement at the locations shown in the plans .
num materials .
use a type spnum traffic level a b or c asphalt concrete mixture .
num construction methods .
sufficiently roughen the surface of the roadway pavement at the locations where the curb will be constructed to provide suitable bonding of the pavement and the curb .
lay the curb by a machine or by other methods to provide the required crosssection .
the engineer may allow variation in the plan crosssection for using the particular machine provided the contractor obtains the equivalent crosssectional area and the specified height of curb .
provide appropriate compaction as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the length plan quantity in feet completed and accepted .
any additions or deletions thereto as authorized by the engineer will be determined by plan dimensions stationtostation dimensions final measurement or any combination thereof as measured along the face of the completed and accepted curb .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num asphaltic concrete curb per foot .
num return to table of contents section num architectural pavers num description .
furnish and install architectural pavers in accordance with this section .
num materials .
num general architectural pavers shall meet the following requirements proposed use astm cnum brick paver astm cnum brick paver astm cnum concrete paver roadways do not use x do not use commercial driveways do not use x x sidewalks and medians x do not use x residential driveways x do not use x ensure that the pavers are consistent in color size and appearance .
architectural paver type pattern shape andor color will be in accordance with plan details when specified .
num architectural pavers roadway for installations on roadways and commercial driveways provide architectural pavers having a minimum thickness of num inch .
num architectural pavers sidewalk for installations on sidewalks medians and residential driveways provide architectural pavers having a minimum thickness of num inch .
num bedding and joint sands provide clean nonplastic bedding and joint sand free from deleterious or foreign matter natural or manufactured from crushed rock .
ensure the bedding sand meets the grading requirements of astm cnum standard specification for concrete aggregate .
ensure the joint sand meets the grading requirements of astm cnum standard specification for aggregate for masonry mortar .
bedding sand may be used for joint sand .
do not use joint sand for bedding sand .
num bedding and joint grouts a suitable grout in thickness specified by the manufacturer and approved for use by the architectural paver manufacturer may be substituted for either bedding sand joint sand or both when specified in the plans and approved by the engineer .
num construction methods .
num general num submittals for architectural pavers roadway furnish full size samples to the engineer for approval prior to beginning placement .
for architectural pavers sidewalk submit to the engineer a certification that the architectural pavers meet the requirements of this section .
in addition for all architectural pavers submit a certified sieve analysis for gradation comparing results of the bedding sand and joint sand with the requirements of astm cnum or astm cnum as applicable .
num mockups prior to beginning placement install a num foot by num foot paver area following these specifications .
this area will be used to determine surcharge of the bedding material layer joint sizes lines laying patterns and colors of the job .
this area will be num return to table of contents adjacent to an edge treatment incorporated into the work and will be the standard from which the work will be judged .
num environmental conditions cover stockpiled materials with waterproof covering to prevent exposure to rainfall .
do not install bedding materials or architectural pavers during heavy rains or over wet substrata .
num installation install the architectural pavers in the following manner num .
spread the bedding material evenly over the base course and screed to plan thickness not to exceed a thickness of num inch .
do not disturb the screeded bedding material .
ensure placement of sufficient bedding material to stay ahead of the laid architectural pavers .
do not use the bedding material to fill depressions in the base course .
num .
lay architectural pavers in the patterns shown in the plans and maintain straight pattern lines .
num .
joints between the architectural pavers on average will be between num to num inch wide .
num .
fill gaps at the edges of the paved area with cut or edge architectural pavers .
num .
when utilizing bedding and joint sand a .
use a low amplitude vibrator capable of num footpounds with num num hz frequencies to vibrate and compact architectural pavers into bedding sand .
b. vibrate the architectural pavers sweeping dry joint sand into the joints and vibrating until the joints are full .
do not vibrate within num feet of the unrestrained edges of the architectural pavers .
c. at the end of each day all work within num feet of laying face must be left fully compacted with sandfilled joints .
d. sweep off the excess sand .
num .
leave a final surface elevation of architectural pavers of num to num inch above adjacent drainage inlets concrete collars or channels .
num .
do not permit the final surface elevations of the pavers to deviate more than num inch under a num foot long straightedge or more than num inch between adjacent pavers .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards for architectural pavers completed and accepted .
no deduction will be made for the areas occupied by ornamental trees left within and any other areas occupied by manholes inlets drainage structures or by public utility appurtenances within the normal areas of the architectural pavers .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work including all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment shall be made under item no .
num num pavers architectural roadway per square yard .
item no .
num num pavers architectural sidewalk per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num detectable warnings num description .
furnish and install detectable warnings on newly constructed andor existing concrete or asphalt walking surfaces sidewalk curb ramps sidewalks shared use paths etc .
constructed in accordance with standard plans index num .
num materials .
num detectable warnings provide detectable warnings in accordance with the americans with disabilities act standards for transportation facilities section num .
use detectable warnings consisting of materials intended for exterior use subject to routine pedestrian traffic and occasional vehicular traffic .
use detectable warnings with size and pattern shown in the plans comprised of truncated domes aligned in parallel rows in accordance with standard plans index num .
do not use detectable warnings with a diagonal pattern .
num preformed materials use detectable warnings consisting of weather resistant tiles or pavers that are cast into concrete or tiles or mats that are surfaceapplied to concrete or asphalt surfaces with adhesives and mechanical fasteners or torchapplied preformed thermoplastic .
num fieldformed materials use detectable warnings applied as a secondary application to the substrate .
num material properties provide detectable warnings that meet the following minimum material property requirements when tested in accordance with the following property standard test value slip resistance fm numcnum dry coefficient of friction num min .
wet coefficient of friction num min .
include recessed areas between truncated domes wear resistance fm num average volume loss no more than num cmnum water absorption astm dnum not to exceed num .
adhesionbond strength fm num num psi min .
tensile adhesion strength nonhazardous classification submit material safety data sheet sds nonhazardous per rcra subtitle c applies only to plastic materials .
applies only to surfaceapplied materials .
num colorcontrast use safety yellow brick red or black colored detectable warnings on concrete walking surfaces .
use safety yellow colored detectable warnings on asphalt walking surfaces .
acceptable detectable warnings shall meet the following criteria for a duration of three years .
color light reflectance values lrv cap y safety yellow num num num return to table of contents color light reflectance values lrv cap y brick red num num black num num when measured with a spectrophotometer num approved product list methods or products used to form detectable warnings in wet concrete will not be permitted .
use detectable warnings listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of products for inclusion on the apl shall submit an application in accordance with section num and include certified test reports from an independent lab showing the product meets the requirements of this section and the standard plans index num acceptance criteria and manufacturers drawings specifications and procedures for materials and installation including touchup and repair .
num installation procedures .
num surface preparation and installation prepare the surface in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
use only products and materials appropriate for the surface on which they will be applied .
install in accordance with the manufacturers instructions using materials and equipment recommended and approved by the manufacturer .
for surface applied tiles or mats use adhesives applied over the entire surface and mechanical fasteners .
num method of measurement .
detectable warnings will be paid by plan quantity per square foot furnished installed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all labor surface preparation materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work payment will be made under item no .
num num detectable warnings square foot .
num return to table of contents section num revetment systems num description .
num riprap construct riprap composed of sandcement or rubble consisting of broken stone or broken concrete as shown in the standard plans and in the plans .
num articulating concrete block acb revetment systems furnish and install an acb revetment system in accordance with this section and in conformance with the lines grades design and dimensions shown in the plans .
submit vendor drawings for review and approval by the engineer .
submit signed and sealed calculations of the block and cable sizing design for approval .
comply with the national concrete masonry associations design manual for articulating concrete block revetment systems second edition or the national highway institute hydraulic engineering circular hec no .
num publication no .
fhwa nhi num .
use a minimum factor of safety of num and num inch for the block projection .
blocks must be open cell and nontapered unless otherwise stated in the plans .
revetment cabling must be bidirectional or for monodirectional cabling the block installation must include a permanent mechanism within the block matrix to prevent lateral displacement of the installed blocks .
cabling must be polyester and free to move within the block .
use only acb revetment systems currently listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num and include certified test reports from an independent test laboratory certifying the acb revetment system meets the requirements of this section .
if the acb revetment system is intended for use as bridge abutment protection include the following drawings with the apl submittal num .
at the corner transition between the front and side slopes .
num .
for anchorages geosynthetic materials treatment of voids between adjacent blocks limits on void size between adjacent blocks and other special details required to successfully install the acb .
num .
for areas adjacent to bridge abutments detail mat placement around curves connections protection of mat ends and splicing of mat .
num gabions furnish and install gabions including gabion baskets and gabion mattresses filled with rock in accordance with this section and in conformance with the lines grades design and dimensions shown in the plans .
num materials .
num riprap num general meet the following requirements portland cementsection num fine aggregate section num grout section num type dnum geotextile fabric section num use products listed on the departments apl .
num sacks provide sacks made of jute cotton or scrim reinforced paper capable of holding the sandcement mixture without leakage .
ensure that sack material is permeable and absorptive enough to permit passage of water to provide for hydration of the cement .
ensure that paper used in sacks is nonasphalt laminated with a polyester fiber scrim num return to table of contents reinforcement in a threeway directional pattern has an embossed finish and is perforated approximately num inch in approximate one inch centers .
extend perforations continuously through the entire wall .
provide sacks of uniform size and dimensions in order to provide uniformity of lines in the completed work .
use sacks that are free from holes and strong enough to withstand handling without ripping or splitting .
use only one type and size of sack at any one structure .
num rubble num rubble bank and shore protection provide sound hard durable rubble free of open or incipient cracks soft seams or other structural defects consisting of broken stone with a bulk specific gravity of at least num .
ensure that stones are rough and angular .
for this application use broken stone meeting the following gradation and thickness requirements weight maximum pounds weight num pounds weight minimum pounds minimum blanket thickness in feet num num num num ensure that at least num of the material by weight is smaller than weight maximum pounds .
ensure that at least num of the material by weight is greater than weight num pounds .
ensure that at least num of the material by weight is greater than weight minimum pounds .
num rubble ditch lining use sound hard durable rubble free of open or incipient cracks soft seams or other structural defects consisting of broken stone or broken concrete with a bulk specific gravity of at least num .
ensure that stones or broken concrete are rough and angular .
use broken stone or broken concrete meeting the following gradation and thickness requirements weight maximum pounds weight num pounds weight minimum pounds minimum blanket thickness in feet num num num num ensure that at least num of the material by weight is smaller than weight maximum pounds .
ensure that at least num of the material by weight is greater than weight num pounds .
ensure that at least num of the material by weight is greater than weight minimum pounds .
num physical requirements of broken stone and broken concrete use broken stone and broken concrete meeting the following physical requirements absorption fm numtnum maximum num los angeles abrasion fm numtnum maximum loss num soundness sodium sulphate aashto tnum maximum loss num after five cycles num return to table of contents flat and elongated pieces materials with least dimension less than one third of greatest dimension not exceeding num by weight .
dirt and fines materials less than num inch in maximum dimension accumulated from interledge layers blasting or handling operations not exceeding num by weight .
drop testem num no new cracks developed or no existing crack widened additional num inch or final largest dimension greater than or equal to num original largest dimension of dropped piece .
ensure that granite does not have a loss greater than num and that broken concrete does not have a loss greater than num .
the engineer may accept rubble exceeding the soundness loss limitation if performance history shows that the material will be acceptable for the intended use .
the engineer will waive the soundness specification for rubble riprap broken stone and broken concrete when project documents indicate it will be placed in or adjacent to water or soil with a sulfate content less than num parts per million and a ph greater than num .
the engineer will waive the drop test unless required to ensure structural integrity .
provide all equipment labor and testing at no expense to the department .
em refers to the us army corps of engineers specification engineering method .
num source approval and project control the engineer will approve construction aggregate sources in accordance with num as amended by the following num .
the engineer may perform independent verification tests on all materials placed on the project .
num .
the engineer will check the gradation of the riprap by visual inspection at the project site .
resolve any difference of opinion with the engineer in accordance with the method provided in fm num .
provide all equipment labor and the sorting site at no expense to the department .
num .
the engineer may test components in a blend of rubble processed from different geologic formations members groups units layers or seams .
the engineer may select components based on like color surface texture porosity or hardness .
the engineer will reject any blend if a component that makes up at least five percent by volume of the blend does not meet these specifications .
num bedding stone use bedding stone of either a durable quality limestone or other quarry run stone with a bulk specific gravity of not less than num and that is reasonably free from thin flat and elongated pieces .
ensure that the bedding stone is also reasonably free from organic matter and soft friable particles .
meet the following gradation limits standard sieve sizes inches individual percentage by weight passing num inches num num inches num to num num inches num to num num inches num to num num inch num to num the engineer will conduct source approval and project control of bedding stone as specified in num .
in lieu of limestone or other quarry run stone the contractor may num return to table of contents substitute nonreinforced concrete from existing pavement that is to be removed and which meets the above requirements for commercial bedding stone .
num articulating concrete block acb revetment systems obtain all precast block cabling anchors and necessary incidental materials from the same manufacturer .
acb revetment systems must meet the requirements of astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum .
submit to the engineer certification from the manufacturer that the acb revetment system meets the requirements of this section .
acb system components must meet the following requirements concrete section num astm dnum cables and fittings astm dnum type dnum geosynthetic material section num granular underlay section num use products listed on the departments apl .
cables must maintain at least num of original tensile strength astm dnum after num hours exposure to a saturated solution of calcium hydroxide ph greater than or equal to num at numf plus or minus three degrees .
cables must not exceed a maximum of num moisture absorption at seven days per astm dnum .
cable crimps must be aluminum or stainless steel type num or num .
num gabions num general provide gabions meeting the requirements of astm anum and astm anum as modified herein .
allowable gabion wire and connector material substructure environmental classification polymeric any metallic slightly aggressive metallic galvanized and pvc coated slightly aggressive moderately aggressive metallic type num stainless steel size wnum mwnum or larger slightly aggressive moderately aggressive extremely aggressive num ppm chlorides metallic type num stainless steel size wnum mwnum or larger any num metallic gabions the components of metallic gabions must meet the following requirements wire mesh and fabric astm anum and anum spiral binders lacing wire stiffeners and ring wire fasteners astm anum and anum stainless steel wire wire fabric and lacing wire astm anum wire mesh must be style num or style num .
wire fabric must be style num or style num .
num polymeric gabions polymeric gabions must be constructed in general accordance with astm anum using a single layer of structural geogrid instead of welded wire and polymeric braid instead of ring wire fasteners .
the structural geogrid must be type rnum num num num or num meeting the requirements of section num and the following num return to table of contents tensile strength num strain md num lbft tensile strength num strain xd num lbft junction strength of tensile strength num min uv stability num min .
carbon black content by weight num md machine direction xd cross direction polymeric braid for seeming polymeric gabions or connecting metallic gabions must have a minimum tensile strength of num pounds for a num inch long specimen and contain at least num carbon black by weight .
num gabion rock use rock meeting the requirements of astm dnum to fill gabions .
the rock must be reasonably free from thin flat or elongated pieces .
rock size must be at least num times greater than the aperture size of the wire mesh or fabric .
each range of sizes may allow for a variation of num oversize rock by weight num undersize rock by weight or both .
physical property requirements acceptable range la abrasion astm cnum and astm dnum maximum loss num bulk specific gravity minimum num absorption astm cnum and astm cnum maximum num num miscellaneous components miscellaneous components for gabion installations must meet the following requirements type dnum geotextile fabric section num granular underlay section num anchors section num or manufacturers recommendations use products listed on the departments apl .
num construction and installation .
num sandcement num mixing materials proportion sand and cement in the ratio of num cubic feet of sand to num pounds one bag of cement .
if proportioning the materials by mass use a density of num pounds per cubic foot loose volume for sand .
the contractor may batch sand at the moisture content occurring in the stockpile .
mix the sand and cement until the mixture is of uniform color .
num filling sacks accurately measure the mixed material into each sack taking care to place the same amount of material in each sack keep at least the top num inches of the sacks unfilled to allow for proper tying or folding and to ensure against breaking of the sack during placing .
num placing place the filled sacks with their tied or folded ends all in the same direction .
lay the sacks with broken joints in a regular pattern .
ram or pack the sacks against each other so as to form a close and molded contact after the sand and cement mixture has set up .
remove and replace sacks ripped or torn in placing with sound unbroken sacks .
then thoroughly saturate all sacks with water .
num return to table of contents num grouting immediately after watering fill all openings between sacks with dry grout composed of one part portland cement and five parts sand .
num toe walls the contractor may construct toe walls of riprap for fill slopes of poured in place concrete in lieu of sand cement in sacks .
meet the concrete requirements as specified in section num .
if using sand cement in sacks for the toe walls fill the entire trench excavated for the toe walls with sand cement in sacks .
num rubble dump rubble in place forming a compact layer conforming to the neat lines and thickness specified in the plans .
ensure that rubble does not segregate so that smaller pieces evenly fill the voids between the larger pieces .
num bedding stone place a minimum one foot thick layer of bedding stone under all rubble riprap without puncturing or tearing the geosynthetic material .
the engineer will allow an in place thickness tolerance of plus or minus one inch .
remove and replace geosynthetic material damaged as a result of operations at no expense to the department .
num articulating concrete block acb revetment system install the acb revetment system in accordance with astm dnum and the manufacturers recommendations unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
prior to installation construct the area to be stabilized to an elevation such that upon completion of stabilizing operations the completed stabilized subgrade will conform to the lines grades and cross sections shown in the plans .
bring the subgrade surface to a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the proposed finished surface such that upon placement of the mat no individual block within the acb mat will protrude more than onehalf inch from any adjacent block .
uniformly compact each subgrade layer to achieve the density required in the plans .
if the plans do not provide for stabilizing compact the subgrade in both cuts and fills to the density specified in astm dnum .
embed anchors at least six feet into the subgrade at a num degree angle into the bank with a minimum pullout resistance of num pounds .
in the presence of the engineer perform onsite anchor strength testing to verify the required pull out resistance is achieved .
anchor strength testing must be performed on the first two and final two installed anchors and randomly throughout the installation operation such that num of all installed anchors are tested for pullout resistance .
if any anchor fails to meet the pullout resistance requirement test every subsequent installed anchor until a revised installation plan is proposed and approved by the engineer .
anchor spacing can not exceed four feet .
immediately prior to placing the geosynthetic material and acb system inspect the prepared subgrade to ensure it is free of loose material and the surface is smoothly compacted .
place the geosynthetic material directly on the prepared area in intimate contact with the subgrade and free of folds or wrinkles .
do not glue or physically bond the geosynthetic material to the acb mat .
install a six inch thick layer of bedding stone under the geosynthetic material when called for in the plans .
when installing acb systems around curves the mats shall be matched up to the greatest extent possible .
gaps greater than one block size shall be filled with a block and grouted the depth of the block with nonstructural grout .
do not install blocks with chips that result in any block weighing less than num of the manufacture specified weight .
num return to table of contents num gabions install doubletwisted wire mesh gabions in accordance with astm dnum .
install welded wire fabric gabions and polymeric gabions in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
prior to installation complete any required excavation and preparation of the foundation as shown in the plans or as directed .
install soil anchors as specified in the plans .
all adjoining gabion units shall be connected along the perimeter of their contact surfaces to obtain a monolithic structure .
if more than one tier stagger the vertical joints of subsequent rows by one half cell length and adjoin the empty gabions to the top of the lower tier along the front and back edges of the contact surface .
fill gabions in a manner that minimizes voids protects against local deformation of the basket or mattress and prevents damage to pvc coating .
at no point in the filling process may rock be mechanically placed from a height of over num inches from machine to fill area .
uniformly overfill gabions by num to num inches to compensate for future rock settlements .
any damage to the basket mattress or coatings during assembly placement or filling shall be repaired promptly in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or replaced with undamaged gabion baskets .
num method of measurement .
num sandcement the quantity to be paid for will be the volume in cubic yards of sand actually used in the sand cement mixture and grout satisfactorily placed and accepted .
if sand cement is proportioned by volume the sand will be measured loose in an approved measure prior to mixing with cement .
if sand cement is proportioned by weight approved scales will be used for this purpose and the volume will be calculated using a standard conversion factor for sand of num pound per cubic foot .
no adjustment of batch weights to allow for varying moisture content of the sand will be made .
for toe walls the quantity to be paid for will include only the volume of sand cement in sacks or concrete placed within the neat lines shown in the plans for the toe walls .
num rubble and bedding stone the quantities to be paid for will be the weight in tons in surface dry natural state by railroad scales truck scales or barge displacement .
the contractor shall determine the weights as follows num .
railroad weights the contractor shall weigh railroad cars on railroad scales before and after loading or before and after unloading .
if weighed by other than the engineer a certified statement of weights will be required .
certificates of weight furnished by the railroad company will be acceptable without further certification .
num .
truck weights the contractor shall weigh trucks on certified scales loaded and empty as prescribed above for railroad weights .
the contractor shall weigh trucks in the presence of the engineer or submit certificates of weights .
num .
barge displacement the engineer will measure each barge .
the contractor shall fit each barge with gauges graduated in num foot increments .
the contractor shall locate a gauge at each corner of the barge near the lower end of the rake .
the contractor shall furnish additional gauges amidships if the engineer deems necessary .
the engineer will compute all weights .
num articulating concrete block acb revetment system the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards completed and accepted subject to the provisions of num .
no allowance will be made for acb placed outside the plan dimensions unless the additional placement is ordered by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num gabions for mattress type applications the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square yards placed in the final locations .
for stacked basket applications the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in cubic yards placed in the final locations .
num basis of payment .
num sandcement price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials labor hauling excavation and backfill .
include the cost of dressing and shaping the existing fills or subgrade for placing riprap in the contract unit price for riprap sandcement .
num rubble price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials hauling excavation and backfill .
include the cost of dressing and shaping the existing fills or subgrade for placing riprap in the contract unit price for riprap rubble .
as an exception to the above concrete that is shown to be removed from an existing structure and subsequently disposed of by being used in the embankment as riprap will not be paid for under this section .
include the cost of such work under removal of existing structures .
num bedding stone price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials and hauling .
include the cost of dressing and shaping the existing fills or subgrade for placing bedding stone in the contract unit price for riprap rubble .
num geosynthetic material include the cost of materials and installation of the geosynthetic material in the contract unit price for riprap or acb revetment system .
num articulating concrete block acb revetment system price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials labor hauling excavation and backfill .
num gabions price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials labor hauling excavation and backfill .
num payment items .
payment will be made under item no .
num num riprap sandcement per cubic yard .
item no .
num num riprap rubble per ton .
item no .
num num articulating concrete block revetment system per square yard .
item no .
num num gabion item no .
num num bedding stone per ton .
num return to table of contents section num noise and perimeter walls num description .
num precast concrete noise walls furnish and install concrete noise walls with piles posts and panels constructed in accordance with standard plans index num unless the plans indicate otherwise .
secure joints and connections in a structurally sound manner without openings in the system that would allow transmission of sound .
num perimeter walls furnish and install perimeter walls and foundations in accordance with standard plans index num for either the precast concrete or the masonry option .
num materials .
meet the following requirements portland cement concrete section num reinforcing steel section num welded wire reinforcement wwr section num concrete masonry units cmu astm cnum mortar astm cnum grout astm cnum horizontal joint reinforcing astm anum or astm anum control joints aci num article num a or b galvanized in accordance with astm anum num requirements .
construct concrete components in accordance with section num .
num precast concrete requirements obtain precast concrete components from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list must meet the requirements of section num .
do not accept products that are not permanently and clearly stamped on the tongue and groove portion of the panel and posted with the type date cast project number and the manufacturers name or symbol by the producer .
num masonry requirements conform to the requirements of specification for masonry structures tms numaci numascenum except as modified by the plans or this specification .
submit to the engineer a certification that materials provided meet the requirements of this section .
num shop drawing submittal .
submit shop drawings for precast elements when required in accordance with section num showing a plan and elevation with the following project specific information num .
begin and end wall stations with offsets num .
horizontal and vertical alignments of the wall num .
panel locations a. graphic details and graphic panel locations noise walls only num return to table of contents b. drainage panel locations and type c. location and length of side installed panels when required num .
post locations and lengths num .
elevations of top of panel bottom of panel and panel joints num .
existing and proposed ground elevations num .
nonstandard precast component details num .
nonstandard post and pile connection details num .
lifting devices num construction .
keep to minimum the clearing and grubbing trim trees and shrubs only to the extent necessary to construct the walls unless otherwise shown in the plans .
keep rightofway fence that is scheduled to be salvaged in place until completing the wall or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
prior to beginning earthwork on the project stake the wall location in the field and establish the final ground line elevations at the base of the walls .
use these elevations to develop the shop drawings .
protect the final ground elevations established in the field for the duration of the project and do not adjust without prior approval of the engineer .
when constructing earthern berms to raise the base elevation of walls construct the berms of fill material compacted to num of the maximum density as determined by aashto tnum .
after erecting the wall return the disturbed area to preconstruction condition unless otherwise indicated in the plans .
num precast construction .
shimming of wall panels between the pile collar and the bearing pads is permitted up to a maximum of num inches .
shims must be either stainless steel or engineered copolymer plastic .
copolymer plastic shims must have a minimum compressive strength of num psi without any fractures .
stacked shim plates must be bonded together with a compatible epoxy adhesive .
stacking of shims is permitted as follows num .
for heights of one inch or less provide up to four num inch shims .
num .
for heights greater than one inch use a minimum of one num inch shim .
erection tolerances num .
variation from plumb plus or minus num inch per num feet num .
panel alignment plus or minus num inch num .
top of panel elevation plus or minus num inch num .
elevation difference of adjacent panels plus or minus num inch num .
joint taper over panel length plus or minus num inch num .
top of collar elevation plus or minus num inch num .
post placement a. variation from specified location plus or minus num inch b. variation from specified elevation plus or minus num inch num .
continuity of graphics fracture fins etc across joints num inch num concrete masonry construction .
grout all cells that contain horizontal or vertical reinforcing bars .
num test wall .
erect a test wall section not less than num feet in length before starting general wall construction at the project site .
the engineer will use the erection of the test wall to verify the contractors methods and equipment are sufficient to produce a wall that meets the requirements num return to table of contents of the contract documents .
build the test wall at a permanent wall location as agreed to by the engineer .
if the test wall does not meet construction tolerances remove and dispose of it at no expense to the department .
include the cost of the test wall in the cost of the wall .
num repairs or rejection .
for precast concrete components that have not been installed evaluate cracks spalls and other deficiencies in accordance with num .
repair deficiencies in accordance with num or with the plants approved repair methods that are included as part of the producer quality control qc plan .
ensure that the original performance and durability of repaired components are maintained .
use materials for concrete repair that will meet or exceed the strength requirement for the class of concrete used .
materials meeting the requirements of section num may be substituted for nonshrink grout when required by num .
precast concrete components are subject to rejection if they fail to conform to any of the requirements after repair .
for precast components that have been installed the disposition of concrete cracks shall be in accordance with num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square feet measured in place completed and accepted of the area bounded by the top of the wall including wall cap and the bottom of the wall elements without deductions for openings from the beginning to end limits shown in the control drawings .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including but not limited to furnishing all materials and labor required to construct the wall including caps and foundations .
payment will be made under item no .
num num concrete noise wall per square foot .
item no .
num num perimeter wall per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num guardrail num description .
construct guardrail including end treatments transition connections to rigid barrier and other associated hardware as specified in the plans and in accordance with the standard plans index num series .
remove existing guardrail as specified in the plans .
num materials .
use components for guardrail including posts offset blocks steel panels bolts foundations barrier delineators end delineators rub rail pipe rail and approach terminals in accordance with section num .
num construction .
num height tolerance install guardrail panels at the height shown in the standard plans with a tolerance of num inch above and num inch below the nominal height specified .
where unavoidable surface irregularities including but not limited to across shoulder gutters inlets and roadway surface break lines are encountered a tolerance of num inches above and num inch below the nominal height is permissible .
num station location tolerance where guardrail feature stationing is called out in the plans the longitudinal stationing tolerance is plus or minus num feet and num inch unless otherwise restricted by field conditions as determined by the engineer .
for transition connections to rigid barrier install the thriebeam terminal connector at a num inch tolerance relative to the end of the rigid barrier as defined in the plans and standard plans .
num setting posts set posts plumb and to the soil depth shown in the standard plans .
use the deep post option only where specified in the plans .
place posts in excavations backfill the space around the posts and thoroughly tamp the backfilled soil .
as an alternate method use a postdriving machine meeting the approval of the engineer .
for guardrail post replacement backfill and tamp the existing soil hole prior to setting the replacement post .
if driving timber posts either block out holes in the asphalt pavement during the asphalt paving operation or cut holes through the asphalt mat prior to the post installation .
blocked out or cut holes in the asphalt pavement must be at least num larger than the cross sectional area of the timber post .
after driving the posts patch the area of asphalt around each post with hot bituminous mixture in accordance with section num .
if driving steel posts drive the post directly through the asphalt mat .
fill asphalt depressions or cracks with hot bituminous mixture in a manner meeting the approval of the engineer .
for post locations where subsurface miscellaneous rock or other solid material is obstructing the post placement remove such material as follows num .
if any part of an obstruction is located within num and num inches in depth excavate a minimum num inch diameter hole around the post location for the full depth of the post with the back edge of the excavated hole placed a minimum of num inches behind the back face of the post .
num return to table of contents num .
if an obstruction is only located below num inches in depth excavate a minimum num inch diameter hole around the post location for the full depth of the post with the back edge of the excavated hole placed a minimum of num inches behind the back face of the post .
num .
backfill the holes with soil and thoroughly tamp .
num post location conflicts when the construction of guardrail at the required post spacing results in posts conflicting with sidewalks gutter underground utilities or other permanent obstacles which can not be removed as determined by the engineer the following options are permitted with the approval of the engineer num .
additional offset blocks up to two additional offset blocks num total may be used where the resulting post placement moved farther behind the face of guardrail will avoid a post conflict .
use buttonhead bolts of added length as needed to secure the panel system with the rear nut and washer .
where bolts greater than num inches are required a num inch threaded rod meeting the same material requirements may be substituted and secured with steel hex nuts of over num inches in diameter .
use a steel washer against the post and not the panel .
the rod is not permitted to extend beyond num inch from the face of the tightened nut on the panel side trim the rod as needed and galvanize in accordance with section num .
over a distance of one post spacing linearly widen the miscellaneous asphalt pavement where required to maintain a minimum of num inches of material behind the post .
num .
special steel posts where post placement atop a concrete structure can not be avoided use special steel posts as defined in the standard plans and num .
num .
encased posts where post placement results in a conflict with an underground utility or obstacle use the shallower encased post option as defined in the standard plans where the concrete encasement will not damage a utility .
num .
frangible leaveout where post placement results in a conflict with a concrete slab use the frangible leaveout as defined in the standard plans .
do not use posts through concrete slabs deeper than num inches .
num deep post mark deep posts on the back face centered num inches below the top edge with a legible black letter d approximately num inches vertical by num inch horizontal in size .
use a permanent black ink stamp or paint stencil .
num special steel post mount to concrete structures using the following systems .
num adhesive bonded anchors for concrete structures num inches deep and greater mount the base plate to the concrete using steel adhesivebonded anchor bolts with a minimum tensile strength of num ksi and galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
stainless steel components may be substituted but components plated in accordance with astm bnum are not acceptable .
use adhesivebonded anchors in accordance with section num and num type hshv and in accordance with the manufacturers specification .
drill holes in concrete through reinforcing steel if encountered .
thoroughly clean and dry the holes immediately prior to setting anchors .
at a minimum meet the following strength capacities approach slabs other structures min .
tensile load each anchor num lbs num lbs min .
shear load each anchor num lbs num lbs num return to table of contents num hexhead bolt for concrete structures less than num inches deep use a num inch hexhead bolt passing through a num inch drilled hole in the concrete structure and secured from underneath with a washer and nut .
the threaded bolt must not protrude more than num inches beyond the tightened nut trim the threaded portion as needed and galvanize in accordance with section num .
num steel panels use straight panels to construct radii of num feet or greater .
use fabricated shopbent panels to accommodate radii of less than num feet .
num panel slots and holes use the panels unaltered prefabricated slots and holes as shown in the standard plans .
do not drill punch ream or otherwise alter the prefabricated slots and holes except when creating new post bolt slots for reduced post spacing quarter spacing and adjusting post spacing to avoid structure edge conflicts as shown in the standard plans .
where required punch new post bolt slots to the dimensions given in the standard plans spaced no closer than num inches measured edge to edge from an existing slot .
galvanize new punched slots per section num .
num barrier delineators mount barrier delineators on top of the guardrail post by adhesive or mechanical means per the manufacturers recommendations .
num end delineators install the retroreflective sheeting on the approach face nose of approach terminals trailing anchorages and controlled release terminal crt end treatments where indicated in the standard plans .
mount the retroreflective sheeting vertically centered on the approach face by adhesive or mechanical means per the manufacturers recommendations .
retroreflective sheeting must be a minimum num inches in height with a minimum area of num square inches for approach terminals and trailing anchorages and num square inches for crt end treatments .
num rub rail treat field drilled holes in accordance with section num .
rub rail must terminate at the nearest post outside of the rub rail stationing range indicated in the plans .
num pipe rail treat field drilled holes in accordance with section num .
pipe rail must terminate at the nearest post outside of the pipe rail stationing range indicated in the plans .
num existing guardrail stockpile guardrail if specified within the rightofway at a location approved by the engineer .
dispose of all remaining guardrail not specified for stockpiling .
num approach terminal assemblies install approach terminal assemblies as specified in the plans and apl drawings and in accordance with the geometry and adjacent grading of the standard plans .
the apl number must be permanently marked on each assembly at a readily visible location using legible lettering at least num inch in height .
if the plans call for a flared approach terminal assembly and do not identify the specific system to be used the contractor has the option to construct any departmentapproved flared terminal assembly identified on the apl subject to the conditions identified in the plans or the apl drawings .
likewise if the plans call for a parallel approach terminal assembly and do not identify the specific system to be used the contractor has the option to construct any departmentapproved parallel terminal assembly identified on the apl subject to the conditions identified in the plans or the apl drawings .
num return to table of contents num certification and acceptance .
submit to the engineer a certification letter from the manufacturer confirming that all materials used meet the requirements of this section along with section num and the standard plans .
this letter must list all of the apl items used on the project along with the devicespecific apl numbers .
provide this certification at least ten days prior to guardrail construction .
for steel panels and panel components submit to the engineer a certified mill analysis meeting the material requirements of section num .
for steel posts and steel offset blocks submit to the engineer a certified mill analysis from the manufacturer showing the physical and chemical properties of each heat meeting the requirements of astm anum the amount of spelter coating and galvanization meeting the requirements of astm anum .
submit to the engineer a certificate of compliance verifying that the guardrail system materials and construction practices comply with applicable standard plans and specifications .
acceptance of submitted material will be based on the material certifications certificate of compliance and visual inspection by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
num guardrail the quantity paid for will be the plan quantity in linear feet constructed in place and accepted .
the length of guardrail is measured endtoend following the centerline of the panels between the beginend guardrail stations as defined in the standard plans and the plans including the full lengths of the adjoining end treatments and transition connections to rigid barrier .
num rub rail the quantity paid for will be the plan length in linear feet constructed in place and accepted .
num pipe rail the quantity paid for will be the plan length in linear feet constructed in place and accepted .
num special guardrail post the quantity paid for will be the number of each constructed in place and accepted .
special guardrail posts include deep posts special steel posts encased posts and frangible leaveouts as defined in the standard plans and indicated in the plans .
num bridge anchorage assemblyapproach transition connection to rigid barrier the quantity paid for will be the number of each constructed in place and accepted .
num guardrail post replacement the quantity paid for will be the number of each replaced .
num guardrail end treatment the quantity paid for will be the number of each type as designated constructed in place and accepted .
guardrail end treatment types may include parallel or flared approach terminals type ii trailing anchorages crt end treatments and double faced approach terminals as defined in the standard plans .
num basis of payment .
num guardrail price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified under this section except those items specified in num through num .
price and payment includes furnishing and installing posts panels barrier delineators offset blocks and all other materials as defined in the plans and the standard plans .
the price and payment will include any num return to table of contents reduced post spacing nested panels shopbent panels end unit panels trailing end transition connections to rigid barrier and crt posts as required in the plans .
the type of guardrail specified will be that which comprises the guardrail run between end treatments and transition connections to rigid barrier including but not limited to wbeam general wbeam double face wbeam lowspeed modified thriebeam .
for guardrail systems with direct connections between end treatments and transition connections to rigid barrier the type of guardrail specified will be wbeam for single face guardrail applications or double faced for double face guardrail applications .
num rub rail price and payment will include all components specified in the plans and standard plans .
num pipe rail price and payment will include all components specified in the plans and standard plans .
pipe rail will be shown and tabulated in the plans for the condition that steel posts are installed at the indicated pipe rail location however the pipe rail is not required if the timber post option is selected and installed at the indicated pipe rail location .
num special guardrail post price and payment will include all costs for furnishing and installing special guardrail posts that are in addition to the cost of items included in num where special guardrail posts are installed instead of standard posts .
num bridge anchorage assemblyapproach transition connection to rigid barrier price and payment will include all costs for furnishing and installing all hardware for approach transition connections to rigid barrier per the standard plans that are in addition to the cost of items included in num .
this includes costs for the concrete alignment curb and its transition where shown in the standard plans and barrier delineators for existing post and beam bridge railings .
num removal of existing guardrail price and payment will include all labor and equipment required for removal and disposition of the existing guardrail as specified in the plans .
no additional payment will be made for the removal of transition connections double faced guardrail thriebeam guardrail nested panels pipe rail rub rail or end terminals .
num guardrail end treatment price and payment will include all costs for furnishing and installing all guardrail end treatment assemblies specified in the plans that are in addition to the cost of items included in num .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num num guardrail per foot .
item no .
num num rub rail per foot .
item no .
num num pipe rail per foot .
item no .
num num special guardrail post each .
item no .
num num bridge anchorage assemblyapproach transition connection to rigid barrier each .
item no .
num num removal of existing guardrail per foot .
item no .
num num guardrail end treatment each .
num return to table of contents section num resetting guardrail num description .
remove the existing guardrail system and reinstall using new and reusable components at the locations shown in the plans .
construct the reset guardrail in accordance with the standard plans using new and reusable components excluding components defined as nonreusable in this section .
furnish and install end treatment assemblies approach transition connections to rigid barrier trailing end transition connections to rigid barrier and bridge anchorage assemblies as required by the plans .
num materials .
num planned nonreusable components the following items are considered planned nonreusable components and must be replaced with new components num .
timber posts num .
timber offset blocks num .
end treatment assemblies num .
approach transition connections to rigid barrier including but not limited to panels posts hardware offset blocks etc .
num .
trailing end transition connections to rigid barrier num .
bridge anchorage assemblies including but not limited to panels posts hardware offset blocks etc .
num .
mounting hardware including but not limited to nuts bolts washers etc .
num .
any other items specified as nonreusable in the plans num unforeseen nonreusable components during construction operations the engineer may deem other existing components excluding planned nonreusable components as unacceptable for reuse .
such components are considered unforeseen nonreusable components and require replacement with new components .
unforeseen nonreusable components will be compensated in accordance with num .
components damaged during construction operations are not considered unforeseen nonreusable components and must be replaced with new components at no cost to the department .
num construction methods .
construct the reset guardrail in accordance with section num .
if the reset guardrail is to be placed in the same location as the previous installation do not use the previous installations inground post holes .
place the reset posts at the approximate midspan location of the previous installation .
backfill and thoroughly tamp the unused in ground holes at the previous post locations .
to accommodate the new post locations field punch new post bolt slots in the reusable guardrail panels where needed .
meet the dimension and treatment requirements of the standard plans and section num .
num method of measurement .
the quantities paid for will be the plan length quantity in linear feet constructed in place and accepted .
num return to table of contents the plan length of a run of guardrail is measured endtoend following the centerline of the panels from the beginend guardrail stations as defined in the standard plans and specified in the plans including the end treatments and transition connections to rigid barrier lengths .
num basis of payment .
price and payment for resetting guardrail will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including the furnishing replacements for planned nonreusable components excluding end treatment assemblies approach transition connections to rigid barriers and bridge anchorage assemblies and installation of all required components as defined in the standard plans .
the price and payment will include any reduced post spacing trailing end transition connections shopbent panels and crt post segments as defined in the standard plans and shown in the plans .
price and payment for end treatment assemblies approach transition connections to rigid barriers and bridge anchorage assemblies will be as specified in section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num num guardrail reset per foot .
num return to table of contents section num crash cushions num description .
install redirective crash cushions as shown in the plans .
redirective crash cushions are safety devices with capabilities to redirect the impacting vehicle along the full length of the device .
num approved product list apl .
use crash cushions listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of crash cushions for inclusion on the apl must submit the following num .
product drawings which at a minimum include a. anchorage details for the crash cushion b .
tables showing the relevant system information and lengths for all options c. length of need location d. transition details e. list of all components num .
installation manuals num .
crash testing reports demonstrating that the system meets the requirements of nchrp num or mash num .
all relevant fhwa eligibility letters any new or revised highway safety hardware review request submitted to and received by fhwa after january num num must meet the crash test requirements of mash .
num installation .
handle and install manufactured materials or articles in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the standard plans .
delineate crash cushion ends with type iv or better retroreflective sheeting meeting the requirements of section num .
install retroreflective sheeting with a minimum surface area of num square inches and a minimum height of num inches .
as an alternative a type num object marker meeting the requirements of section num may be used to delineate the crash cushion end .
center the object marker num feet in front of the crash cushion end .
perform repairs necessary due to defective material work or operations without additional cost to the department .
restore crash cushions damaged by the traveling public after the installation is completed accepted and serving its intended purpose on an open section of bridge or roadway within num hours .
num compensation .
price and payment will be full compensation for the complete system or module in place and accepted including object marker or sheeting .
relocation of an existing crash cushion to a permanent location called for in the plans will be paid for at the contract unit price for relocating existing systems .
price and payment will be full compensation for relocating and reinstalling the system in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the standard plans .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num num relocate crash cushion each .
item no .
num num crash cushion each .
num return to table of contents section num rumble strips num description .
construct rumble strips in accordance with the details shown in the plans and standard plans .
num materials for raised rumble strips .
num general construct raised rumble strips using one of the following num preformed thermoplastic use only materials listed on the departments approved product list apl meeting the following requirements preformed thermoplastic num and num ensure that the material used can be restored to its original dimensions by using a self bonding overlay meeting these requirements .
submit a certified test report to the engineer indicating that the materials meet all requirements specified .
num asphalt any plantmixed hot bituminous asphalt mixture meeting the requirements of a jobmix formula issued by the department except opengraded friction course .
num application .
num raised rumble strips notify the engineer before the placement of raised rumble strips .
apply raised rumble strips having well defined edges .
remove and replace any raised rumble strips not meeting the requirements of the contract documents at no additional cost to the department .
before applying raised rumble strips remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the raised rumble strips by a method approved by the engineer .
apply raised rumble strips only to dry surfaces and only when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least numf and rising .
before applying thermoplastic materials on portland cement concrete surfaces apply a primer sealer recommended by the manufacturer .
prior to the application of any plantmixed hot bituminous material apply a tack coat meeting the requirements of num .
the mixture will be accepted on the basis of visual inspection by the engineer with no further testing required .
num groundin rumble strip num general grind rumble strips that have welldefined edges and smooth interiors without tearing the finished pavement .
on a daily basis before opening the adjacent lane to traffic ensure that all debris generated by the grinding process is removed and disposed of by vacuum or a method approved by the engineer .
do not dispose of the debris within the right of way .
do not use the debris generated by the grinding process in recycled asphalt rap .
restore any pavement to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department when groundin rumble strips do not meet the requirements of the contract documents .
num inspection for limited access roadways measure depth every one mile .
for arterial and collector roadways measure depth every num feet .
measure depth as num return to table of contents distance from pavement grade to top of groundin grooves at the transverse and longitudinal centerline of the grinding prior to the placement of longitudinal thermoplastic pavement markings .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity of raised rumble strips to be paid for under this section will be the plan quantity per set constructed and accepted .
the quantity of groundin rumble strips to be paid for under this section will be the plan quantity in gross miles constructed and accepted .
no deduction will be made when the skip array is used .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all surface cleaning and preparation all debris disposal furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines labor and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
payment will be made under item no .
num num raised rumble strip sets per set .
item no .
num num groundin rumble strips per gross mile .
num return to table of contents section num retaining wall systems num description .
construct permanent and temporary retaining wall systems in accordance with this section and in conformance with the lines grades design and dimensions shown in the contract or established by the engineer .
sheet pile walls and castinplace walls are not included in this section .
construct all walls of a specific type mechanically stabilized earth mse counterfort etc .
using the same wall system and supplier .
if different types of wall systems must be used in such a manner that causes one wall to interact with or influence another wall coordinate the detailing of these areas of interactioninfluence with the assistance of the contractors engineer of record .
obtain each reinforced concrete precast concrete retaining wall system from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
ensure that each wall system component is marked in accordance with num .
ensure that each shipment of products to the job site includes a signed or stamped delivery ticket in accordance with the materials manual section num volume ii and the required written certification statement for each product shipped .
submit these tickets and certifications to the engineer .
when shown in the plans or approved by the engineer a segmental block mse retaining wall sbw system may be provided as a substitute for a reinforced concrete panel mse wall system .
all sbw systems must comprise num .
unreinforced drycast masonry facing blocks in a running bond pattern meeting the requirements of num .
num .
structural backfill reinforcement a .
type rnum geosynthetic backfill reinforcement placed in sheets full length without splices normal to the facing blocks and laterally without horizontal gaps and with a vertical spacing of not more than every other course of blocks or num inches whichever is less .
b. metallic reinforcement placed full length without splices normal to the facing blocks and spaced laterally and vertically not more than every other block or num inches whichever is less with a positive mechanical or shear connection to the facing blocks .
num .
a mechanical shear connection to lock adjacent blocks together horizontally or vertically .
num materials .
provide a wall system listed on the departments approved product list apl based on the wall type shown in the plans .
purchase components soil reinforcement attachment devices joint filler filter fabric and all necessary incidentals for each wall from the same wall supplier .
num concrete ensure that concrete utilized for all wall components is consistent with the concrete class environmental classification and admixture requirements for durability as stated in the contract documents .
produce and supply concrete for all reinforced concrete wall components meeting the requirements of section num .
produce and supply concrete for the leveling pad meeting the requirements of section num .
use department approved mix designs .
num return to table of contents num reinforcing steel meet the requirements of section num utilizing grade num black steel .
num backfill reinforcement for walls utilizing backfill reinforcement use reinforcement consisting of steel wire mesh metal strips or structural geosynthetics as required for the wall system chosen .
use backfill reinforcement of the same length from top to bottom of wall at any section .
for tiered walls use backfill reinforcement of the same length within the height of each tier at any section .
use plain steel wire mesh and embedded loops shop fabricated from cold drawn steel wire and weld into the finished mesh fabric meeting the requirements of astm anum .
use longitudinal and transverse wires of equal and constant diameter within a given piece of mesh reinforcement .
use steel strips hot rolled from bars to the required shape and dimensions with physical and mechanical properties meeting astm anum grade num or as shown in the contract .
use shopfabricated hot rolled steel tie straps meeting the minimum requirements of astm anumanum m grade num or as shown in the contract .
ensure that steel reinforcing strips tie strips reinforcing mesh and connectors used in permanent walls are galvanized in accordance with astm anum or astm anum as applicable .
for typical applications punch or drill holes in metal items before galvanizing .
field drilled holes for bin walls are permitted .
repair field drilled holes field cut ends and other damage to galvanized surfaces in accordance with section num .
use type rnum structural geosynthetics made of polypropylene select high density polyethylene or hightenacity polyester fibers having crosssections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the backfill .
use geosynthetics having a high tensile modulus in relation to the backfill .
use geosynthetics having high resistance to deformation under sustained long term design load while in service and resistant to ultraviolet degradation to damage under normal construction practices and to all forms of biological or chemical degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced .
do not use uncoated polyester pet reinforcements or reinforcements weakened or damaged by high ph environments within any portion of the flowable fill or within coarse aggregate backfill below the design high water elevation dhw shown in the plans .
store the geosynthetics in conditions above numf and not greater than numf .
prevent mud wet cement epoxy and like materials from coming into contact with and affixing to the geosynthetic material .
rolled geosynthetic may be laid flat or stood on end for storage .
cover the geosynthetic and protect from sunlight prior to placement in the wall system .
carefully inspect all reinforcement steel and geosynthetics to ensure they are the proper size and free from defects that may impair their strength and durability .
num attachment devices use backfill reinforcement attachment devices as required by the wall system chosen .
num joint materials and filter fabrics num horizontal joint pads use elastomeric or polymeric pads in all horizontal joints between precast components as recommended by the wall manufacturer .
ensure that the pads are of sufficient size and hardness to limit vertical stresses on the pad and concrete surface and to prevent concrete to concrete contact at the joints .
num joint covers for nonsbw walls for walls supporting bridge abutments on spread footings cover joints and other wall openings within a horizontal distance equal to the larger of num return to table of contents num. the length of the reinforcement under the footing plus num feet or num. twice the maximum height of the footing above the leveling pad measured from the nearest edge of the footing surrounding the reinforced backfill for the abutment with type dnum geotextile fabric meeting the requirements of section num .
cover all joints and wall openings in portions of the wall backfilled with coarse aggregate with type dnum geotextile fabric meeting the requirements of section num .
cover all other joints and wall openings with type dnum or dnum geotextile fabric with a maximum apparent opening size aos equal to us sieve no .
num meeting the requirements of section num .
apply an adhesive approved by the engineer to the back of the precast component for attachment of the fabric material .
num alignment pins ensure that pins used to align the precast components during construction are of the size shape and material required for the wall system chosen .
num separation geotextile provide a type dnum dnum or dnum separation geotextile meeting the requirements of section num between the coarse aggregate and the select backfillembankment at the bottom top and sides of the coarse aggregate .
num backfill material num general provide compacted select backfill or coarse aggregate backfill within the retaining wall volume as shown in the plans .
for permanent walls provide coarse aggregate backfill in lieu of compacted select backfill to an elevation at least one foot above the dhw shown in the plans when the dhw is above the lowest adjacent ground surface .
provide flowable fill within the retaining wall volume in lieu of compacted select backfill or coarse aggregate backfill only when the option for flowable fill is shown in the plans .
the retaining wall volume is defined to extend from the top of the leveling pad or footing or bottom of walls which do not have footing or leveling pads to the finish grade line and from the face of the wall to a vertical plane passing through the end of the extreme wall component straps counterforts etc .
plus one foot .
num compacted select backfill meet the requirements of sections num and num except as noted within this section .
have the backfill material tested for every soil type for ph resistivity sulfate and chloride content by a department approved independent testing laboratory prior to placement .
submit a certification signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of florida that the results have met the requirements of this section .
the ph as determined by fm num shall not be lower than num and not higher than num .
sources of select backfill material having a ph between num and num for wall utilizing metallic reinforcement and between num and num for walls utilizing geosynthetic reinforcement with no metallic elements or pipes placed within the backfill as determined by fm num may be used provided the interior face of the mse wall panels have three inches of concrete cover over the reinforcement and the concrete used in the panels contains the following ingredients and proportions num .
the quantity of cement replaced with type f fly ash is num to num by weight .
num .
the quantity of cement replaced with slag is num to num by weight .
num .
portland cement is num by weight of total cementitious material .
num return to table of contents num .
the total weight of the type f fly ash and slag does not exceed num of total cementitious material .
in lieu of the mix design described above a mix design with a fast pozzolanic material meeting the requirements of num silica fume metakaolin and ultrafine fly ash can be substituted .
examples of mix designs meeting this requirement are num .
num silica fume plus num fly ash num .
num metakaolin plus num fly ash .
provide proper curing for these materials to prevent surface cracking .
do not place metallic pipe in backfill materials having a ph less than num .
in addition for permanent walls utilizing metallic soil reinforcement use backfill that meets the following electrochemical test criteria for determining corrosiveness criteria test method resistivity num ohm cm fm num soluble sulfate content num ppm fm num soluble chloride content num ppm fm num for constructing the retaining wall volume do not use backfill material containing more than num by weight of organic material as determined by fm numtnum and by averaging the test results for three randomly selected samples from each stratum or stockpile of a particular material .
if an individual test value of the three samples exceeds num the stratum or stockpile will not be suitable for constructing the retaining wall volume .
ensure that the material is nonplastic as determined by aashto tnum and the liquid limit as determined by aashto tnum is less than num .
for walls using soil reinforcement use backfill that meets the following gradation limits determined in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum sieve size percent passing num inches num num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num for walls not using soil reinforcement use backfill that meets the following gradation limits determined in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numt num sieve size percent passing num inches num no .
num num num flowable fill meet the requirements of section num except as noted within this section and the plans .
num return to table of contents num coarse aggregate backfill and drainage aggregate provide coarse aggregate comprised of natural stones meeting the requirements of section num with a size distribution of any of the listed aggregate gradations from size no num through size no num inclusive except as noted on the plans .
have all coarse aggregate backfill materials tested for ph resistivity sulfate and chloride content by a department approved independent testing laboratory prior to placement .
submit a certification signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of florida that the results of these tests meet the requirements of num .
for sbw systems provide drainage aggregate comprised of coarse aggregate backfill and a drainage geotextile to separate the drainage aggregate from the reinforced backfill as specified for each approved wall system .
num approved product list apl .
all proprietary retaining wall systems shall be listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of products for inclusion on the apl shall submit an application in accordance with section num independently certified test reports and calculations and drawings in accordance with the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and the departments structures design guidelines sdg signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of florida .
submit calculations and drawings showing details notes materials dimensions sizes and other information as described below for a complete description of the retaining wall system .
num .
soil reinforcement durability andor corrosion data num .
differential settlement the wall system can tolerate without exceeding normal stress range of the soil reinforcement and wall facing or the construction tolerances in this section num .
the effects of water flow num .
applicable environmental classifications as outlined in the sdg num .
signed and sealed design calculations .
design calculations may be either by hand or by a wall company program with hand calculations verifying the program output .
it is only necessary to include sample hand calculations for a num foot height for each soil condition .
num .
corrosion and durability design procedures for soil reinforcement elements num .
provide num inch xnum inch drawings showing a .
notes specific to the wall system b .
panel sizes and reinforcing c. soil reinforcement connection to wall facings d. wall panel abutment interfacing e. slip joints f. steps in leveling pad g. soil reinforcing details around all vertical obstructions h. filter fabric placement at panel joints and around all obstructions i .
details for skewing soil reinforcement num degrees maximum without cutting j .
corner elements required at all angle breaks greater than num degrees k. bin wall details for acute corners required at all acute corners where interior corner angle is less than num degrees num return to table of contents l. details showing how to accommodate long term post construction wall settlement in excess of four inches without attaching soil reinforcement to the abutment and m. details of how to ground the wall system .
num .
pullout test data for the proposed wallreinforcement connection and size and type of soil reinforcement for wall system .
testing shall be done by an independent soil testing laboratory or testing agency certified by the department .
ensure test data includes all sizes and types of soil reinforcement to be utilized on department projects .
default aashto values may be used for conventional soil reinforcement .
for soil reinforcement grids include all various configurations and combinations of longitudinal and transverse wires .
num .
other information pertinent to the design and performance of the wall system as necessary .
num .
a field construction manual describing construction requirements and sequencing for the wall system .
submit manual in num inch x num inch format in either pdf or ms word format .
num shop drawings .
submit shop drawings and calculations in accordance with section num .
provide calculations and drawings showing details notes materials dimensions sizes and other information necessary for the complete fabrication and erection of the retaining wall system .
as a minimum provide the following num .
elevation view showing the final ground line and elevations of the top and bottom of wall at the begin and end of wall all breaks in vertical alignment and all whole stations and num foot station increments .
num .
sections showing the length size and designation of soil reinforcement .
num .
plan view showing the horizontal alignment and offsets from the horizontal control line to the exterior face of the wall the location of utilities drainage structures and other items that impact the wall the limits of the reinforced soil volume and the location of piles within the reinforced earth volume .
num .
details for construction around utilities drainage structures and other items that impact the wall for placement of soil reinforcement at acute corners for addressing conflicts between soil reinforcement and obstructions in the reinforced soil volume for addressing different wall types intersecting and impacting each other .
num .
general notes and design parameters including design soil characteristics factored bearing resistance and factored bearing pressure for each wall height increment and other notes required for construction of the walls .
num .
design calculations for each wall height increment detailed in the shop drawings .
num .
when the friction angle depicted in the shop drawings exceeds num degrees for sand backfill or num degrees for limerock backfill provide laboratory test results in accordance with num verifying the backfill to be used for the wall meets the design soil characteristics for the shop drawings .
num .
for sbw systems include details for the placement of drainage aggregate drainage pipes and separation geotextile .
drawings should be similar to details for type ii or type iii underdrains in standard plans index num .
do not directly cover perforated drainage pipes with a geotextile filter fabric such as a filter sock .
num return to table of contents num .
when sbw systems use friction or semifriction connections between geosynthetic reinforcement and the facing blocks include the results of connection capacity testing .
tests must be performed using the materials to be used on the project and tested in accordance with astm dnum to justify the shortterm ultimate connection strength reduction factor cru used to determine the longterm connection strength reduction factor crcr value in the design calculations for each wall height increment detailed in the shop drawings .
num concrete component construction .
construct reinforced concrete components in accordance with section num .
precast wall components are produced using certification acceptance therefore assume responsibility for performance of all quality control testing and inspections required by sections num and num for the precast component construction .
perform all quality control qc inspection and testing using construction training and qualification program ctqp qualified personnel .
perform compressive strength testing in a laboratory meeting and maintaining at all times the qualification requirements listed in section num .
the minimum time for form removal is num hours .
unless otherwise indicated in the contract apply a class num finish to the concrete surface for the front face and roughly screed the rear face to eliminate open pockets of aggregate and surface distortions in excess of num inch .
construct unreinforced concrete sbw components facing blocks with a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days and a maximum absorption of num in accordance with astm cnum .
units must have a normal weight density classification meeting the requirements of astm cnum except as modified in this section .
num curing cure reinforced concrete components in accordance with section num .
num tolerances meet the following manufactured tolerances num reinforced concrete components num .
precast component dimensions lateral position of soil reinforcement attachment devices within num inch .
all other dimensions within num inch .
num .
precast component squareness angular distortion of the component must not exceed num inches in num feet .
num .
precast component surface finish surface defects on smooth formed surfaces measured on a length of num feet must not exceed more than num inches .
surface defects on textured finished surfaces measured on a length of num feet must not exceed num inch .
num unreinforced concrete sbw components num .
length width and height of each individual block must be within num inch of the specified dimension .
hollow units must have a minimum wall thickness of num num inches .
num .
all units must be free of defects that would interfere with proper placing of the unit or impair the integrity of the wall construction .
minor cracks with a width less than num inch and a length less than num of the unit height may be acceptable .
num .
exposed facing blocks must be split face texture with a uniform wheat or tan color unless shown otherwise in the plans .
num marking of precast components num reinforced concrete components permanently and legibly mark the following information on the back of each reinforced precast wall panel by etching the panel num return to table of contents number or type piece mark project number if applicable date cast and precast manufacturers name or symbol with the approved producers qc stamp affixed .
num unreinforced concrete sbw components label each pallet of dry cast unreinforced concrete sbw facing blocks with the component identification number or type project number if applicable lot number date cast and the manufacturers name or symbol .
labels must be clearly legible until the component is installed .
num repairs or rejection of precast components .
num reinforced concrete components for precast concrete wall components that have not been installed evaluate cracks spalls and other deficiencies in accordance with num .
repair deficiencies in accordance with num or the plants approved repair methods that are included as part of the producer quality control plan .
the original performance and durability of repaired wall components must be maintained .
use materials for concrete repair that meet or exceed the strength requirement for the class of concrete used .
materials meeting the requirements of section num may be substituted for non shrink grout when required by num .
for precast concrete wall components that have been installed the disposition of concrete cracks will be determined in accordance with num .
the department will reject all precast concrete wall components not meeting the quality standard of this section and referenced specifications .
in addition any of the following defects will be sufficient cause for rejection by the department num .
defects that indicate unsatisfactory molding .
num .
defects indicating honeycombed or open texture concrete .
num .
defects in the physical characteristics such as a .
signs of aggregate segregation b .
broken or cracked corners c. soil reinforcement attachment devices improperly installeddamaged d. lifting inserts not useable e. exposed reinforcing steel f. insufficient cover over reinforcing steel g. cracks at the alignment pipe or pin h. insufficient concrete compressive strength i. precast component thickness in excess of plus or minus num inch from that shown in the contractr j. stained front face due to excess form oil or other reasons .
if the face of the precast component is stained or discolored to the point of rejection the stain or discoloration may be removed or a department approved stain or a class num finish may be applied to attain a uniform appearance for the entire structure to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num unreinforced concrete sbw components the department will reject all segmental retaining wall blocks not meeting the requirements of this section and the contract documents .
in addition any of the following defects will be sufficient cause for rejection of sbw facing blocks by the department num .
defects that indicate unsatisfactory molding .
num .
defects indicating honeycombed or open texture concrete .
num .
defects in the physical characteristics such as num return to table of contents a .
signs of aggregate segregation b .
broken or cracked corners c. insufficient concrete compressive strength d excessive concrete absorption e. exceeding dimensional tolerances or f. discoloration .
correct cracks or spalls occurring after installation in accordance with num .
num handling storage and shipping .
handle store and ship all components in a manner that prevents chipping cracks fractures excessive bending stresses mud dirt and debris .
support precast panel wall and counterfort components in storage on firm blocking located immediately adjacent to the attachment device .
do not ship precast concrete wall components to the project site prior to the completion of the num hour curing period and attainment of the required num day strength .
the contractor is permitted to verify the shipping strength test before num days by testing compressive strength cylinders that are cured under the conditions similar to the product or by testing temperature match cured cylinders .
the shipping strength test is the average compressive strength of two test cylinders .
do not ship reinforced concrete products until accepted and stamped by the qc manager or the inspectors under the direct observation of the qc manager .
num construction requirements .
num general due to the unique nature of the structure and concept procure from the wall supplier fully detailed shop drawings technical instructions guidance in preconstruction activities and onsite technical assistance during construction .
closely follow any instructions from the wall supplier unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
submit any instructions from the wall supplier to the engineer .
verify all pertinent retaining wall information soil parameters wall alignment utility locations conflicting structures prior to the wall supplier finalizing shop drawings .
bring any conflicts not shown in the contract to the engineers attention .
num wall excavation excavate to the limits shown in the contract and in conformance with section num .
num foundation preparation grade the foundation for the structure level for a width equal to or exceeding the limits of the retaining wall volume or as shown in the contract .
prepare the foundation in conformance with section num .
in addition to the compaction requirements of section num compact the graded area with an appropriate vibratory roller weighing a minimum of eight tons for at least five passes or as directed by the departments district geotechnical engineer .
remove and replace any soft or loose foundation subsoils incapable of sustaining the required compaction to the engineers satisfaction .
for permanent mse wall systems provide an unreinforced concrete leveling pad as shown in the contract documents .
cure the leveling pad a minimum of num hours before placement of precast wall components .
for sbw mse wall systems a geogrid reinforced geotextile wrapped compacted aggregate leveling pad may be used in lieu of the unreinforced concrete leveling pad .
the compacted aggregate leveling pad must be at least num inches wide and at least num inches thick after compacting and the geogrid must be at least num inches below the top of the leveling pad .
wrap the num return to table of contents aggregate leveling pad with a dnum dnum or dnum separation geotextile .
the geotextile may run up the front and back of the first block course or between the aggregate leveling pad and the first block course .
num wall erection assemble connect and support wall components as recommended by the wall supplier .
as backfill material is placed behind the wall face of mse wall systems utilizing reinforced concrete panels maintain the wall in the vertical position or slightly battered into the backfill to provide a final vertical alignment by means of bracing temporary wooden wedges placed in the joint at the junction of the two adjacent precast components on the external side of the wall or other alignment aids .
remove wooden wedges as soon as the precast component above the wedged precast component is completely erected and backfilled .
external bracing is required for the initial lift of mse systems .
for sbw systems carefully place the first course of concrete block units on the leveling pad .
up to num inch of sand may be placed between the concrete leveling pad and the buried first course of blocks to provide a level and stable base .
a one inch gap between the first course of facing units is allowed provided a suitable filter fabric is placed behind the foundation units as specified for each approved wall system .
each unit must be in full contact with the base and checked for level and horizontal alignment .
voids must be kept to a minimum to prevent point loading and cracking unless otherwise indicated in the shop drawings .
place units side by side for the full length of wall alignment .
fill the hollow cores or cells and the space within blocks with drainage aggregate .
sweep away excess material from top of units and install the next course .
place soil reinforcement normal to the face of the wall unless otherwise shown in the contract or as directed by the engineer .
do not cut or kink soil reinforcement .
do not connect soil reinforcement to piles or allow soil reinforcement to bear against piles .
field cut soil reinforcement only at locations as shown in the approved shop drawings .
prior to placement of the reinforcement compact the backfill in accordance with num .
for sbw systems shims made of nondegradable materials may be used as specified for each approved wall system .
the shim thickness per course of block must not exceed num inch and must not be installed on reinforcement elevations when the reinforcement connection relies on any friction .
num tolerances for permanent walls walls that do not meet the following tolerances will not be accepted by the department and must be removed and reconstructed at no cost to the department .
num reinforced concrete mse wall systems vertical tolerances plumbness and horizontal alignment tolerances must not exceed num inch when measured with a num foot straightedge .
the maximum allowable offset in the joint between precast components is num inch .
the final overall vertical tolerance of the completed wall plumbness from top to bottom must not exceed num inch per num feet of wall height .
horizontal and vertical joints between precast components must not be less than num inch or more than num num inches .
num sbw systems horizontal alignment tolerances must not exceed num inch pernum feet of wall length .
the maximum allowable gap between segmental retaining wall blocks above the first course must not exceed num inch .
the final overall vertical tolerance of the completed wall deviation from plumbness from top to bottom or batter shown in the plans must not exceed num inch per num feet of wall height .
num return to table of contents num tolerances for temporary walls vertical tolerances plumbness and horizontal alignment tolerances must not exceed three inches when measured with a num foot straightedge .
the final overall vertical tolerance of the completed wall plumbness from top to bottom must not exceed one inch per three feet of wall height not to exceed a total of six inches .
num backfill placement num compacted select and coarse aggregate backfill a lot is defined as a single lift of finished embankment not to exceed num feet in length or cumulative length of continuous interconnected walls .
backfill within three feet from the panels and backfill beyond three feet from the panels are separate lots .
overlapping retaining wall volumes may be considered one lot excluding the three feet width behind the panels .
strips up to eight feet wide between two retaining wall volumes constructed with the same material in one operation may be considered as one lot with the retaining wall volumes .
isolated compaction operations will be considered as separate lots .
for multiple phase construction a lot will not extend beyond the limits of the phase .
when bridge abutments on spread footings are shown in the plans the material within three feet behind the wall face and within the limits defined in num num are considered as separate lots .
remove wrinkles in geotextile reinforcement prior to covering with backfill .
place the backfill closely following the erection of each course of precast components or soil reinforcement layers and spread by moving the machinery parallel to the wall face .
do not allow equipment heavier than eight tons closer than three feet behind the wall face .
place backfill in a manner to avoid any damage or disturbance to the wall materials or misalignment of the facing materials .
remove and replace any wall materials which become damaged or disturbed during backfill placement at no cost to the department or correct as directed by the engineer .
remove and reconstruct any misalignment or distortion of the wall facing due to placement of backfill outside the limits of this specification at no cost to the department .
compact coarse aggregate backfill with a minimum of three passes of a vibratory compactor weighing between num and num pounds or two passes of vibratory compactor weighing over num pounds .
use the highest vibration level that does not cause excessive fracture of the aggregate in the opinion of the engineer .
continue compaction until there is no additional movement .
sheepsfoot grid rollers or other types of equipment employing a foot are not allowed for any backfill type .
achieve compaction of all backfill types within three feet of the back of the wall face using a power operated roller or plate weighing less than num pounds .
at a distance greater than three feet from the back of the wall a vibratory roller may be used provided that the frequency and amplitude combined with bulk weight of the roller has performed satisfactorily at a trial section of the same type of wall .
for select backfill a smooth wheel or rubber tire roller is considered adequate .
ensure that the maximum lift thickness after compaction does not exceed six inches .
decrease the lift thickness if necessary to obtain specified density .
all transitions from coarse aggregate backfill to select backfill must occur at least six inches above and below any layers of backfill reinforcement .
place a separation geotextile in accordance with num between the coarse aggregate backfill and select backfill and embankment .
perform backfill compaction in a way that the compactor moves in a direction parallel to the wall face and proceeds from a distance not less than three feet behind the wall face toward the end of the soil reinforcement element .
num return to table of contents when placing select backfill the moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction must be uniformly distributed throughout each layer of material .
use backfill material having a placement moisture content at the dry side of the optimum moisture content .
to achieve the required compaction moisture content use water that meets the requirements of section num .
do not transport excessively moist backfill materials to the site for any reason .
determine the optimum moisture content in accordance with the test method used to determine maximum density in num .
at the end of each days operation shape the last level of backfill to permit runoff of rainwater away from the wall face or provide a positive means of controlling run off away from the wall such as temporary pipe .
num flowable fill metallic wall components including metallic soil reinforcements must not be in partial contact with the flowable fill .
if the metallic components contact the flowable fill the metallic components must be completely encapsulated by the flowable fill .
num compressible free draining seal seal all joints between panels of reinforced concrete panel mse walls with compressible free draining material to prevent plant growth from seeds or spores that may be in the joints or transported to the joints by wind or rain .
the installation must be secure and free draining to keep the seal in place until uninstalled and to prevent hydrostatic forces from building up behind the panel .
num acceptance program .
num general requirements meet the requirements of num except delete the requirements of num num num num and num .
num maximum density determination for select backfill determine the maximum qc density in accordance with fm numtnum method d. when compacting anum or anum materials to meet the alternate acceptance criteria in num determine the maximum density in accordance with aashto tnum method c. perform gradation tests on the sample collected in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum .
classify soils in accordance with aashto mnum in order to determine compliance with embankment utilization requirements .
num density testing requirements ensure compliance with the requirements of nuclear density testing in accordance with fm numtnum .
determine the inplace moisture content for each density test .
use fm numtnum fm num determination of moisture content by means of a calcium carbide gas pressure moisture tester or fm num laboratory determination of moisture content of granular soils by use of a microwave oven for moisture determination .
perform these tests at a minimum frequency of one set of tests per lot .
determine test locations including stations and offsets using the random number generator provided by the engineer .
do not use note pads or work sheets to record data for later transfer to the density log book .
notify the engineer upon successful completion of qc testing on each lot .
num acceptance criteria for select backfill obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum dry density as determined by fm numtnum within three feet behind the wall face and obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum dry density as determined by fm numtnum from beyond three feet behind the wall face .
num return to table of contents for flowable fill meet the requirements of num .
for coarse aggregate backfill compact with a minimum of three passes of a vibratory compactor weighing between num and num pounds or two passes of a vibratory compactor weighing over num pounds .
use the highest vibration level that does not cause excessive fracture of the aggregate in the opinion of the engineer .
continue compaction until there is no additional movement .
num optional acceptance criteria for anum and anum materials obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum dry density as determined by aashto tnum within three feet behind the wall face and obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum dry density as determined by aashto tnum beyond three feet behind the wall face .
the combined width from both mse wall backfill excluding the three foot zone from the panels and embankment material may be considered the same lot if the same material is used the material in both wall backfill and embankment is compacted with the same procedure equipment and compacting effort and the maximum lift thickness after compaction in both wall backfill and embankment is six inches .
num acceptance criteria for wall backfill supporting spread footings when spread footings at bridge abutments are shown in the plans obtain a minimum of num of the maximum dry density as determined by fm numtnum on the material within three feet behind the wall face and underneath the footing as defined by the following limits num .
all lifts below the bottom of the footing for a depth equal to at least the footing width num .
a minimum distance of three feet beyond the edges of the footing width if the optional criteria specified in num is used compact the backfill material within the limits specified above to obtain a minimum density of num of the maximum dry density as determined by aashto tnum .
compact the remainder of the backfill in accordance with num or num as applicable .
do not use compaction equipment larger than permitted in num within three feet behind the wall face decrease the lift thickness if necessary .
num friction angle when the friction angle depicted in the shop drawings exceeds num degrees for sand backfill or num degrees for limerock backfill ensure the friction angle of the backfill material tested in accordance with fm numdnum equals or exceeds the backfill friction angle depicted in the shop drawings .
num frequency conduct sampling and testing at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
the engineer will perform verification sampling and tests at a minimum frequency listed in the table below .
test name quality control qc verification maximum density one per soil type one per soil type density one per lot one per four lots for each type of qc test gradation one per maximum density one per maximum density llpi one per maximum density one per maximum density soil classification one per maximum density one per maximum density organic content one per soil type one per soil type ph one per soil type one per soil type num return to table of contents direct shear three per soil type when required by num one per soil type verification testing for ph will be performed on samples taken at the point of placement .
in addition for permanent walls utilizing metallic soil reinforcement test for corrosiveness at a minimum frequency of one test per soil type at point of placement according to the electrochemical table in num .
the engineer will collect enough material to split and create two separate samples and retain one for resolution at point of placement until lots represented by the samples are accepted .
the engineer will perform verification tests for corrosiveness at a minimum frequency of one test per soil type .
num verification comparison criteria and resolution procedures num maximum density determination the engineer will collect enough material to split and create two separate samples and retain one for resolution until lots represented by the samples are accepted .
the engineer will meet the requirements of num except replace aashto tnum method c with fm numtnum method d. if the contractor selects the optional acceptance criteria the engineer will verify the qc results of aashto tnum method c in accordance with num .
num density testing meet the requirements of num .
num soil classification the engineer will meet the requirements of num except test the sample retained in num instead of taking the additional one .
num gradation the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result meets the gradation limits set forth in the gradation table of num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained in num .
the state materials office smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with aashto tnum and fm numtnum .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required gradation limits the lots will be verified .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required gradation limits reconstruct the lots with acceptable material .
the engineer will perform new verification testing .
num liquid limit and plasticity index llpi the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result satisfies the plasticity index and liquid limit criteria set forth in num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained in num .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with aashto tnum and aashto tnum respectively .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required criteria lots of that soil type will be verified .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reconstruct the corresponding lots with acceptable material .
the engineer will perform new verification testing .
num corrosiveness the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result satisfies the electrochemical and ph test criteria set forth in num .
otherwise the engineer will test the sample retained in num .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm num fm num fm num and fm num .
num return to table of contents if the resolution test result satisfies the required criteria material of that soil type will be verified and accepted .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reject the material and reconstruct with acceptable material .
num organic content the engineer will verify the qc results if the verification result satisfies the organic content test criteria set forth in num .
otherwise the engineer will collect three additional samples .
the material will be sampled and tested in accordance with fm numtnum and by averaging the test results for three randomly selected samples from at least one lift per soil type .
the smo or an aashto accredited laboratory designated by the smo will perform resolution testing .
if the resolution test result satisfies the required criteria material of that soil type will be verified and accepted .
if the resolution test results do not meet the required criteria reject the material and reconstruct with acceptable material .
num friction angle when the friction angle depicted in the shop drawings exceeds num degrees for sand backfill or num degrees for limerock backfill the engineer will take a verification sample at the point of placement to perform a direct shear verification test in accordance with fm numdnum .
the smo or a consultant qualified to perform geotechnical specialty lab testing type of work num per rule num of the florida administrative code will perform the verification testing .
if the test verifies the material has a friction angle greater than or equal to the friction angle depicted in the shop drawings the material in the lots will be verified .
if the verification test does not meet the required friction angle reconstruct the lots with acceptable material .
the contractor may request to redesign the wall and resubmit the shop drawings with the lower friction angle indicated by the verification test .
employ a professional engineer to redesign and submit signed and sealed drawings and computations .
do not begin any reconstruction until the proposed redesign has been reviewed and approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall bear the costs of the redesign and any work resulting from the design changes .
num certification .
submit all test reports to the engineer necessary to document compliance with the specifications at least ten days prior to wall construction .
also submit a certificate of compliance certifying that the retaining wall materials backfill and construction practices comply with this section .
for sbw systems the engineer will randomly select samples of each type of block used in the segmental block retaining wall system and review a copy of the certified test report corresponding the sample at a frequency of one sample per type of block for each wall .
acceptance of furnished material will be based on the certificate of compliance accompanying test reports and visual inspection by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in square feet completed and accepted of the area bounded by the following for permanent retaining wall systems the top of the coping the top of the leveling pad or top of structural footings and the begin and end wall limits as shown on the wall control drawings .
for temporary retaining wall systems the top of wall the ground line and the begin and end wall limits as shown on the wall control drawings .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including the design of the wall system excavation required specifically for wall construction below the normal roadway template backfill reinforcement leveling pad footings copings light pole pedestals fabric material horizontal joint materials alignment pins repairs labor equipment and other materials necessary to complete the wall in an acceptable manner as shown in the contract .
the cost of backfill for the normal roadway template will be included in the cost of embankment or borrow excavation as applicable .
payment will be made under item no .
num retaining wall system permanent per square foot .
item no .
num retaining wall system temporary per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num fencing num description .
furnish erect and reset metal fence of the type and at the locations shown in the plans .
num types of fence .
the types of fence are designated as follows type a farm fence .
type b chainlink fence .
type r chainlink fence for pedestrian overpass .
num materials .
num type a fence farm fence meet the requirements of section num for timber posts and braces .
for metal posts and braces and for recycled plastic fence posts meet the requirements of the standard plans .
for the fabric and all other accessories meet the requirements of the standard plans .
num type b fence chainlink for the posts braces fabric and all accessories other than the concrete for bases meet the requirements of the standard plans .
use concrete as specified in section num or a premix approved by the engineer for bases .
the requirements contained in num and num will not apply .
num type r fence chainlink for pedestrian overpass use the fabric and accessories specified in the plans .
num resetting fence use material from the existing fence .
for any additional materials required provide the same type of material as in the existing fence and as specified herein including gates when applicable .
num optional use of materials for type a fence a combination of steel aluminum timber recycled plastic or concrete posts may be used .
unless otherwise called for in the plans line posts of one material may be used with corner pull and end post assemblies of a different material .
the engineer will permit the use of line posts of only one optional material and pull posts assemblies of only one optional material between corner and end post assemblies .
within individual corner and end post assemblies the engineer will allow the use of only one optional material .
for type b fence a combination of zinccoated steel fence members aluminum coated fence members and aluminum alloy fence members may be used .
unless otherwise indicated in the plans the engineer will allow the use of only one type of fabric material one type of line post material and one type of pull assembly material between corner and end post assemblies .
num certification provide the engineer with certified test reports from the manufacturer confirming that all materials posts braces fabric and all other accessories conform to the requirements of this section section num and the standard plans .
provide the engineer a copy of the certification at least ten days prior to fence construction .
num return to table of contents also furnish the engineer a certificate of compliance certifying that the fencing system materials and construction practices comply with the applicable standard plans and specifications .
acceptance of furnished material will be based on the certificate of compliance accompanying test reports and visual inspection by the engineer .
num construction methods .
num general install the fence in accordance with the specific requirements of this article and with the details shown on the standard plans for the particular type of fence called for except for type r fence which shall be detailed in the plans .
construct the fence in close proximity to the right of way line except as otherwise detailed in the plans .
assume responsibility for obtaining satisfactory permits or permission from property owners for any encroachments required to perform the work and for proper scheduling of the fence installation with the removal of existing fence where it is necessary to provide continuous security to adjacent areas already fenced .
in order to meet this requirement where necessary for maintaining security of livestock on adjacent property during construction of the new fence the engineer may require the erection and subsequent removal of temporary fencing .
num spacing of posts space posts as shown in the standard plans within a tolerance of num inches except where definite spotting of corner posts is required .
ensure that in any line of fence the overspacings and the underspacings shall approximately compensate .
set additional line posts at abrupt changes in grade .
num clearing where the clearing and grubbing for the project includes the area occupied by the fence clear the area to the limits shown in the plans .
if the limits are not shown in the plans clear the area at least num feet wide on each side of the fence line .
the engineer may direct that desirable trees be left in place and may restrict clearing where permission from the property owners can not be obtained .
num construction over irregular terrain and other obstructions num clearance of bottom of fence install the fence such that the bottom of the fence in general follows the contour of the ground .
the fence is detailed in the plans at approximately num inches above ground line .
over irregular ground however the engineer will permit a minimum clearance of num inch and a maximum of num inches for a length not to exceed num feet and for type a fence with the barbed wire spaced midway between ground and bottom of fabric .
num grading where necessary to secure proper vertical alignment and to meet the clearance requirements fill depressions except where filling would obstruct proper drainage and cut down knolls and ridges .
provide a substantial and permanent foundation for the fence .
num use of extralength posts .
at locations where it is impracticable to adjust the ground level the engineer may require that posts of additional length be set and that the opening at the bottom be closed by additional barbed wire stretched taut between poles with no vertical distance between wires greater than num inches .
for all such posts requiring a concrete base extend the concrete downward to the bottom of the extralength post .
num setting posts if rock occurs within the required depth of the post hole or pavement which is to remain in place exists at the location of a post drill a hole of a diameter slightly larger than the greatest dimension of the post or footing and grout in the post or footing .
num return to table of contents set timber posts either by digging or by driving .
set recycled plastic fence posts in accordance with the standard plans .
num placing fabric do not place fabric and barbed wire until the posts have been permanently positioned and concrete foundations have attained adequate strength .
place the fabric by securing one end and applying sufficient tension to remove all slack before making permanent attachments at intermediate points .
fasten the fabric to all end corner and pull posts by approved means .
fasten the fabric using tools designed for the purpose in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply the tension for stretching by mechanical fence stretchers or with singlewire stretchers designed for the purpose .
num electrical grounds num grounding for overhead lines wherever an overhead power line crosses over the fence install a ground rod directly below the point of crossing .
where an overhead power line runs parallel to and within num feet of the fence install a ground rod at each end of the fence and at intervals of no greater than num feet .
use copperclad steel ground rods that are a minimum of num feet in length and num inch in diameter .
drive the rod vertically until the top of the rod is approximately num inches below the ground surface .
connect a conductor of no .
num awg solid copper wire to the ground rod and each metal fence element directly adjacent to the ground rod using noncorrosive ground rod clamps .
num fences with nonmetal posts for all fences using nonmetal posts substitute a metal post for a nonmetal post at intervals of no greater than num feet with at least one metal post in any length of fence .
tightly fasten a galvanized steel wire to the barbed wire fence fabric and metal post .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantities to be paid for will be plan quantity for the number of gates and the length of each type of fence constructed and accepted .
in addition extra payment will be made in accordance with num for additional lengths of post approved by the engineer for the crossing of depressions in accordance with num muck areas or other areas of inadequate support for a post of standard length .
num measurement of fence length and payment the length of fence to be paid for will be plan quantity completed and accepted .
measurement for resetting fence will be the actual length of existing fence reset including gates when applicable .
num basis of payment .
num basic items of fencing the contract unit price per foot for the item of fencing will be full compensation for all work and materials necessary for the complete installation including line posts corner end and pull posts .
such price and payment will include but not be limited to the following specific incidental work .
num .
any work required to level and prepare the terrain along the line of the fence .
num .
any additional clearing incidental to construction of the fence .
num .
all preparation for post holes in whatever type of material as specified herein .
num .
any furnishing and installing of electrical grounds .
num .
any additional work or materials required for special construction over irregular terrain or terrain of inadequate support for the posts including the additional barbed wire but not including the extra lengths of posts ordered by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num .
any cost of erection and removal of any temporary fencing which may be necessary for maintaining security of livestock etc .
on adjacent property during construction of the new fence .
num payment rates for extralength posts any extra length posts added to complete installation of the fence will require an invoice .
the contractor will be compensated for invoice price plus num as payment for any extra length posts .
the standard length of steel recycled plastic and aluminum posts will be the required length as indicated in the plans or standard plans for each type and case .
the payment for additional length of post will include the cost of additional concrete to extend concrete bases as applicable .
num gate payment the quantities to be paid for will be full compensation for all labor materials posts and associated hardware for the complete installation of the type gate specified in the plans and accepted by the engineer .
num payment items payment shall be made under item no .
num num fencing per foot .
item no .
num num gates each .
num return to table of contents section num directional bore num description .
num scope of work the work specified in this section documents the approved construction methods and procedures for directional boring also commonly called horizontal directional drilling hdd .
num general hdd is a trenchless method for installing a product that serves as a carrier pipe for transporting solids liquids or gasses under pressure or gravity flow or serves as a conduit casing or duct for a carrier pipe cable or wire line products .
it is a multistage process consisting of site preparation and restoration equipment setup and drilling a pilot bore along a predetermined path and then pulling the product back through the drilled space .
when necessary enlargement of the pilot bore hole may be necessary to accommodate a product larger than the pilot bore hole size .
this process is referred to as back reaming and is done at the same time the product is being pulled back through the pilot bore hole .
accomplish alignment of the bore by proper orientation of the drill bit head as it is being pushed into the ground by a hydraulic jack and determine orientation and tracking of the drill bit .
in order to minimize friction and prevent collapse of the bore hole introduce a soil stabilizing agent drilling fluid into the annular bore space from the trailing end of the drill bit .
select or design drilling fluids for the site specific soil and ground water conditions .
confine free flowing escaping slurry or drilling fluids at the ground surface during pull back or drilling .
remove all residual slurry from the surface and restore the site to preconstruction conditions .
num construction site requirements .
num pedestrian traffic when and where installations temporarily disrupt use of a pedestrian way provide a safe alternate route in accordance with standard plans indexes num num and num .
num site conditions num .
carry out excavation for entry exit recovery pits slurry sump pits or any other excavation as specified in section num .
sump pits are required to contain drilling fluids if vacuum devices are not operated throughout the drilling operation unless approved by the engineer .
num .
within num hours of completing installation of the product clean the work site of all excess slurry or spoils .
take responsibility for the removal and final disposition of excess slurry or spoils .
ensure that the work site is restored to preconstruction conditions or as identified on the plans .
num .
provide mot in accordance with the standard plans and the mutcd when and where the former is silent .
num .
exposure of product shall be limited to num feet and num consecutive days unless approved by the engineer .
num damage restoration take responsibility for restoration for any damage caused by heaving settlement separation of pavement escaping drilling fluid fracout or the directional drilling operation at no cost to the department .
num remediation plans when required by the engineer provide detailed plans which show how damage to any roadway facility will be remedied .
these details will num return to table of contents become part of the asbuilt plans package .
remediation plans must follow the same guidelines for development and presentation of the asbuilt plans .
when remediation plans are required they must be approved by the engineer before any work proceeds .
num quality control .
num general take control of the operation at all times .
have a representative who is thoroughly knowledgeable of the equipment boring and department procedures present at the job site during the entire installation and available to address immediate concerns and emergency operations .
notify the engineer num hours in advance of starting work .
do not begin installation until the engineer is present at the job site and agrees that proper preparations have been made .
num product testing when there is any indication that the installed product has sustained damage and may leak stop all work notify the engineer and investigate the damage .
the engineer may require a pressure test and reserves the right to be present during the test .
perform pressure test within num hours unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
submit the test results to the engineer for review and approval .
the engineer is allowed up to num hours to approve or determine if the product installation is not in compliance with the specifications .
the engineer may require noncompliant installations to be filled with excavatable flowable fill .
num testing methods testing may consist of one of the following methods and must always meet or exceed the departments testing requirements num .
follow the product manufacturers pressure testing recommendations .
num .
ensure carrier pipes installed without a casing meet the pressure requirements set by the owner .
if the owner does not require pressure testing the engineer may require at least one test .
num .
a water tight pipe and joint configuration where the product is installed beneath any pavement including sidewalk and front shoulders is required .
the engineer will determine when and where water tight joint requirements will be applied to the ultimate roadway section for future widening .
when a product is located elsewhere the pipe and joint configuration must meet or exceed soil tight joint requirements .
conduct tests for joint integrity for one hour .
the test for a soil tight joint allows up to num gallon of water leakage at a sustained pressure of num psi .
the water tight joint criteria allows no leakage at all for a sustained pressure of num psi .
num failed bore path if conditions warrant removal of any materials installed in a failed bore path as determined by the engineer it will be at no cost to the department .
promptly fill all voids with excavatable flowable fill .
num product locating and tracking the method of locating and tracking the drill head during the pilot bore will be shown in the plans .
the department recognizes walkover wire line and wire line with surface grid verification or any other system as approved by the engineer as the accepted methods of tracking directional bores .
use a locating and tracking system capable of ensuring the proposed installation is installed as intended .
if an area of radio signal interference is expected to exceed num feet the engineer may specify the use of a suitable tracking system .
the locating and tracking system must provide information on num .
clock and pitch information num .
depth num .
transmitter temperature num .
battery status num .
position xy num return to table of contents num .
azimuth where direct overhead readings walkover are not possible i.e .
subaqueous or limited access transportation facility num .
ensure proper calibration of all equipment before commencing directional drilling operation .
num .
take and record alignment readings or plot points such that elevations on top of and offset dimensions from the center of the product to a permanent fixed feature are provided .
such permanent fixed feature must have prior approval of the engineer .
provide elevations and dimensions at all bore alignment corrections vertical and horizontal with a minimum distance between points of num feet .
provide a sufficient number of elevations and offset distances to accurately plot the vertical and horizontal alignment of the installed product .
a minimum of three elevation and plot points are required .
num product bore hole diameter minimize potential damage from soil displacementsettlement by limiting the ratio of the bore hole to the product size .
the size of the back reamer bit or pilot bit if no back reaming is required will be limited relative to the product diameter to be installed as follows maximum pilot or backreamer bit diameter when rotated num degrees outside pipe diameter inches maximum bit diameter inches num diameter num num to num num x diameter num diameter num use manufacturers recommendation for pipe with restrained joints .
num drilling fluids use a mixture of bentonite clay or other approved stabilizing agent mixed with potable water with a minimum ph of num to create the drilling fluid for lubrication and soil stabilization .
do not use any other chemicals or polymer surfactants in the drilling fluid without written consent from the engineer .
certify to the engineer in writing that any chemicals to be added are environmentally safe and not harmful or corrosive to the facility .
identify the source of water for mixing the drilling fluid .
any water source used other than a potable water source may require a ph test .
num drilling operations num installation process ensure adequate removal of soil cuttings and stability of the bore hole by monitoring the drilling fluids such as the pumping rate pressures viscosity and density during the pilot bore back reaming and pipe installation .
relief holes can be used as necessary to relieve excess pressure down hole .
obtain the engineers approval of the location and all conditions necessary to construct relief holes to ensure the proper disposition of drilling fluids is maintained and unnecessary inconvenience is minimized to other facility users .
to minimize heaving during pull back the pull back rate is determined in order to maximize the removal of soil cuttings without building excess down hole pressure .
contain excess drilling fluids at entry and exit points until they are recycled or removed from the site or vacuumed during drilling operations .
ensure that entry and exit pits are of sufficient size to contain the expected return of drilling fluids and soil cuttings .
ensure that all drilling fluids are disposed of or recycled in a manner acceptable to the appropriate local state or federal regulatory agencies .
when drilling in suspected contaminated ground test the drilling fluid for contamination and appropriately dispose of it .
num return to table of contents remove any excess material upon completion of the bore .
if in the drilling process it becomes evident that the soil is contaminated contact the engineer immediately .
do not continue drilling without the engineers approval .
when conditions warrant as determined by the engineer back reaming for enlarging the bore diameter shall be accomplished by connecting the reamer to trailing drill stems at the exit pit of the pilot bore .
the drill pipe shall remain in the bore hole until the final product is pulled into place .
after the pilot bore is established do not push anything from the entry pit to the exit pit .
the timing of all boring processes is critical .
install a product into a bore hole within the same day that the prebore is completed to ensure necessary support exists .
num boring failure if an obstruction is encountered during boring which prevents completion of the installation in accordance with the design location and specification the pipe may be taken out of service and left in place at the discretion of the engineer .
immediately fill the product left in place with excavatable flowable fill .
submit a new installation procedure and revised plans to the engineer for approval before resuming work at another location .
if during construction damage is observed to the fdot facility cease all work until resolution to minimize further damage and a plan of action for restoration is obtained and approved by the engineer .
num documentation requirements .
num boring path report submit a bore path report to the engineer within seven days of the completion of each bore path .
include the following in the report num .
location of project and financial project number including the permit number when assigned num .
name of person collecting data including title position and company name num .
investigation site location contract plans station number or reference to a permanent structure within the project right of way num .
identification of the detection method used num .
elevations and offset dimensions as required in num num asbuilt plans provide the engineer a complete set of asbuilt plans showing all bores successful and failed within num calendar days of completing the work .
asbuilt plans must be pdf files in the same scale as the contract plans and formatted on num inch by num inch sheets .
ensure that the plans are dimensionally correct copies of the contract plans and include roadway plan and profile crosssection boring location and subsurface conditions as directed by the engineer .
the plans must show appropriate elevations referenced to a permanent fdot feature mast arm foundation manhole inlet cover head wall etc .
specific plans content requirements include but may not be limited to the following num .
the contract plan view shows the center line location of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service to an accuracy of num inch at the ends and other points physically observed in accordance with the bore path report .
num .
as directed by the engineer provide either a profile plan for each bore path or a crosssection of the roadway at a station specified by the engineer or a roadway centerline profile .
show the ground or pavement surface and crown elevation of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service to an accuracy of within num inch at the ends and other exposed locations .
on profile plans for bore paths crossing the roadway show stationing of the crossing on the contract plans .
on the profile plans for the bore paths paralleling the roadway show the num return to table of contents contract plans stationing .
if the profile plan for the bore path is not made on one of the contract profile or crosssection sheets use a num to num vertical exaggeration .
num .
if during boring an obstruction is encountered which prevents completion of the installation in accordance with the design location and specification and the product is left in place and taken out of service show the failed bore path along with the final bore path on the plans .
note the failed bore path as failed bore path taken out of service .
also show the name of the utility owner location and length of the drill head and any drill stems not removed from the bore path .
num .
show the top elevation diameter and material type of all utilities encountered and physically observed during the subsoil investigation .
for all other obstructions encountered during a subsoil investigation or the installation show the type of material horizontal and vertical location top and lowest elevation observed and note if the obstruction continues below the lowest point observed .
num .
include bore notes on each plan stating the final bore path diameter product diameter drilling fluid composition composition of any other materials used to fill the annular void between the bore path and the product or facility placed out of service .
note if the product is a casing as well as the size and type of carrier pipes placed within the casing as part of the contract work .
num compensation .
no direct payment will be made for directional bore .
include the cost to perform this operation in the contract price for the item being installed .
no compensation will be made for failed bore paths injection of flowable fill products taken out of service or incomplete installations .
no compensation will be made for the pay item associated with the directional bore until a bore path report has been submitted and accepted by the engineer .
num return to table of contents section num jack and bore num description .
num scope of work the work specified in this section documents the approved construction methods procedures and materials for jack and bore jb also known as auger boring .
micro tunneling mt is also included in the category of jb for purposes of specifications .
num general jb is a method for installing a product often called a casing that may serve as a direct conduit for liquids or gases or as a duct for carrier pipe cable or wire line products .
it is a multistage process consisting of constructing a temporary horizontal jacking platform and a starting alignment track in an entrance pit at a desired elevation .
the product is then jacked by manual control along the starting alignment track with simultaneous excavation of the soil being accomplished by a rotating cutting head in the leading edge of the products annular space .
the ground up soil spoil is transported back to the entrance pit by helical wound auger flights rotating inside the product .
jb typically provides limited tracking and steering as well as limited support to the excavation face .
mt is conducted similar to jb with the exception that it is remotely controlled guided pipe jacking process that provides continuous support to the excavation face .
the guidance system usually consists of a laser mounted in the tunneling drive shaft which communicates a reference line to a target mounted inside the mt machines articulated steering head .
the mt process provides the ability to control the excavation face stability by applying mechanical or fluid pressure to counterbalance the earth and hydrostatic pressures .
removal and disposition of excess material varies is the responsibility of the boring contractor and is not covered under this specification .
however the cost of removal or final disposition is included in the cost of the jb operation .
no jb conduit may be left open ended without approval of the engineer .
num materials .
select materials approved for installation within the rightofway based on their suitability for the construction method as defined in table num .
after determining product suitability individual material standards as contained in table num apply .
table num product suitability by construction method type pipecasing installation mode suitable pipecasing jack and bore jacking steel plastic micro tunneling jacking di frpm pc pccp rccp rcp steel table num material standards acceptable for jb and mt installations material type nonpressure pressure ductile iron di awwa cnumcnum astm anum awwa cnumcnum num return to table of contents table num material standards acceptable for jb and mt installations material type nonpressure pressure fiberglass reinforced polymer mortar frpm astm dnum astm dnum awwa cnum polymer concrete pc din num num na prestressed concrete cylinder pipe pccp na awwa cnum reinforced concrete cylinder pipe rccp na astm cnum reinforced concrete pipe rcp astm c num astm cnum awwa cnumcnum steel astm anum grade bnum api numbnum awwa cnum api numbnum polyvinyl chloride pvc astm dnum astm dnum reinforced thermosetting resin pipe rtrp astm dnum or astm dnum astm dnum or astm dnum num no hydrostatic test required num dimensional tolerances only unless otherwise tested and approved by the department only use encasement pipe or uncased carrier pipe material that is new and has smooth interior and exterior walls .
when the plans show that the casing is to be used as a drainage carrier pipe extend the casing the entire length from drainage structure to drainage structure .
when using uncased carrier pipe use pipe meeting the requirements in num .
maintain a uniform diameter wall thickness and material type for the entire length of the casing .
num steel pipe casing and welds in addition to meeting or exceeding the conditions contained in table num and table num meet the following requirements num .
the size of the steel casing must be at least num inches larger than the largest outside diameter of the carrier .
casing size must accommodate pressure pipe or carrier pipe joint restraints .
num .
the casing pipe must be straight seam pipe spiral seam pipe or seamless pipe .
num .
all steel pipe may be bare inside and out with the manufacturers recommended minimum nominal wall thicknesses to meet the greater of either installation loading or carrier requirements .
num .
all steel casing pipe must be square cut and have deadeven lengths which are compatible with the jb equipment .
use steel pipe casings and welds meeting or exceeding the thickness requirements to achieve the service life requirements noted in the department drainage manual chapter num .
for purposes of determining service life ensure that casings installed under roadways meet or exceed cross drain requirements and casings under driveways meet or exceed side drain pipe requirements .
for pipe used in drainage applications use pipe meeting the requirements in num num .
for purposes of material classification consider steel pipe casing structural plate steel pipe .
ensure that steel pipe casing of insufficient length achieves the required length through fully welded joints .
ensure that joints are airtight and continuous over the entire circumference of the pipe with a bead equal to or exceeding the minimum of either that required to meet the thickness num return to table of contents criteria of the pipe wall for jacking and loading or service life .
all welding shall be done in accordance with the american welding society structural welding code steel dnum .
num reinforced concrete pipe casing in addition to meeting or exceeding the conditions contained in tables num and table num meet the following requirements ensure that concrete pipe complies with the following minimum requirements num .
num psi concrete compressive strength num .
class iii iv or v as required by load calculations with a cwall num .
full circular inner andor outer reinforcing cage num .
multiple layers of steel reinforcing cages wire splices laps and spacers are permanently secured together by welding in place num .
straight outside pipe wall with no bell modification num .
no elliptical reinforcing steel is allowed num .
single cage reinforcement with a num inch minimum cover from the inside wall num .
double cage reinforcement with a num inch minimum cover from each wall num .
joints are gasket type num .
additional joint reinforcement num .
for drainage applications use pipe meeting the requirements in num num .
upon installation the engineer may at his discretion require the contractor to perform concrete wiping or injection of the joints if it is believed the joints have not maintained their water tightness during the jacking operation .
no additional payment will be made for this operation .
num plastic pipe casing plastic pipe may be jacked and bored if its physical properties meet or exceed the conditions contained in tables num and num and has a sufficient wall thickness to maintain proper alignment without exceeding the deflection requirements in section num .
if plastic pipe is jacked and bored it may not be used as a pressurized carrier .
plastic pipe casing installed by the jack and bore method requires the use of an auger .
open end jacking without the use of an auger for continuous cleanout of the bore as the pipe is advanced is not permitted .
closed end jacking is not permitted .
for drainage applications use pipe meeting the requirements in num .
num pipe couplings and joints in addition to meeting or exceeding the conditions contained in tables num and num to minimize potential for bore failure couplings must not project at right angles from the casing diameter by more than num inch .
num .
steel pipe coupling and joints a. welds must comply with num when couplings are not used or when the coupling thickness is less than the casing thickness .
b .
when couplings are used the casing joint needs only to be tack welded .
couplings must have a full bead weld such that the thickness when measured at an angle of num degrees to the casing and coupling interface must be no less than the casing thickness .
num .
plastic pipe couplings and joints a .
must meet or exceed all astm strength and composition standards established for the casing material to which they are being attached .
b .
joints must be made sufficiently strong to withstand the pressures of jacking .
all chemical welds must be completely set and cured before any jacking is attempted .
num return to table of contents num construction site requirements .
num site conditions num .
carry out excavation for entry exit recovery pits auger slurry sump pits or any other excavation as specified in section num .
when using auger fluids the sump pits must contain auger fluids if vacuum devices are not operated throughout the boring operation .
num .
within num hours of completing installation of the boring product ensure that the work site is cleaned of all excess auger fluids or spoils .
removal and final disposition of excess fluids or spoils is the responsibility of the boring contractor and ensure that the work site is restored to preconstruction conditions or as identified in the plans .
num .
restore excavated areas in accordance with the specifications and standard plans .
num .
provide mot in accordance with the department standard plans and the mutcd when and where the former is silent .
num .
ensure that equipment does not impede visibility of the roadway user without taking the necessary precautions of proper signing and maintenance of traffic operations .
num ground water control investigate all sites for possibility of having to manage groundwater problems that may occur due to seasonal changes or natural conditions .
when ground water level must be controlled use a system and equipment that is compatible with the properties characteristics and behavior of the soils as indicated by the soil investigation report .
num damage restoration take responsibility for restoring any damage caused by heaving settlement separation of pavement escaping boring fluid fracout of the jb or mt operation at no cost to the department .
num remediation plans when required by the engineer submit detailed plans which show how damage to any roadway facility will be remedied .
these details will become part of the asbuilt plans package .
remediation plans must follow the same guidelines for development and presentation of the asbuilt plans .
when remediation plans are required they must be approved by the engineer before any work proceeds .
num quality control .
num general take control of the operation at all times .
have a representative who is thoroughly knowledgeable of the equipment boring and department procedures present at the job site during the entire installation and available to address immediate concerns and emergency operations .
notify the engineer num hours in advance of starting work .
do not begin the installation until the engineer is present at the job site and agrees that proper preparations have been made .
num construction process and approval for all installations submit sufficient information to establish the proposed strategy for providing the following num .
an indication of where the leading edge of the casing is located with respect to line and grade and the intervals for checking line and grade .
indication may be provided by using a water gauge dutch level or electronic transmitting and receiving devices .
other methods must have prior approval .
maintain a record of the progress at the job site .
num .
equipment of adequate size and capability to install the product and including the equipment manufacturers information for all power equipment used in the installation .
num .
a means for controlling line and grade .
num .
a means for centering the cutting head inside the borehole .
num .
provide a means for preventing voids by assuring num return to table of contents a .
the rear of the cutting head from advancing in front of the leading edge of the casing by more than num times the casing diameter and in stable cohesive conditions not to exceed num inches .
b .
in unstable conditions such as granular soil loose or flowable materials the cutting head is retracted into the casing a distance that permits a balance between pushing pressure pipe advancement and soil conditions .
c. development of and maintaining a log of the volume of spoil material removal relative to the advancement of the casing .
num .
adequate casing lubrication with a bentonite slurry or other approved technique .
num .
an adequate band around the leading edge of the casing to provide extra strength in loose unstable materials when the cutting head has been retracted into the casing to reduce skin friction as well as provides a method for the slurry lubricant to coat the outside of the casing .
num .
at least num feet of full diameter auger at the leading end of the casing .
subsequent auger size may be reduced but the reduced auger diameter must be at least num of the full auger diameter .
num .
water to be injected inside the casing to facilitate spoil removal .
the point of injection shall be no closer than num feet from the leading edge of the casing .
num testing num testing requirements ensure all casing joints meet the departments watertight pressure requirements in accordance with section num .
testing may consist of one of the following methods but must always meet or exceed department testing requirements .
num .
follow the product manufacturers pressure testing recommendations .
num .
carrier pipes installed without a casing must meet the pressure requirements set by the owner .
if the owner does not require pressure testing the engineer may require at least one test .
num drainage application testing under pavement when under pavement including sidewalk and front shoulders all jb pipe installations must meet or exceed the departments water tight pipe and joint configuration in accordance with section num .
the engineer will determine when and where water tight joint requirements shall be applied to the ultimate roadway section for future widening .
when under the pavement conduct an air pressure test for leaks in the presence of the engineer at a minimum test pressure of num psi by either of the following methods .
num .
num hour pressure test with a recording chart or num .
a dragnet type leak detector or equivalent device capable of detecting pressure drops of num psi for a time period recommended by the manufacturer .
num drainage application testing not under pavement when jb pipe installations are not located under the pavement the pipe and joint configuration must meet or exceed soil tight joint requirements .
the test for a soil tight joint allows up to num gallon of water leakage at a sustained pressure of num psi .
conduct test for joint integrity for one hour .
num .
num damaged product testing when there is any indication that the installed product has sustained damage and may leak stop the work notify the engineer and investigate damage .
the engineer may require a pressure test and reserves the right to be present during the test .
perform pressure test within num hours unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
submit the test results to the engineer for review and approval .
the engineer shall be allowed up num return to table of contents to num hours to approve or determine if the product installation is not in compliance with specifications .
the engineer may require noncompliant installations to be filled with excavatable flowable fill at no cost to the department .
num product locating and tracking install all facilities such that their location can be readily determined by electronic designation after installation .
for nonconductive installations attach a minimum of two separate and continuous conductive tracking tone wire materials either externally internally or integral with the product .
use either a continuous green sheathed solid conductor copper wire line minimum num awg for external placement or minimum num awg for internal placement in the conduitcasing or a coated conductive tape .
ensure that conductors are located on opposite sides when installed externally .
connect any break in the conductor line before construction with an electrical clamp or solder and coat the connection with a rubber or plastic insulator to maintain the integrity of the connection from corrosion .
clamp connections must be made of brass or copper and of the butt end type with wires secured by compression .
soldered connections must be made by tight spiral winding of each wire around the other with a finished length minimum of num inches overlap .
tracking conductors must extend num feet beyond bore termini .
conductors must be tested for continuity .
identify each conductor that passes by removing the last num inches of the sheath .
no deductions are allowed for failed tracking conductors .
failed conductor ends must be wound into a small coil and left attached for future use .
num augering fluids use a mixture of bentonite clay or other approved stabilizing agent mixed with potable water with a minimum ph of num to create the drilling fluid for lubrication and soil stabilization .
vary the fluid viscosity to best fit the soil conditions encountered .
do not use other chemicals or polymer surfactant in the drilling fluid without written consent of the engineer .
certify in writing to the engineer that any chemicals to be added are environmentally safe and not harmful or corrosive to the facility .
identify the source of water for mixing the drilling fluid .
approvals and permits are required for obtaining water from such sources as streams rivers ponds or fire hydrants .
any water source used other than potable water may require a ph test .
num microtunneling mt and micro tunnel boring machine mtbm requirements num performance requirements the mtbm must meet the following minimum performance requirements num .
capable of providing positive face support regardless of the mtbm type .
num .
articulated to enable controlled steering in both the vertical and horizontal direction to a tolerance of plus or minus num inch from design alignment .
num .
all functions are controlled remotely from a surface control unit .
num .
capable of controlling rotation using a bidirectional drive on the cutter head or by using antiroll fins or grippers .
the engineer must approve other methods .
num .
capable of injecting lubricant around the exterior of the pipe being jacked .
num .
indication of steering direction .
for slurry systems the following is also required num .
the volume of slurry flow in both the supply and return side of the slurry loop .
num .
indication of slurry bypass valve position .
num return to table of contents num .
indication of pressure of the slurry in the slurry chamber .
num failed bore path if conditions warrant removal of any materials installed in a failed bore path as determined by the engineer it will be at no cost to the department .
promptly fill all voids by injecting all taken out of service products that have any annular space with excavatable flowable fill .
num jack and bore and microtunneling operations num installation process provide continuous pressure to the face of the excavation to balance groundwater and earth pressures .
ensure that shafts are of sufficient size to accommodate equipment the pipe selected and to allow for safe working practices .
provide entry and exit seals at shaft walls to prevent inflows of groundwater soil slurry and lubricants .
use thrust blocks designed to distribute loads in a uniform manner so that any deflection of the thrust block is uniform and does not impart excessive loads on the shaft itself or cause the jacking frame to become misaligned .
the jacking system must have the capability of pushing the pipe in jb operations or mtbm and pipe for mt operations through the ground in a controlled manner and be compatible with the anticipated jacking loads and pipe capacity .
monitor the jacking force applied to the pipe and do not exceed the pipe manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that the pipe lubrication system is functional at all times and sufficient to reduce jacking loads .
use pipe lubrication systems that include a mixing tank holding tank and pumps to convey lubricant from the holding tank to application points at the rear of the mtbm .
maintain sufficient fluids on site to avoid loss of lubrication .
power distribution system must be identified in the plans package or permit provisions as well as any noise constraints .
identity spoil removal capability and method to avoid creating hindrance to other activities which may be necessary in the area .
num excess material and fluids monitor the pumping rate pressures viscosity and density of the boring fluids to ensure adequate removal of soil cuttings and the stability of the borehole .
contain excess drilling fluids slurry and soil cuttings at entry and exit points in pits until they are recycled or removed from the site .
ensure that all boring fluids and other materials are disposed of or recycled in a manner acceptable to the appropriate federal state and local rules and regulations .
when jacking and boring in known or suspected areas of contaminated groundwater or soil coordinate with the engineer and district contamination coordinator dcic during the preconstruction meeting and prior to the start of boring to determine the best course of action for jb activities within the contaminated area .
if the jb operation encounters an unidentified area of contamination or abnormal condition indicating the presence of potentially contaminated material stop operations and contact the engineer immediately .
do not continue boring without the engineers approval .
num boring failure if an obstruction is encountered which prevents completion of the installation in accordance with the design location and specifications the pipe may be taken out of service and left in place at the discretion of the engineer .
immediately fill the product left in place with excavatable flowable fill .
submit a new installation procedure and revised plans to the engineer for approval before resuming work at another location .
if damage is observed to any property cease all work until a plan of action to minimize further damage and restore damaged property is submitted and approved by the engineer .
num return to table of contents num documentation requirements .
num boring path report submit a bore path report to the engineer within num days of the completion of each bore path .
no payment will be made for directional boring work until the bore path report has been delivered to the department .
include the following information in the report num .
location of project and financial project number including the permit number when assigned .
num .
name of person collecting data including title position and company name .
num .
investigation site location contract plans station number or reference to a permanent structure within the project rightofway .
num .
identification of the detection method used .
num .
spoils removal log .
num .
asbuilt placement plans showing roadway plan and profile crosssection boring location and subsurface conditions as defined in bore path plans below .
reference the shown plan elevations to a department bench mark when associated with a department project otherwise to a usgs grid system and datum or to the top of an existing department head wall .
num asbuilt plans submit to the engineer a complete set of asbuilt plans showing all bores successful and failed within num calendar days of completion of the work .
asbuilt plans must be pdf files in the same scale as the contract plans and formatted on num inch by num inch sheets .
include notes on the plans stating the final bore path diameter facility diameter drilling fluid composition composition of any other materials used to fill the annular void between the bore path and the facility or facility placed out of service .
if the facility is a casing note this as well as the size and type of carrier pipes to be placed within the casing as part of the contract work .
produce the plans as follows num .
on the contract plan view show the centerline location of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service to an accuracy within num inch at the ends and other points physically observed .
they show the remainder of the horizontal alignment of the centerline of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service and note the accuracy with which the installation was monitored .
num .
as directed by the engineer submit either a profile plan for each bore path or a crosssection of the roadway at a station specified by the engineer or a roadway centerline profile .
also show the ground or pavement surface and the crown elevation of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service accurately to within num inch at the ends and other points physically observed .
show the remainder of the vertical alignment of the crown of each facility installed or installed and placed out of service and note the accuracy with which the installation was monitored .
on profile plans for bore paths crossing the roadway show the contract plans stationing .
on the profile plans for bore paths paralleling the roadway show the contract plans stationing .
if the profile plan for the bore path is not made on one of the contract profile or crosssection sheets use a num to num vertical exaggeration .
num .
if a bore path is not completed show on the plans the failed bore path along with the name of the utility owner and the final bore path .
note the failed bore path as failed bore path .
also show the location and length of the cutting head and any product not removed from the bore path .
num .
show the crown elevation diameter and material type of all utilities encountered and physically observed during the subsoil investigation .
for all other obstructions encountered during subsoil investigation or the installation show the type of material horizontal num return to table of contents and vertical location top elevation and lowest elevation observed and note if the obstruction continues below the lowest point observed .
num compensation .
no direct payment will be made under this section .
include the cost to perform this operation in the contract unit price for the item being installed .
no compensation will be made for failed bore paths injection of excavatable flowable fill products taken out of service or incomplete installations .
no compensation will be made for the pay item associated with the jack and bore until a bore path report has been submitted to the engineer .
num return to table of contents section num coating new structural steel num description coat new structural steel in accordance with the requirements of this section .
apply the coating system designated in the contract documents .
num materials .
num coating system use only coating products and systems meeting the requirements of section num and listed on the departments approved product list apl .
use type m coal tar epoxy coatings meeting the requirements of section num and listed on the departments apl for coating of permanent bulkhead sheet piles and h piles .
num thinners solvents and cleaners use thinners solvents and cleaners listed on the coating manufacturers product data sheet .
num caulking use caulks that are paintable compatible with the coating system and recommended by the coating manufacturer as part of the coating system .
num soluble salts test kit use a soluble salts test kit in accordance with sspc guide num utilizing a table num retrieval method .
ensure the test sleeve or cell creates a sealed encapsulated environment during ion extraction and is suitable for testing all structural steel surfaces .
as an alternative electronic conductivity meters approved for use by the engineer may be used .
num abrasives use properly sized abrasives to achieve the required cleanliness and anchor profile .
use abrasives meeting the requirements of sspcab num mineral and slag abrasives sspcab num cleanliness of recycled ferrous metallic abrasives or sspcab num newly manufactured or remanufactured steel abrasive and do not introduce any contamination that interferes with the coating application and performance .
submit certification to the engineer that the abrasives used meet the requirements of this section and do not contain any chlorides and other salts .
for non metallic abrasives verify compliance with the conductivity and cleanliness requirements of sspcabnum .
for recycled abrasives verify compliance with the conductivity and cleanliness requirements of sspcab num after each recycling or more frequently if required by the engineer .
select a sample from each recycling machine in use and conduct the watersoluble contaminant and oil content tests outlined in sspcab num at least one time each week or more frequently if directed by the engineer .
conduct the nonabrasive residue and lead content tests as directed by the engineer .
if test results do not meet requirements notify the engineer immediately remove and replace the abrasive clean the recycling equipment and conduct tests each day to confirm the equipment is functioning properly .
return to the weekly testing interval as directed by the engineer .
num rust preventative compound use a class num rust preventative compound meeting the requirements of military specification milcnumc corrosion preventative compound petrolatum hot applied .
num storage store materials in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num return to table of contents num equipment .
num compressed air use a compressed air system capable of delivering clean dry continuous nozzle pressure to achieve the required surface cleanliness and profile or spray pattern .
the system must comply with the instructions and recommendations of the manufacturer of the abrasive blasting system or coating application system .
num abrasive blasting system design the blasting system to produce the specified cleanliness and profile .
num coating application system use the coating application equipment approved by and in accordance with the coating manufacturers technical data requirements .
num environmental health and safety requirements .
isolate the work areas with containment devices canvasses tarpaulins or screens during all surface preparation and coating application operations .
dispose of all debris and waste products generated in accordance with all federal state and local regulations .
num quality control qc .
num shop preparation and application prior to applying coatings submit a current corporate quality control plan approved by the american institute of steel construction aisc under the sophisticated paint endorsement program or sspc under the sspcqpnum certification to the state materials office for approval .
num field preparation and application submit a current corporate qc plan approved by sspc under the sspcqpnum andor sspcqpnum certifications as appropriate and a site specific coating plan to the engineer at least num calendar days prior to beginning coatings work .
do not begin coatings work until the site specific coating plan has been approved by the engineer .
num inspection ensure that all inspection equipment is maintained in accordance with the manufacturers instructions calibrated and in good working condition .
ensure that all activities are observed and approved by a quality control coatings inspector meeting the requirements of this section .
maintain daily inspection reports at the job site for review by the engineer .
submit all daily inspection reports upon completion of the project to the engineer or more frequently as requested by the engineer .
num qualifications .
num shop submit documentation to the engineer at least num days prior to beginning work that the shop performing any work in accordance with this section is certified by aisc sophisticated paint endorsement or by sspc to the requirements of sspcqpnum .
num field contractor submit documentation to the engineer at least num days prior to beginning work that the field contractor performing any work in accordance with this section is certified by sspc to the requirements of sspcqpnum andor sspcqpnum as appropriate .
num quality control qc inspectors in the shop and field all personnel performing coating qc activities must be employed by the coating contractor .
submit documentation to the engineer that all personnel performing qc inspections are certified at a minimum as a national association of corrosion engineers nace coating inspector level i or a sspc level num bridge coating inspector and that they report directly to a qc supervisor who is certified either as a nace coating inspector level num or a sspc level num bridge coating inspector .
num return to table of contents num certifications maintain certifications for the duration of the contract .
if the certifications expire do not perform any work until certifications are reissued .
notify the engineer of any change in certification status .
num surface preparation .
num general ensure all surfaces to be coated are clean dry and free from oil grease dirt dust soluble salts corrosion peeling coating caulking weld spatter mill scale and any other surface contaminants .
prepare all surfaces that will become inaccessible after fabrication erection or installation while accessible .
sequence the surface preparations and coating operations so that freshly applied coatings will not be contaminated by dust or foreign matter .
protect all equipment and adjacent surfaces not to be coated from surface preparation operations .
protect working mechanisms against intrusion of abrasive .
in the event that any rusting or contamination occurs after the completion of the surface preparation prepare the surfaces again to the initial requirements .
perform surface preparation work only when the temperature of the steel surface is at least numf above the dew point temperature .
num mechanical removal of surface defects break all corners resulting from sawing burning or shearing .
in areas where burning has been used remove the flame hardened surface of the steel to the extent necessary to achieve the required surface profile after abrasive blast cleaning .
remove all weld slag and weld spatter .
conduct all of this work in accordance with aashtonsba steel bridge collaboration s num .
num cleaning clean all steel surfaces in accordance with the requirements of sspc sp num .
num washing clean all steel surfaces in accordance with the requirements of sspc sp num lpwc wjnum .
num soluble salts detection and removal when using sspc guide num table num retrieval methods determine the chloride sulfate and nitrate concentrations on all steel surfaces using soluble salts test kits meeting the requirements of num .
measure the concentration levels using the method described in sspctu num .
perform the tests after washing and after each applied coat of the coating system .
ensure the nonvisible surface contaminant concentrations on blastcleaned surfaces do not exceed num gcmnum for chlorides num gcmnum for soluble ferrous iron num gcmnum for sulfates and num gcmnum for nitrates .
when using electronic conductivity meters use meters meeting the requirements of num and measure the surface conductivity as prescribed by the manufacturer .
the instrument shall be properly calibrated and maintained according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure the surface conductivity does not exceed num microsiemens per centimeter squared .
for either contaminant assessment method salt test kits or conductivity meter test three random locations in the first num square feet and one random location for each subsequent num square feet .
when quality control documentation at a fixed location indicates num months of historical sequential soluble saltconductivity levels below those specified above soluble saltconductivity testing frequency may be reduced to one test per day .
when any concentration or conductivity measurement exceeds the levels given above rewash the entire surface area and retest all potentially contaminated steel to the satisfaction of the engineer .
if additional washing does not reduce the concentration to the acceptable level a surface treatment or water additive may be used .
use a surface treatment or water additive that is approved by the coating system supplier and the engineer .
num abrasive blast cleaning prepare steel by abrasive blast cleaning to near white metal condition as defined in sspcsp num .
use sspc vis num as an aid in establishing num return to table of contents cleanliness .
after abrasive blast cleaning ensure the surface profile meets the requirements of the coating manufacturers product data sheet .
determine the surface profile in accordance with astm dnum method b or c. perform all abrasive blast cleaning within a containment system to ensure confinement of all particulates .
design the containment system to comply with all applicable federal state and local regulations .
ensure the abrasive blast cleaning does not produce holes cause distortion remove metal or cause thinning of the substrate .
num hand and power tool cleaning prepare steel by power and hand tool cleaning as defined in sspcsp num sspcsp num sspcsp num and sspcsp num for touch up and repair when approved by the engineer .
use sspcvis num as an aid in establishing cleanliness .
num surfaces not to be coated .
num galvanized surfaces do not coat galvanized surfaces unless specified in the contract documents .
num surfaces to be in contact with concrete do not coat the areas of contact surfaces of steel to be encased or embedded in concrete or coated with concrete unless specified in the contract documents .
when specified prepare the contact surfaces and apply primer .
num faying surfaces after application of the primer protect the contact surfaces of members to be joined by highstrength bolts in friction type joints from all other coatings and foreign material .
num machine finished surfaces apply a coating of rust preventative compound to all machine finished or similar surfaces that are not to be coated or will not be coated immediately .
num surfaces to be welded mask off surfaces within num inch of field welded connections before the application of any shop coating .
apply a mist coat of primer that is less than num mil dry film thickness to surfaces where shear studs will be welded .
num application .
num general apply a complete coating system to all structural steel surfaces except surfaces indicated in num .
apply a complete coating system to all surfaces that will become inaccessible after fabrication erection or installation .
apply the prime coat in the shop .
apply the intermediate coat in the shop or field .
only apply the finish coat after erection and after concrete work is complete .
prior to the application of any coating inspect the substrate for contamination and defects and prepare the surface in accordance with num before application of the next coat .
apply each coat including a stripe coat in a color that contrasts with the substrate or preceding coat .
for exterior surfaces apply a finish coat color meeting fedstdnum shade num unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
num weather and temperature limitations do not spray coating when the measured wind speed in the immediate coating area is above num miles per hour .
do not apply coatings when contamination from rainfall is imminent or when the ambient air temperature relative humidity dew point temperature or temperature of the steel is outside limits of the coating manufacturers product data sheet .
num sealing using caulk apply caulk after the intermediate coat has cured to a condition suitable for recoating in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet and before application of the finish coat .
completely seal the perimeter of all cracks and crevices joints open less than num inch and skipwelded joints using caulk .
apply the caulk to the joint num return to table of contents following the caulk manufacturers recommendations .
ensure the caulk bead has a smooth and uniform finish and is cured according to the caulk manufacturers curing schedule prior to the application of the finish coat .
it is unnecessary to caulk the perimeter of bolted friction splice plates unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
in addition it is unnecessary to caulk cracks or crevices less than num inches in width located on the interior surface area of box girders .
num protection of adjacent surfaces protect all surfaces and working mechanisms not intended to be coated during the application of coatings .
clean surfaces that have been contaminated with coatings until all traces of the coating have been removed .
do not allow material from cleaning and coating operations to be dispersed outside the work site .
num mixing and thinning mix all coatings in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
only mix complete kits .
use thinners and solvents in accordance with the requirements of the coating manufacturers product data sheet and confirm that the amount of thinner added does not result in the coating exceeding voc regulations stated in section num .
perform all mixing operations over an impervious surface with provisions to prevent runoff to grade of any spilled material .
num application methods use coating application equipment and apply coatings per the coating manufacturers product data sheet .
application with brushes may be permitted for minor touchup of spray applications stripe coats or when otherwise approved by the engineer .
adjust spray equipment to produce an even wet coat with minimum overspray .
apply coatings in even parallel passes overlapping num percent .
agitate coatings during application as required by the coating manufacturers product data sheet .
num stripe coating use an aluminum epoxy mastic that is at least num solids by volume .
apply a stripe coat after the prime coat but prior to applying the intermediate coat .
also apply a stripe coat after the intermediate coat but prior to the finish coat .
apply the stripe coat per the manufacturers published product data sheet but no less than num mils dry film thickness .
apply both stripe coats to achieve complete coverage on welds corners crevices sharp edges bolts nuts rivets and rough or pitted surfaces .
a stripe coat of translucent coatings is not required .
do not apply subsequent coats until the previous stripe coat has cured per the manufacturers product data sheet for recoating .
stripe coating is not required for the inside surface area of all steel box girders .
num thickness of coats apply coatings to the thickness as identified in the manufacturers product data sheet .
after application of each coat thoroughly inspect the surfaces and measure the dry film thickness dft in accordance with sspcpa num .
as an exception to sspcpanum the dft of the prime coat shall not be less than the minimum specified by the manufacturers product data sheet .
when the dft is deficient or excessive correct in accordance with the coating manufacturers recommendations and retest the area .
num coating drying and curing apply coatings within the time specified by the coating manufacturers product data sheet for drying and recoating .
test the coating for proper cure before handling and shipping .
test for cure in accordance with the manufacturers recommended method .
meet the requirements of astm dnum for inorganic zinc primers or astm dnum for organic zinc primers when the manufacturers technical data sheet does not state a specified cure test .
obtain the acceptance criteria from the coating manufacturer and report the results to the engineer .
prior to assembling bolted connections test and verify that the primer coating on the faying surfaces has cured to a resistance rating of num in accordance with astm dnum astm dnum or the coating manufacturers requirements .
if cure testing is performed per the num return to table of contents coating manufacturers requirements submit the test results to the engineer for approval prior to assembling the bolted connection .
num coating finish apply each coat free of runs sags blisters bubbles and mud cracking variations in color gloss or texture holidays excessive film buildup foreign contaminants orange peeling and overspray .
num touchup and repair .
clean and coat all welds rivets bolts and all damaged or defective coating and rusted areas in accordance with num and num .
upon approval by the engineer aluminum mastic may be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
aluminum mastic must contain aluminum pigment and minimum num volume solids .
num coating of permanent sheet pipe and h piles .
num surface preparation prepare the substrate in accordance with num .
provide a depth of anchor profile in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet but in no case less than num mils .
reblast piles not coated during the same shift or if the surface to be coated no longer meets the requirements sspcsp num .
num application of coating unless otherwise shown in the contract documents apply the inorganic zinc primer to all surfaces of h and sheet piles and the exterior surface of pipe piles .
unless otherwise shown in the contract documents apply coal tarepoxy coatings to the exposed side of sheet piles from the top of the piles to a depth of five feet below the lower of the design ground surface or the design scour depth .
apply the inorganic zinc primer in accordance with this section .
apply the coal tarepoxy in accordance with the following specific requirements num .
apply the coal tarepoxy system in two coats .
the time interval between the first coat and the second coat will be in strict accordance with the coating manufacturers published specifications .
apply the first coat to yield a dry film thickness of num to num mils .
apply the second coat to attain a total dry film thickness of the two coats between num and num mils .
num .
ensure that no portion of the coating is less than the specified minimum film thicknesses .
the total minimum film thickness for any combination of coats will be the sum total of the averages of the specified thickness range of the individual coats .
num .
after applying the coating on the steel piles the engineer will thoroughly inspect the surfaces and make film thickness measurements at the approximate rate of one for each num square feet of area unless deficient thickness is found .
in this case the rate of sub measurements will be increased as required to determine the extent of the deficient area .
num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for coating new structural steel .
include the cost in the cost of the structural steel .
num return to table of contents section num coating existing structural steel num description .
coat existing structural steel in accordance with the requirements of this section by removing and replacing the existing coating or overcoating the existing coating as stated in the contract documents .
num materials .
num coating systems for removal and replacement systems use coating products and systems meeting the requirements of section num and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
for overcoating systems use products and systems as designated in the contract documents .
submit product data sheets and product material safety data sheets sds or in lieu of sds submit test reports showing percent weight compositional analysis chemical abstract number american conference of governmental industrial hygienists acgih time weighted average and ceiling exposure limits for all components and lower and upper explosive limits flash point boiling point amount of volatile organic compounds by weight and specific gravity for each component of the coating system .
num thinners solvents and cleaners meet the requirements of num .
in addition for overcoating systems use thinners solvents and cleaners that do not damage the existing coating system .
num caulking meet the requirements of num .
num soluble salts test kit meet the requirements of num .
num abrasives meet the requirements of num .
num rust preventative compound meet the requirements of num .
num storage meet the requirements of num .
num equipment .
num compressed air meet the requirements of num .
num abrasive blasting system meet the requirements of num .
num coating application system meet the requirements of num .
num quality control qc .
num field preparation and application submit a current corporate q c plan approved by sspc under the sspc qpnum and sspc qpnum certifications as appropriate and a site specific coating plan to the engineer at least num calendar days prior to beginning coatings work .
do not begin coatings work until the site specific coating plan has been approved by the engineer .
prepare a traffic control plan for each phase of construction activities signed and sealed by the contractors engineer of record in accordance with the fdot design manual .
do not begin work until the traffic control plan is approved by the engineer .
maintain traffic in accordance with section num .
for work over navigable waters submit a work plan to the united states coast guard including any scheduled restrictions to navigation channels or marine traffic .
obtain coast guard approval at least num days in advance of any restrictions .
num inspection meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num qualifications .
num field contractor meet the requirements of num .
num quality control qc inspectors meet the requirements of num .
num certifications meet the requirements of num .
num surface preparation .
num general when portions of the existing coating are designated in the contract documents to be removed and replaced clean wash test and remove soluble salts and abrasive blast or hand and power tool clean to remove all existing coating and corrosion in the intended locations .
feather back the edges of all existing coating to remain a minimum of num inches around the area of existing coating removed to provide a smooth transition .
verify the edges of the existing coating are intact by probing with a dull putty knife in accordance with sspc sp num .
roughen the existing coating in the feathered area to ensure proper adhesion of the new coating .
notify the engineer immediately when any structural steel appears to be defective .
when the existing coating is to remain clean wash and test and remove soluble salts .
ensure all surfaces to be coated are clean dry and free from oil grease dirt dust soluble salts corrosion peeling coating caulking weld spatter mill scale and any other surface contaminants .
sequence the surface preparations and coating operations so that freshly applied coatings will not be contaminated by dust or foreign matter .
protect all equipment and adjacent surfaces not to be coated from surface preparation operations .
protect working mechanisms against intrusion of abrasive .
in the event that any rusting or contamination occurs after the completion of the surface preparation prepare the surfaces again to the initial requirements .
perform surface preparation work only when the temperature of the steel surface is at least numof above the dew point temperature .
num mechanical removal of surface defects meet the requirements of num .
in addition remove all pack rust prior to solvent cleaning .
num cleaning meet the requirements of num .
num washing meet the requirements of num .
num soluble salts detection and removal meet the requirements of num except test five random locations in the first num square feet and one random location for each subsequent num square feet .
num abrasive blast cleaning meet the requirements of num .
num hand and power tool cleaning prepare steel by power and hand tool cleaning as defined in sspc sp num sspc sp num and sspc sp num as stated in the contract documents .
use sspc vis num as an aid in establishing cleanliness .
num surfaces not to be coated .
num galvanized surfaces meet the requirements of num .
num machine finished surfaces meet the requirements of num .
num application .
num general apply a complete coating system to all structural steel surfaces except surfaces indicated in num .
prior to the application of any coating inspect the substrate for contamination and defects and prepare the surface in accordance with num before application of the next coat .
num return to table of contents apply each coat including a stripe coat in a color that contrasts with the substrate or preceding coat .
for exterior surfaces apply a finish coat color meeting fedstdnum shade num unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
num weather and temperature limitations meet the requirements of num .
num sealing using caulk meet the requirements of num .
num protection of adjacent surfaces meet the requirements of num .
num mixing and thinning meet the requirements of num .
num application methods meet the requirements of num .
num stripe coating meet the requirements of num .
num thickness of coats meet the requirements of num .
num coating drying and curing apply coatings within the time specified by the coating manufacturers product data sheet for drying and recoating .
before handling test for cure in accordance with the manufacturers recommended method .
meet the requirements of astm dnum for organic zinc primers when the manufacturers technical data sheet does not state a specified cure test .
obtain the acceptance criteria from the coating manufacturer and report the results to the engineer .
num coating finish meet the requirements of num .
num touchup and repair .
clean and coat all welds rivets bolts and all damaged or defective coating and rusted areas in accordance with num and num .
upon approval by the engineer aluminum mastic may be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
aluminum mastic must contain aluminum pigment and minimum num volume solids .
num protection of the environment public and workers .
num general establish plans and programs to protect the environment public contractor employees other workers and property from overspray exposure to toxic heavy metals and the release and emission of hazardous materials and nuisance dusts .
include in such plans and programs a procedure for the receipt processing evaluation and timely written response for claims by the public for damage resulting from the foregoing work .
submit to the department any written response which denies such damage claims .
conduct all coating application and removal operations in compliance with epa osha and other applicable federal state and local regulations .
submit a contingency plan for the remediation of water and land in the event of contamination by solid or liquid paint and contaminated water .
num environmental protection prepare and submit to the engineer plans and programs for the protection of the environment and public based on the applicable epa requirements the requirements of this section and the contract documents .
include plans and programs for the protection of the air soilground and water .
num pollution control submit a written pollution control and monitoring plan at the preconstruction meeting or as directed by the engineer which clearly describes the means for complying with all local state and federal regulations including pollution control provisions specified herein .
the written plan must be in accordance with sspc project design industrial lead paint removal handbook volume ii phase num environmental monitoring and specifically include but not be limited to providing a scaled map of the work site layout showing the proposed number and location of soil sampling total suspended particulate tsp monitoring sites waste storage areas staging areas temporary waste storage areas and ambient air and personnel sampling frequency .
num return to table of contents comply with all applicable federal state and local rules and regulations .
immediately cease all operations in the event a violation of any environmental regulation or a failure to properly execute any pollution control provisions occurs .
resume operations after written proposed corrective procedures have been submitted to and approved by the engineer and implemented .
num permits submit all required permits from all applicable regulatory agencies to the engineer prior to the commencement of any work .
seek permit determination from these regulatory agencies to avoid any potential permit noncompliance issues during work activities .
the contractor is responsible for all liability resulting from noncompliance with pertinent rules and regulations including permit requirements .
num ambient air quality compliance and protection of the air num visible emissions assess the visible emissions using epa method num timing of emissions as defined by num cfr num appendix a standards of performance for new stationary sources .
during abrasive blasting do not allow visible emissions from a containment to exceed a random cumulative duration of more than one percent of the workday sspc guide num level num emissions .
during pressurized water cleaning do not allow visible emissions from a containment to exceed a random cumulative duration of more than ten percent of the workday sspc guide num level num emissions .
num total suspended particulate tsp matter control emissions from the containment area to prevent exceeding the tsp lead of num gmnum over a num day period or the daily and adjusted daily allowances of sspctu num .
conduct tsp lead monitoring in accordance with num cfr num appendix b reference method for determination of tsp matter in the atmosphere high volume sampler required and num cfr num appendix g reference method for determination of tsp matter collected from ambient air .
position the tsp lead monitoring equipment in general accordance with num cfr num ambient air quality surveillance .
when lead is present in the coating perform tsp lead background monitoring for a period of num days prior to the beginning of abrasive blast cleaning operations .
submit the results from background monitoring and the first week of monitoring during abrasive blast cleaning to the engineer for review within num calendar days after the first week of work .
continue monitoring unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num regulated area establish a regulated area around the work site to prohibit unauthorized persons from areas where exposure to hazardous airborne metals may exceed the following action levels airborne metals action level lead num gmnum cadmium num gmnum arsenic num gmnum hexavalent chromium crnum num gmnum conduct monitoring in accordance with the national institute for occupational safety and health niosh procedures upon initiation of dust producing operations and submit the test results to the engineer within num hours of sampling .
report sample results as eighthour time weighted averages twa .
reestablish the regulated area and perform additional sampling when the results exceed the action levels or when directed by the num return to table of contents engineer .
record all pertinent data .
position airsampling pumps around the project perimeter where the public or personnel can approach the work area .
place sampler inlets at breathing height .
clearly mark the regulated area by the use of warning signs rope barrier tape or temporary construction fencing .
num soilground quality inspect the ground beneath and in proximity to the structure in the presence of the engineer for visible paint chips to establish an initial job site cleanliness standard .
when heavy metals are in the existing coatings test soil samples prior to the beginning of operations and after project completion for heavy metals .
document the number and specific locations where the initial samples are taken as outlined in the sspc project design industrial lead paint removal handbook volume num to ensure the post samples are collected from the same locations .
submit all samples to the engineer for review .
if the project activities increase the heavy metal content in soil to more than num above the prejob geometric mean or num at any one location return the site to the prejob levels .
conduct additional soil testing as necessary to determine the extent of contamination .
for structures less than num feet minimum height take one sample north south east and west where soil is present of the structure .
if the structure is longer than num feet take one additional sample for every num feet in length .
for structures greater than num feet minimum height take two samples north south east and west where soil is present of the structure .
locate the inner row of samples within num feet of the structure .
locate the outer row of samples at a distance equal to the height of the structure .
if the structure is longer than num feet take one additional sample for every num feet in length .
in addition submit a pre and post soil sampling plan for storage areas identifying the sample location depth analyses list lab certification and turnaround time .
once approved by the engineer submit sampling results along with a scaled drawing indicating designated sample locations .
num water quality do not release discharge or otherwise cause hazardous materials debris waste or paint chips to enter the water .
protect against releases due to rain and methods of surface preparation from reaching rivers streams lakes storm drains or other bodies of water .
num containment system submit a written containment system design plan in accordance with this section and the contract documents at the preconstruction conference or as directed by the engineer which clearly describes the proposed containment system applicable to the intended removal method and in accordance with the requirements outlined herein and sspc guide num guide for containing debris generated during paint removal activities .
ensure the plan includes but is not limited to removal method methods for collecting debris and containment enclosure components .
use fire retardant materials .
submit containment drawings calculations assumptions ventilation criteria if applicable and a structural analysis that verifies the existing structure can withstand the additional dead live and wind loads imposed by the containment system signed and sealed by a specialty engineer .
however for more complex structures incorporating cables stayed suspension or truss designs the analysis must be performed by the contractors engineer of record qualified in type work category num complex bridge design .
submit a contingency plan addressing natural weather events such as tropical storms and hurricanes .
ensure the lighting inside the containment is in accordance with sspc guide num guide for illumination of industrial painting projects .
provide lighting to a minimum intensity of num ftcd for general num ftcd for work and num ftcd for inspection .
all num return to table of contents drawings and calculations must be submitted and accepted before any work begins .
include a clear description of the ventilation system components and information including the fan curve and design point on the proposed dust collector .
design to provide ventilation according to the notes provided in sspc guide num num feet per minute for cross draft and num feet per minute for downdraft .
isolate the immediate area of the structure to ensure compliance with current and permit requirements for air water soil and pollution prevention .
protect the containment system from vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
ensure paint paint chips or other debris will not fall outside of the containment area under any circumstances .
repair any damage created by fastening bracing or handling the scaffolding and staging .
if a suspended platform is constructed use rigid or flexible materials as needed to create an air and dust impenetrable enclosure .
verify that the platform and its components are designed and constructed to support at least four times its maximum intended load without failure with wire cables capable of supporting at least six times their maximum intended load without failure .
strictly comply with all applicable osha regulations regarding scaffolding .
the category and class of containment shall be as required in the contract documents .
num protection of adjacent areas protect all areas adjacent to abrasive blast cleaning including machinery and deck grating .
before the commencement of any cleaning and coating operations submit a control plan for the protection of adjacent surfaces from damage by nearby blasting and coating to the engineer for review .
repair any damage to adjacent areas .
the repair procedure must be submitted to the engineer for acceptance prior to any remediation .
num worker protection comply with the requirements of osha num cfr num and applicable portions of num cfr num .
include specific programs as required by num cfr num lead num cfr num inorganic arsenic num cfr num hexavalent chromium and num cfr num cadmium when these hazardous agents are present .
implement appropriate safety procedures for all hazards on the job site whether specifically identified herein or not .
num waste handling and management .
num general prepare a waste management program plan which addresses the applicable requirements from epa regulations for hazardous waste management and the contract documents .
include provisions for the handling and disposal of non hazardous waste .
dispose of all waste in accordance with all federal state and local laws and regulations .
num collection and handling of waste properly classify package and store all paint removal debris both solid and liquid in accordance with sspc guide num guide for the disposal of leadcontaminated surface preparation debris the federal water pollution control act with amendments and all other current government regulations and guidelines .
comply with the resource conservation and recovery act to include at a minimum cfr num num through cfr num num .
prior to identification and storage separate solid and liquid waste and separate individual waste streams .
num testing and analysis laboratory analyses for all waste stream and environmental samples shall be conducted by an epa certified independent laboratory with an approved quality assurance plan .
laboratory analyses for worker monitoring and regulated area samples shall be conducted by an american industrial hygiene association aiha metals accredited laboratory .
submit all sampling and test reports no later than num hours after collection of samples .
num return to table of contents num waste identification collect samples in accordance with epa sw num test methods for evaluating solid waste physicalchemical methods .
use a random and representative sampling technique .
collect a minimum of four representative samples of each waste stream .
these waste streams include but are not limited to water paint chips dust and paint chips mixed with disposable abrasives and debris .
complete the initial sampling of each waste stream immediately upon filling the first drum but do not allow waste to accumulate for longer than num days before sampling .
after the representative samples are collected send them immediately to the epa certified laboratory for analysis .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer required by state regulations or required by the waste recycling or disposal facility once each waste stream is sampled tested and classified additional sampling and analysis are not required for subsequent shipments unless the waste stream changes .
submit samples to an approved laboratory to be tested for arsenic barium cadmium hexavalent chromium lead mercury selenium and silver in accordance with epa method num and method num content and epa method num toxicity characteristics leaching procedures tclp.clearly label each sample with sample number date and time of sampling name of collector and location of collection .
maintain chain of custody forms for each sample .
enter each sample on a sample analysis request form .
record sample numbers type of waste amount of each sample distribution of samples signature and all other information .
num waste storage collect waste from the control devices equipment and all work surfaces on a daily basis .
keep hazardous and nonhazardous waste separate .
do not mix blasting debris with any other type of waste .
place waste in approved storage drums .
locate all hazardous waste within a regulated area .
the maximum weight for each drum when filled is num pounds .
properly seal and label all drums .
transport waste storage drums to a secured marked temporary storage area .
locate the temporary storage area on well drained ground not susceptible to flooding or storm water runoff .
place drums on a pallet and cover with fiber reinforced impermeable tarpaulins .
store drums no more than two drums wide and two drums high .
arrange drums so that labels are easily readable .
do not store waste in the temporary storage area longer than num days .
num waste disposal transport treat and dispose of all hazardous and non hazardous waste .
notify the engineer a minimum of three weeks prior to the date of shipment of any waste to an off site facility .
submit to the engineer documentation that the receiving disposal facilities are properly licensed .
submit manifests for all hazardous and nonhazardous waste shipments .
identify any waste disposal subcontractors and submit verification of their licensing to perform waste disposal and transport operations .
num permits the contractor is responsible for all liability resulting from non compliance with pertinent rules and regulations including permit requirements .
num method of measurement .
when a lump sum pay item is provided the quantity to be paid for coating existing structural steel will be the lump sum quantity for the areas shown in the plans completed and accepted .
when a square foot item is provided the quantity to be paid for coating existing structural steel will be the plan quantity in square feet of surface area as shown in the plans completed and accepted .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num coating existing structural steel lump sum .
item no .
num num coating existing structural steel square foot .
num return to table of contents section num repair of galvanized surfaces num description .
apply a coating of galvanizing compound over welded areas of galvanized structural members and over areas of previously galvanized members on which the galvanizing has become damaged .
num materials .
num areas num square inches or less use a cold galvanizing compound containing at least num zinc dust in the dry film .
num areas greater than num square inches use a galvanizing compound as specified in num and listed on the approved product list apl .
num construction methods .
prepare surfaces and apply the galvanizing compound according to astm anum and manufacturers recommendations .
apply additional coats on rough or pitted surfaces when in the opinion of the engineer it is necessary to obtain acceptable cover .
follow the manufacturers recommended dry time between coats .
reclean the areas not coated on the same day the cleaning is accomplished or surfaces that have rusted prior to coating .
apply the galvanizing compound to attain a uniform appearance free from all defects or failures .
submit repair procedures to the engineer for approval .
all deficiencies will be corrected at no cost to the department .
num basis of payment .
no direct payment will be made for galvanizing compound coating of welded surfaces or for field repair of damaged galvanized surfaces .
include the cost to perform these operations in the contract price for the item which includes the member being so treated .
num return to table of contents section num antigraffiti coatings num description .
apply an antigraffiti coating in accordance with the requirements of this section to the areas shown in the plans .
num materials .
use antigraffiti coating products meeting the requirements of section num that are recommended for the base substrate by the manufacturer and listed on the departments approved product list apl .
do not use sacrificial coatings on steel structures .
num application .
numgeneral apply antigraffiti coatings in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
num protection of adjacent surfaces consider wind direction velocity and geographic location as having a major impact on all cleaning and antigraffiti coating operations .
use all necessary precautions to prevent cleaning and antigraffiti coating materials from being dispersed outside the work site .
if conditions are such that material is dispersed to areas where vehicles or other property may be damaged suspend operations until conditions improve and work can continue without affecting adjacent property .
protect all surfaces not intended to be coated which are adjacent to or in close proximity to the surfaces to be coated during the application of antigraffiti coating .
clean surfaces that are to be coated as per the manufacturers product data sheet .
num surface preparation remove all graffiti from the substrate .
prior to applying any antigraffiti coatings prepare all surfaces to be coated in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum and the manufacturers product data sheet .
when the antigraffiti coating or coating system is to be applied over an existing coating apply a test patch minimum area of num square feet in accordance with this section .
allow the test patch to cure a minimum of num days without any defects .
no time extension will be granted as a result of this test requirement .
num correction of deficiencies remove all applied antigraffiti coatings identified by the engineer as damaged defective or otherwise not meeting these specifications in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
prepare the surface and reapply the coating in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as specified herein .
remove and correct all deficiencies at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be plan quantity in square feet of the area of anti graffiti coating completed and accepted .
the area will be based on the surface area shown in the plans with no allowance for surface texture or variable depth surface profiles .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing and applying all materials to complete the antigraffiti coating .
payment shall be made under item no .
num num antigraffiti coating sacrificial per square foot .
item no .
num num antigraffiti coating non sacrificial per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num performance turf num description .
establish a growing healthy turf over all areas designated in the plans .
use sod in areas designated in the plans to be sodded .
use seed hydroseed bonded fiber matrix or sod in all other areas .
maintain turf areas until final acceptance of all contract work in accordance with section num .
num materials .
meet the following requirements turf materials section num fertilizer section num water section num num construction methods .
num general incorporate turf installation into the project at the earliest practical time .
shape the areas to be planted to the plan typical sections and lines and grade shown in the contract documents .
except in areas where the contract documents requires specific types of grass to match adjoining private property any species of grass designated in section num may be used .
use the methods and materials necessary to establish and maintain the initial grassing until acceptance of the contract work in accordance with num .
all of the permanent grassing material shall be in place prior to final acceptance .
the department will only pay for replanting as necessary due to factors determined by the engineer to be beyond control of the contractor .
complete all grassing on shoulder areas prior to the placement of the friction course on adjacent pavement .
num seeding at the contractors option wildflower seed may be included in the turf seeding operation or performed separately from the turf seeding .
use of compost meeting the requirements of section num as mulch is acceptable unless otherwise specified .
num sod place the sod on the prepared surface with edges in close contact .
do not use sod which has been cut for more than num hours .
place the sod to the edge of all landscape areas as shown in the plans and the standard plans .
place rolled sod parallel with the roadway and cut any exposed netting even with the sod edge .
monitor placed sod for growth of pest plants and noxious weeds .
if pest plants andor noxious weeds manifest themselves within num days of placement of the sod during the months april through october within num days of placement of the sod during the months of november through march treat affected areas by means acceptable to the department at no expense to the department .
if pest plants andor noxious weeds manifest themselves after the time frames described above from date of placement of sod the engineer at his sole option will determine if treatment is required and whether or not the contractor will be compensated for num return to table of contents such treatment .
if compensation is provided payment will be made as unforeseeable work as described in num .
remove and replace any sod as directed by the engineer .
num hydroseeding use equipment specifically designed for mixing the mulch seed fertilizer tackifier and dye and applying the slurry uniformly over the areas to be hydroseeded .
use mulch that does not contain reprocessed wood or paper fibers .
ensure that num of the fibers will be retained on a twentyfive mesh screen .
mix fertilizer as required into the hydroseeding slurry .
ensure that the dye does not contain growth or germination inhibiting chemicals .
when polyacrylamide is used as part of hydroseeding mix only anionic polymer formulation with free acrylamide monomer residual content of less than num is allowed .
cationic polyacrylamide shall not be used in any concentration .
do not spray polyacrylamide containing mixtures onto pavement .
these may include tackifiers flocculants or moisture holding compounds .
num bonded fiber matrix bfm meet the minimum physical and performance criteria of this specification for use of bfm in hydroseeding operations or temporary non vegetative erosion and sediment control methods .
provide evidence of product performance testing manufacturers certification of training and material samples to the engineer at least num calendar days prior to installation .
provide documentation to the engineer of manufacturers testing at an independent laboratory demonstrating superior performance of bfm as measured by reduced water runoff reduced soil loss and faster seed germination in comparison to erosion control blankets .
use only bfms that contain all components prepackaged by the manufacturer to assure material performance .
deliver materials in uv and weather resistant factory labeled packaging .
store and handle products in strict compliance with the manufacturers directions .
when polyacrylamide is used as part of hydroseeding mix only anionic polymer formulation with free acrylamide monomer residual content of less than num is allowed .
cationic polyacrylamide shall not be used in any concentration .
do not spray polyacrylamide containing mixtures onto pavement .
these may include tackifiers flocculants or moisture holding compounds .
meet the following requirements after application of the formed matrix ensure that the tackifier does not dissolve or disperse upon rewetting .
ensure that the matrix has no gaps between the product and the soil and that it provides num coverage of all disturbed soil areas after application .
ensure that the matrix has no germination or growth inhibiting properties and does not form a waterrepelling crust .
ensure that the matrix is comprised of materials which are num biodegradable and num beneficial to plant growth .
mix and apply the bfm in strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply the bfm to geotechnically stable slopes at the manufacturers recommended rates .
degradation of bfm will occur naturally as a result of chemical and biological hydrolysis uv exposure and temperature fluctuations .
reapplication as determined by the engineer will be required if bfmtreated soils are disturbed or water quality or turbidity tests num return to table of contents show the need for an additional application .
the work and materials for reapplication will be paid for as unforeseeable work .
num watering water all turf areas as necessary to produce a healthy and vigorous stand of turf .
ensure that the water used for turf irrigation meets the requirements of section num .
num fertilizing fertilize as necessary based on soil testing performed in accordance with section num .
refer to section num for fertilizer rates .
for bid purposes base estimated quantities on an initial application of num lbsacre and one subsequent application of num lbsacre of num .
num turf establishment .
perform all work necessary including watering and fertilizing to sustain an established turf until final acceptance at no additional expense to the department .
provide the filling leveling and repairing of any washed or eroded areas as may be necessary .
established turf is defined as follows num .
an established root system leaf blades break before seedlings or sod can be pulled from the soil by hand .
num .
no bare spots larger than one square foot .
num .
no continuous streaks running perpendicular to the face of the slope .
num .
no bare areas comprising more than num of any given num square foot area .
num .
no deformation of the turf areas caused by mowing or other contractor equipment .
num .
no exposed sod netting .
num .
no pests or noxious weeds .
monitor turf areas and remove all competing vegetation pest plants and noxious weeds as listed by the florida exotic pest plant council category i list of invasive species current edition httpwww.fleppc.org .
remove such vegetation regularly by manual mechanical or chemical control means as necessary .
when selecting herbicides pay particular attention to ensure use of chemicals that will not harm desired turf or wildflower species .
use herbicides in accordance with num .
if at the time that all other work on the project is completed but all turf areas have not met the requirements for established turf set forth in num continuously maintain all turf areas until the requirements for established turf set forth in num have been met .
during the entire establishment period and until turf is established in accordance with this specification continue inspection and maintenance of erosion and sedimentation control items in accordance with section num .
take responsibility for the proper removal and disposal of all erosion and sedimentation control items after turf has been established .
notify the engineer with a minimum of seven calendar days advance notice to conduct inspections of the turf at approximate numday intervals during the establishment period to determine establishment .
results of such inspections will be made available to the contractor within seven calendar days of the date of inspection .
determination of an established turf will be based on the entire project and not in sections .
upon the determination by the engineer that the requirements of num have been met and an established turf has been achieved and all erosion and sedimentation control items have been removed the engineer will release the contractor from any further responsibility provided for in this specification .
num return to table of contents the contractors establishment obligations of this specification will not apply to deficiencies due to the following factors if found by the engineer to be beyond the control of the contractor his subcontractors vendors or suppliers num .
determination that the deficiency was due to the failure of other features of the contract .
num .
determination that the deficiency was the responsibility of a third party performing work not included in the contract or its actions .
the department will only pay for replanting as necessary due to factors determined by the department to be beyond the control of the contractor .
num responsible party .
for the purposes of this specification the contractor shall be the responsible party throughout construction and establishment periods .
upon final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num the contractors responsibility for maintenance of all the work or facilities within the project limits of the contract will terminate in accordance with num with the sole exception that the facilities damaged due to lack of established turf and the obligations set forth in this specification for performance turf shall continue thereafter to be responsibility of the contractor as otherwise provided in this section .
num disputes resolution .
the contractor and the department acknowledge that use of the statewide disputes review board is required and the determinations of the statewide disputes review board for disputes arising out of the performance turf specification will be binding on both the contractor and the department with no right of appeal by either party for the purposes of this specification .
any and all statewide disputes review board meetings after final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num shall be requested and paid for by the contractor .
the department will reimburse the contractor for all fees associated with meetings .
num failure to perform .
should the contractor fail to timely submit any dispute to the statewide disputes review board refuse to submit any dispute to the statewide disputes review board fail to provide an established turf in accordance with num within one year of final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num or fail to compensate the department for any remedial work performed by the department in establishing a turf and other remedial work associated with lack of an established turf including but not limited to repair of shoulder or other areas due to erosion and removal of sediments deposited in roadside ditches and streams as determined by the statewide disputes review board to be the contractors responsibility the department shall suspend revoke or deny the contractors certificate of qualification under the terms of section numdnum florida statutes until the contractor provides an established turf or makes full and complete payment for the remedial work performed by the department .
in no case shall the period of suspension revocation or denial of the contractors certificate of qualification be less than six months .
should the contractor choose to challenge the departments notification of intent for suspension revocation or denial of qualification and the departments action is upheld the contractor shall have its qualification suspended for a minimum of six months or until the remedial action is satisfactorily performed whichever is longer .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be plan quantity in square yards based on the area shown in the plans completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num performance turf per square yard .
num return to table of contents section num plastic erosion mat num description .
furnish and install plastic erosion mat on areas as shown in the plans .
conduct this work in conjunction with the performance turf work as specified in section num .
num materials .
use a plastic erosion mat consisting of continuous or fused synthetic polymer fibers which are entangled to form a threedimensional matrix netting or distorted netting may be included as part of the matrix .
ensure that the mat is capable of maintaining its shape throughout installation .
ensure that the mat is inert to chemicals encountered in a natural soil environment and meets the requirement of section num according to its application .
num installation of plastic erosion mat .
before installing the plastic erosion mat submit to the engineer certified test reports from the manufacturer certifying that the geotextile to be incorporated into this project meets the requirements of section num .
also submit the manufacturers written installation instructions .
install a plastic erosion mat of uniform thickness not less than num inch or more than num inch on the prepared soil surface in accordance with these specifications the manufacturers recommendations and in conformity with the lines grades and dimensions as shown in the plans .
ensure that all joints are shingle lapped such that the bottom of each section fits over the top of the section below to prevent uplift of the ends or edges by water flow .
overlap ends of adjacent rolls a minimum of num feet .
overlap edges of adjacent rolls a minimum of num inches .
stake all edges at num to num feet intervals with staples as recommended by the manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
ensure that overlaps and anchor trenches are in conformance with the plans and the manufacturers installation recommendations .
ensure that after installation there are no protrusions projections or exposures of the plastic erosion mat .
do not compact the installed plastic erosion mat with any type of equipment employing a foot or grid .
the engineer will reject any material having defects tears punctures flaws deterioration or other damage before during or after installation .
remove and replace all rejected plastic erosion mat at no additional expense to the department .
fill all voids in the mat with soil meeting the requirements of section num .
establish performance turf meeting the requirements of section num .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid for will be the surface area of plastic erosion mat installed and accepted in square yards with no allowance for overlaps .
performance turf will be paid for separately in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including furnishing handling placement of plastic erosion mat all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
payment will be made under num return to table of contents item no .
num num plastic erosion mat per square yard .
num return to table of contents traffic control signals and devices section num general requirements for traffic control signals and devices num description .
the provisions contained in this section include general requirements for all traffic control signals and devices .
num equipment and materials .
num general only use traffic control signals and devices that are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products for the apl must submit an application in accordance with section num .
only use new equipment and materials except as specified in the contract .
num exceptions the department may grant exceptions to the requirements of num by permit to evaluate new technology or for other circumstances that are found to be in the public interest .
num uniformity only use compatible units of any one item of equipment such as signal heads detectors controllers cabinets poles signal system or interconnection equipment etc .
num hardware and fittings used for installation ensure that all assembly hardware including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
use stainless steel bolts screws and studs meeting the requirements of astm fnum .
use nuts meeting the requirements of astm fnum .
ensure all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter is galvanized .
use bolts studs and threaded rod meeting the requirements of astm anum .
use structural bolts meeting the requirements of astm fnum grade anum .
use highstrength steel anchor bolts and ubolts having a minimum yield strength of num psi and a minimum ultimate strength of num psi .
num galvanizing meet the requirements of section num when galvanizing for fittings and appurtenances for all structural steel including steel poles .
num environmental specifications ensure system electronics intended for installation outdoors or within a roadside cabinet satisfactorily performs all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing described in national electrical manufacturers association nema tsnum num num and num .
num definitions .
traffic control signals and devices any signal or device manually electrically or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed or controlled in any manner .
traffic control signals and devices regulate warn or guide traffic on over or adjacent to a street highway pedestrian facility or bikeway by authority of a public agency having jurisdiction .
traffic control signals and devices include but are not limited to controller assemblies controller cabinets and their contents signal heads including their hanging or mounting devices vehicle detection systems pedestrian detection systems motorist num return to table of contents information systems video equipment network devices dynamic message signs highway advisory radios cameras and other equipment used within a traffic control system .
num systems approval requirement .
the engineer will review and approve any system design plan of traffic control signals and devices that is controlled or operated from a remote location by computers or similar devices and which affects the movement of traffic on any portion of the state highway system prior to installation .
num submittal data requirements .
prior to the installation of equipment and within num days after the preconstruction conference submit a listing of all traffic control signals devices and hardware with department apl approval numbers to the engineer for approval on form num submittal data traffic control equipment .
alternate or modified forms are unacceptable .
submit a separate form for each cabinet location .
for nonstructural equipment or materials that do not have an apl approval number submit the manufacturers descriptive literature and technical data fully describing the equipment to the engineer for approval .
the engineer will submit forms received from the contractor to the district traffic operations engineer for concurrence .
develop shop drawings for all structural support materials and other special designs such as nonelectrical nonmechanical or other fabricated items which may not be specifically detailed in the plans .
have the specialty engineer approve all shop drawings .
do not submit shop drawings for those items that have been previously evaluated and approved .
provide a complete operable signal installation as specified in the contract regardless of any failure of the department to discover or note any unsatisfactory material .
num documentation for electronic equipment .
prior to final acceptance submit the following documentary items obtained from the manufacturer for the electronic equipment listed below num .
operation manual num .
troubleshooting and service manual num .
assembly and installation instructions num .
pictorial layout of components and schematics for circuit boards num .
parts list num .
diagram of the field installation wiring not applicable to the detectors num .
warranty information submit documentary items for the following equipment num .
controllers num .
vehicle detectors num .
load switches num .
flasher units num .
preemption units num .
conflict monitors num .
special sequence relays num .
cameras num .
dynamic message signs num .
highway advisory radios num return to table of contents num .
road weather information systems num .
any other equipment which has a logic timing or communications function num .
other equipment specified in the contract documents num departmentfurnished equipment installed by contractor .
where the contract includes installation of departmentfurnished equipment the department will turn over such equipment to the contractor when the construction progress allows or as designated in the contract .
the department will test and certify the equipment to be in proper condition and ready to use and will bear the costs of correcting any defects in the equipment prior to pickup by the contractor .
the engineer will coordinate the pickup and installation of the equipment .
maintain the equipment in proper operational condition after pick up at no cost to the department until either final acceptance or the equipment is returned to the department .
num return to table of contents section num manufacturers warranties for traffic control signals and devices num description .
this section sets forth manufacturers warranty requirements for traffic control signals and devices furnished to the department .
manufacturer and contractor costs associated with transferring submitting and delivering equipment warranties requirements terms and conditions are part of the work and are included in the pay item for the equipment or construction feature utilizing the equipment .
num manufacturers warranty provisions .
num general submit all warranties provided by the equipment manufacturer for the specific equipment included in the contract .
ensure that all warranties are fully transferable from the contractor to the owner of the equipment within the project limits .
ensure that warranties cover defects for at least the duration specified in the contract documents from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num .
transfer warranties upon final acceptance in accordance with num .
submit all warranties and warranty transfers to the engineer .
in accordance with num the contractors responsibility for warranty repairs warranty replacement troubleshooting or other costs associated with repair or replacement of traffic control signals and devices within the contracts project limits will terminate num days after final acceptance in accordance with num .
num terms and conditions ensure that the terms and conditions of warranties are documented by the manufacturer for equipment submittals on construction projects .
include terms for a specified service performance with provisions for repair parts and labor or for replacement .
ensure warranties require the manufacturer to furnish replacements for any part or equipment found to be defective during the manufacturers warranty period at no cost to the owner of the equipment within the project limits .
num return to table of contents section num acceptance procedures for traffic control signals and devices num description .
this section sets forth contract acceptance procedures for installations of traffic control signals and devices and for equipment purchase contracts .
num acceptance of traffic control signal and device installations .
num partial acceptance the engineer may make inspection for partial acceptance under the contract in accordance with num of a complete traffic control signal and device installation upon its completion in accordance with the contract documents and at such time that other parts of the total contract are at a stage of completion that either require or allow the installation to operate in a manner which is in accordance with the contract documents .
before inspection for partial acceptance the engineer will require the satisfactory completion of all field tests of completed installations in accordance with the requirements of num .
the engineer will make inspection for partial acceptance in accordance with num in company with a contractors representative and when applicable a representative of the agency designated to accept maintenance responsibility .
num final acceptance the engineer will make inspection for final acceptance of traffic control signal and device installations as part of all work under the contract in accordance with num only after satisfactory completion of all field tests of completed installations and on the basis of a comprehensive field inspection of all equipment installations .
submit form num num submittal data traffic control equipment for each cabinet location to the engineer .
the engineer will make the final inspection with a contractors representative and a representative of the agency designated to accept maintenance responsibility .
the engineer will submit the approved form to the district traffic operations engineer and place a hard copy in the cabinet at each location .
transfer warranties and guarantees on equipment to the department in accordance with section num .
for traffic signal installations submit form num final acceptance of traffic signal installations and transfer of maintenance to the engineer .
num asbuilt documentation as a condition precedent to acceptance under num or num submit asbuilt drawings for all installations signed and sealed by a professional engineer or professional surveyor and mapper registered in the state of florida along with supplemental asbuilt information using feature import templates used for the departments its facility management itsfm system .
feature import templates can be found on the departments web site httpwww.fdot.govtrafficitsfmindex.shtml .
num submittal requirements submit asbuilt plans for review by the engineer .
asbuilt plans must be pdf files in the same scale as the contract plans and formatted on num inch by num inch sheets .
signing and pavement marking plan sheets may be used instead of signalization plan sheets if a substantial number of changes from the original plans must be recorded .
if in the opinion of the engineer the changes can not be clearly delineated on the existing drawings clearly delineate all changes on num inch by num inch detail sheets enlarged num from the reproductions .
submit fiber optic splicing diagrams detailing all cable splices terminations equipment port assignments and optical circuit path names within the communication network .
include cable manufacturer type strand count and cable sequential num return to table of contents reading at each pull box entranceexit each side of the splice enclosure and at patch panel terminations .
asbuilt submittals must include an inventory of all traffic control signals and devices and support structures .
the inventory must include horizontal position geographic coordinate data collected using differential global positioning system dgps equipment .
the inventory must include the manufacturer model and serial number for each device or completed assembly .
submit coordinate data for pull boxes as well as conduit and cable at num foot intervals including changes in direction .
all support structures equipment cabinets and other fixed location features must be assigned a unique site id name to create a common association between the asbuilt plans inventory forms and the itsfm system .
include data for all components listed in num except those listed in num and num .
aerial photographs may be submitted with asbuilt plan submittals to provide supplementary information .
the aerials should not include extra features such as the right of way baseline or roadway edges .
the aerials may be used as a base for the asbuilt plans with mile post and offset dimensions .
make any corrections resulting from the engineers review and resubmit asbuilt plans as a condition precedent to acceptance of the installation .
num components as a minimum identify all traffic control devices poles support structures cabinets pull and splice boxes hubs conduit duct banks access points and power services and utility demarcation points .
num conduit and cable identify all conduit and cable with unique line styles for routing conduit electrical and jointuse trenched that are clearly identified in a legend on each plan sheet .
identify the type of cable example num conductor signal cable and label the number of conductors fiber strands or other identifying features of the cable .
for conduit duct banks clearly note conduit and innerduct size length and number of runs .
num loops and detection zones identify the location of all installed loops including the distance from the stop bar for the advance loops the path of each loop to the pull box the loop window and the path of the loop leadin to the controller cabinet .
identify the device location and the approximate detection area for detection systems that are not embedded in or under pavement .
num pull boxes label unused and out of service pull boxes clearly .
show distances to each pull box from the nearest edgeline stop bar or other permanent feature .
if an edgeline is not near a pull box or would not clearly identify its location a fixed monument may be used example fdot pole or structure .
num poles identify poles from the nearest edgeline of both approaches .
if an edgeline is not near a pole or would not clearly identify its location a fixed monument may be used .
num signal heads asbuilt plans must show the final location of signal heads .
each signal head shall be identified by its corresponding movement number .
num cabinet the type of cabinet and inventory of internal components must be documented .
controller manufacturer along with the controller model number shall be submitted for all traffic signal cabinets .
a cabinet corner blow up shall be submitted detailing pull box locations with all conduit and cable .
num compensation all costs incurred in submitting asbuilt documentation are incidental to the other items of work associated with traffic control signals and devices .
num installation inspection requirements meet the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents num signal timing .
set the timing of a traffic signal or system of traffic control devices in accordance with the contract documents unless approved otherwise in writing by the engineer .
num field tests of installations .
perform the following tests in the presence of the engineer and when applicable a representative of the agency designated to accept maintenance responsibility .
continuity test each signal head circuit pedestrian detector circuit vehicle detector loop circuit and interconnect signal circuit for continuity .
functional perform a functional test that demonstrates that each and every part of the installation functions as specified .
induced voltage on traffic signal connections measure the voltage between each signal head indication field terminal and the ac neutral circuit in the controller cabinet during the off dark state of each signal head indication .
ensure that the voltage does not exceed num vac rms .
if this value is exceeded take the following action to reduce the value to num vac rms num .
check for loose or broken connections in the signal head circuit from the controller cabinet to the signal heads .
num .
if num above does not correct the problem connect additional neutral circuits between the signal head and the controller cabinet .
inductive loop assembly an inductive loop assembly is defined as a loop plus the lead in cable .
measure and record the series resistance of each inductive loop assembly .
ensure that the resistance does not exceed num  .
perform an insulation resistance megger test at num vdc for each inductive loop assembly at the cabinet in which the inductive loop assembly is terminated .
do not connect the inductive loop assembly to the cabinet terminal strips during the test except for the drain wire of a shielded leadin cable .
insulation resistance is defined as the resistance between one wire of the leadin cable and a ground rod or bussbar .
record the insulation resistance of each inductive loop assembly .
ensure that the resistance is equal to or greater than num m .
perform the num hour test only after achieving acceptable results from the other tests listed in num .
num hour test for traffic signal installations num .
before beginning the num hour test place all new signal installations no existing signals in flash for num to num hours .
the length of the flash period will be determined by the engineer .
num .
continuously operate each new or modified traffic signal installation or system for not less than num hours .
if unsatisfactory performance of the system develops correct the condition and repeat the test until obtaining num hours of satisfactory continuous operation .
num .
during the num hour test period the contractor is fully responsible for the signal or signal systems .
provide a responsible representative technically qualified who can monitor signal operation and troubleshoot any malfunctions within a one hour period .
when coordination is specified in the contract documents provide a two hour training session on the operation and programming of the coordination features of the controller units during the num hour test .
arrange the time and place of the training session with the engineer .
num .
perform a num hour test for flashing beacon installations in the same manner as for traffic signal installations .
num .
start the num hour test on a monday tuesday or wednesday .
ensure the num hour test does not include weekends holidays or special events .
num return to table of contents num .
start the num hour test between num am and num pm .
num .
before the num hour test install and have standing by all equipment specified in the contract documents .
num contractors warranty period for installations .
num general requirements repair or replace any defective components or work of the installations for a num day period after final acceptance .
num contractors responsibilities during the warranty period the contractor is responsible for the following num .
repair or replacement of equipment that fails to function properly due to defective materials or workmanship .
num .
upon notification by the engineer of a malfunction restore the equipment to proper operating condition within num hours after notification by the engineer .
if the contractor fails to restore the equipment to proper operating condition within num hours after notification the engineer has the authority to have the remedial work performed by other forces .
the contractor is responsible for all incurred costs of the work performed by other forces .
remedial work performed by other forces does not alter any of the requirements responsibilities or obligations of this warranty .
num .
in the event that the equipment does not function or malfunctions due to defective materials or workmanship the contractor is liable for any impairment to the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic resulting from such malfunction .
num departments responsibilities during the warranty period the department is responsible for the following num .
electrical energy costs which are paid for by the local maintaining agency .
num .
all adjustments such as timing necessary for the normal operations of equipment .
num .
documentation of the individuals involved and the time of contractor notification upon failure or malfunction of equipment .
num .
repair or replacement of any part of the installation damaged as a result of natural causes or those resulting from vehicular or pedestrian traffic not associated with contractor activities .
num manufacturers tests and certifications .
for materials which may not require formal testing the engineer reserves the right to require certifications from the manufacturer of such equipment and material to the effect that they meet all specification requirements and in the event of questionable equipment or material to require that such material or equipment be tested at no expense to the department .
the engineer reserves the right to withhold any payments which may be due if the engineer determines that the equipment does not meet the specifications or evaluation criteria .
num contracts for purchase of equipment .
num acceptance tests required for each unit of equipment furnished under purchase contracts furnish only the engineer will perform the following tests num .
visual inspection within num days after delivery .
num .
operational tests which determine whether the equipment performs in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents .
the engineer will complete such tests within num days after delivery .
if the equipment is listed on the departments approved num return to table of contents product list apl the engineer may verify the apl certification number in lieu of the operational tests .
num eligibility for payment the department will base payment for equipment furnished under purchase contracts on satisfactory completion of the visual inspection and operational tests required by num .
before any payment will be made for each functional group deliver to the engineer and receive from the engineer acceptance of all units of each functional group of equipment required to be furnished by the contract documents .
the department will make separate payment for a staged delivery of each functional group of equipment only when staged delivery is specified in the contract documents .
num equipment failing to pass acceptance tests when any unit of equipment fails to pass the acceptance tests correct the deficiencies by repair or replacement at no expense including all freight costs to the department to attain compliance .
if the original contract time has expired the department will charge and continue to assess liquidated damages in accordance with num until final acceptance of the equipment .
upon compliance with such correction requirements the engineer will perform tests on the equipment as specified above and will determine their eligibility for payment .
the department will not assess liquidated damages during the acceptance test period in num .
the department will allow only one acceptance test exclusion with regard to liquidated damages assessment per lot of units required to be delivered .
num return to table of contents section num grounding and lightning protection num description .
furnish and install grounding and lightning protection to provide personnel and equipment protection against faults surge currents and lightning transients .
provide a grounding and lightning protection system in accordance with the details shown in the standard plans unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num materials .
num ground rods use ground rods meeting the requirements of ul num that are listed by an osha nationally recognized testing laboratory nrtl .
ground rods must be made of copperclad steel with a nominal diameter of num inches .
ground rod sections must be a minimum of eight feet in length and manufactured for the sole purpose of providing electrical grounding .
num ground rod assembly provide a ground rod assembly consisting of one or more ground rods coupled together such that the total length of the assembly is a minimum of num feet driven into the earth at a single point without disrupting the electrical continuity of the assembly .
num ground rod array provide ground rod arrays as required consisting of two or more ground rod assemblies bonded together and spaced a minimum of num feet apart .
num grounding conductors for installing grounding conductor in conduit provide an insulated conductor that is stranded in accordance with astm bnum and color code the grounding conductor green .
for installing grounding conductor without conduit provide bare solid copper wire meeting the requirements of astm bnum for grounding conductors .
connect the grounding conductor from the system ground bus or barrier plates to the ground rod assembly .
size equipment grounding conductors according to nec section num .
size grounding electrode conductors according to nec section num .
num exothermic grounding bond make all connections to the ground rod assemblies using exothermic welds .
num air terminals use air terminals that comply with ul numa and nfpa num standards and are listed by a nrtl .
num surge protective devices spds provide spds to protect electronics from lightning transient voltage surges and induced current .
install spds on all power data video and any other conductive circuit .
spd requirements for lighting must meet the minimum requirements of section num and the standard plans .
spds for traffic control devices including intelligent transportation system its equipment must be listed on the departments approved product list apl .
provide primary and secondary surge protection on ac power at traffic control device field sites .
num spd for num volt or num volt power install a spd at the utility disconnect to the cabinet .
ensure that the spd at the utility disconnect includes ln lg and n g protection and has a maximum surge current rating of num ka per phase or greater .
the spd must meet the requirements of ul num third edition and be listed by a nrtl .
num return to table of contents ensure an spd is provided where the supply circuit enters the cabinet .
locate the spd on the load side of the main disconnect and ahead of any and all electronic devices and connected in parallel with the ac supply .
ensure that the spd in the cabinet includes ln lg and ng protection and has a maximum surge current rating of num ka per phase or greater .
the spd must meet the requirements of ul num third edition and be listed by a nrtl .
ensure that the spd has a visual indication system that monitors the weakest link in each mode and shows normal operation or failure status and also provides one set of normally open nonormally closed nc form c contacts for remote alarm monitoring .
the enclosure for a spd shall have a nema num rating .
num spd at point of use install a spd at the point the its devices receive num volt power and connected in series with the circuits .
ensure that these devices comply with the minimum functional requirements shown in table num .
ensure that the units are rated at num or num amps load and are configured with receptacles .
ensure that these units have internal fuse protection and provide common mode lng protection .
num spds for lowvoltage power control data and signal systems install a specialized spd on all conductive circuits including but not limited to data communication cables coaxial video cables and lowvoltage power cables .
ensure that these devices comply with the minimum functional requirements shown in table num for all available modes i.e .
power ln ng lg data and signal center pintoshield ll lg and shieldg where appropriate .
table num spd minimum requirements circuit description clamping voltage data rate surge capacity maximum letthrough voltage num vdc num volts na numka per mode numxnum s num vpk num vac num volts na numka per mode numxnum s num vpk num vdc num volts na numka per mode numxnum s num vpk num vac at pou num num volts na numka per mode numxnum s num vpk coaxial composite video num volts na numka per mode numxnum s num vpk numxnum snumxnums numkv numka rsnumrsnum num volts up to num mbps numka per mode numxnum s num vpk tnum num volts up to num mbps numka per mode numxnum s num vpk num return to table of contents table num spd minimum requirements circuit description clamping voltage data rate surge capacity maximum letthrough voltage ethernet data num volts up to num gbps numka per mode numxnum s num vpk poe num volts up to num gbps numka per mode numxnum s numvpk numkhz nums numkv numa ensure that spds meet the requirements of ul numb or ul numc as applicable and are listed by a nrtl .
num mechanical specifications ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number and date of manufacture or serial number .
all parts must be made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
num environmental specifications ensure that spds operate properly during and after being subjected to the temperature and humidity test described in nema ts num section num and the vibration and shock tests described in nema ts num sections num. and num .
num manufacturers warranty ensure that the spd has a manufacturers warranty covering failures for a minimum of num years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
the term failure for warranty replacement is defined as follows parallelconnected powerrated spd units are considered in failure mode when any of the visual indicators shows failure mode when power is applied to the terminals at the units rated voltage or the properly functioning overcurrent protective device will not reset after tripping .
seriesconnected lowvoltage power data or signal units are considered in the failure mode when an open circuit condition is created and no datasignal will pass through the spd device or a signal lead is permanently connected to ground .
in the event that the spd including any component of the unit should fail during the warranty period the entire spd shall be replaced by the manufacturer at no cost to the department or maintaining agency .
num installation .
num general construct a singlepoint grounding system .
install the primary ground rod assembly in an electrical pull box so that the top four inches are accessible for inspection resistance testing and maintenance .
the primary ground rod assembly and electrical pull box shall be installed between num inches to num inches from the element being grounded .
the top of all other ground rod assemblies connected to the primary ground rod assembly in an array must be buried a minimum of num inches below grade .
direct bury grounding conductors used to connect ground rod assemblies a minimum of num inches below finished grade .
num return to table of contents bond all ground rod assemblies and ground rod arrays together with solid bare tinned copper wire unless otherwise shown in the plans .
install grounding conductors in a straight path .
make all bonds between ground wires and ground rod assemblies and ground rod arrays with an exothermic bond with the following exception do not exothermically bond sections of ground rods to create the ground rod assembly and do not exothermically bond connections within a cabinet .
apply an antioxidant compound to all mechanical connections .
connect primary surge protection for power at the service entrance or main disconnect .
connect secondary surge protection at point of use unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ensure that lightning protection systems conform to the requirements of the national fire protection association nfpa code nfpa num standard for the installation of lightning protection systems .
install spds that have an operating voltage appropriate for the characteristics of the circuits they protect .
the nfpa requirements do not apply to lighting systems .
num grounding resistance num minimum resistance required obtain a resistance to ground of not more than num ohms for the following grounding applications .
install multiple ground rod assemblies totaling a maximum length of up to num feet as required to achieve minimum grounding resistance .
num .
power service for traffic control devices num .
signal and its cabinets num .
its polesstructures with electronic equipment num .
dms and dms structures install a minimum of one primary ground rod assembly .
if a grounding and lightning protection system using a single ground rod assembly does not achieve the required resistance to ground extend the length of the ground rod assembly an additional num feet or install an additional ground rod assembly num feet away and connect it to the main ground rod assembly to create a ground rod array .
continue installing ground rod assemblies connected in an array until the required resistance is obtained or until the maximum required total length of ground rod is installed .
grounding systems formed from horizontally constructed conductive radials are permitted if site conditions prohibit the use of vertically driven rods as permitted by the nec article numg .
a grounding system consisting of the maximum total length of ground rod required is acceptable in cases where soil conditions prevent the grounding system from achieving the required resistance to ground .
submit the site resistance measurement to the engineer .
num minimum resistance not required install a single ground rod assembly for the following applications .
no resistance to ground measurements are required .
num .
conventional lighting num .
external lighting for signs num .
signal cable span wire num .
aerial interconnect messenger wire num .
pedestals for pedestrian signals num .
pull boxes with metal covers when num volts or greater ac power is num return to table of contents present num .
splice vaults with wire grounding units .
num grounding traffic control systems at signalized intersections ensure that all separately grounded elements at an intersection signal cabinet power service mast arms or strain poles etc .
are bonded together to form an intersection grounding network array .
for traffic signal poles including pedestals for pedestrian signals accommodate the ground connection from signal heads and electrically powered signs through span wires to the ground rod assembly or array located at the pole base in accordance with the details in the standard plans .
for span wire assemblies use the span wire to connect the ground rod assemblies or arrays of the poles .
do not use guy wires for grounding purposes however bond any guy wire to the span wire as part of the intersection grounding network .
num grounding traffic control systems on highways install the primary ground rod assembly at the base of the traffic control device supporting structure .
bond all metal components of the system such as cabinets steel poles and concrete pole grounding wire to the grounding system using a mechanical connection on the equipment side and an exothermically welded connection at the down cable .
do not use split bolts for grounding system connections .
connect all ground rod assemblies and any associated grounded electrical system within a num foot radius but not beyond the edge of the roadway of the primary ground rod assembly .
connect the primary ground rod assembly to a single point main grounding bar inside the equipment cabinet or mount it to the base of the traffic control device supporting structure unless otherwise shown in the plans .
place multiple ground rod assemblies as required in a ground rod array as depicted in the standard plans unless otherwise shown in the plans .
if a required array can not be placed in the right of way submit an alternate placement detail for approval .
num grounding highway lighting systems ground each metal light pole .
for poles on bridge structures bring the grounding conductors out to a pull box at each end of the structure and connect them to driven ground rods num feet in length .
ground all high mast poles in accordance with the details for grounding in standard plans index num .
num grounding equipment shelters install all grounds for the equipment shelter on the side of the building that utilities communication cables and fiber enter .
connect all earth grounds to this point including the grounding system for spds .
make all connections to spds according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that communication cables ac power emergency generator and equipment frames are connected by the shortest practical route to the grounding system .
protect the lead lengths from each device to the spd .
use compression type connection for all interior connections to bond grounding conductors to equipment in the shelter .
for connections to bus bars use mechanical connections having two bolts on a doublelug connector .
install star washers or another means that accommodates the fasteners used and achieves reliable electrical connections that will not deteriorate .
crimp and solder all wires connected to lugs or clamps .
verify electrical continuity of all connections .
remove all nonconducting surface coatings before each connection is made .
num return to table of contents ensure that ground conductors are downward coursing vertical and as short and straight as possible .
ensure that the minimum bending radius for interior equipment shelter grounds is eight inches .
avoid sharp bends and multiple bends in grounding conductors .
num interior grounding install a no .
num awg solid bare copper wire approximately one foot below the ceiling on each wall and mount it using insulated standoffs .
ensure that the wire encircles the equipment room forming a ring or continuous loop .
mechanically connect the cable trays to the interior perimeter ground using stranded copper wires with green insulation and bolted terminal connectors at the cable tray ends .
make all points where cable tray sections meet electrically continuous by use of a short jumper wire with terminals attached at each end .
directly bond all other metallic objects such as door frames and doors air conditioners alarm systems wallmounted communication equipment etc .
to the closest interior perimeter ground with the shortest possible stranded copper wire with green insulation .
bond the door to the doorframe using flexible welding cable .
num exterior grounding install an exterior grounding system consisting of multiple ground rod assemblies around the exterior perimeter of the equipment shelter .
place the ground rod assemblies a minimum of two feet from the building foundation in a suitable access point .
bond the following items to the shelters grounding system num .
metal building parts such as downspouts and siding .
num .
ground rods provided by power or telephone utilities for grounding of ac power or surge protection devices as permitted by local codes .
num .
shelter support skids bases or foundations if applicable .
num .
any metal object larger than four square feet .
num .
external metal fencing .
num punch block spd grounding ground type num punchdown blocks in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and mechanically connect them to the shelters interior perimeter ground .
num .
equipment shelter fence grounding ensure that the metal type b fence is grounded to fence perimeter grounding conductors consisting of no .
num awg solid bare tinned copper wires that encircle the entire compound to achieve required resistance to ground required in num .
exothermically bond any splices in the grounding conductors .
bury the fence perimeter grounding conductor a minimum of num feet below finished grade .
bond all fence posts to the fence perimeter ground wire using no .
num awg solid bare tinned copper wire .
bond the gate and gatepost together with a flexible ground such as welding cable wires .
ground the gatepost to the fence perimeter ground wire using no .
num awg solid bare tinned copper wire .
exothermically bond all connections to the fence perimeter ground wire .
connect the fences top rail to each corner post and in the middle of each side .
ground the fence fabric with no .
num awg solid bare tinned copper wire connected to the fence posts .
connect the fence perimeter wires to the ground rod assemblies of the equipment shelters ground system with no .
num awg solid bare tinned copper wire as shown in the plans .
ensure that all ground leads are no .
num awg solid bare tinned copper wires for all above and underground grounding wire installations .
ensure that all exothermic bonds are appropriate for the application .
do not use welding or other forms of bonding without prior written approval .
num return to table of contents num ground resistance testing and inspection .
num testing measure the ground resistance with an instrument designed specifically to measure and document earthground resistance soil resistivity and current flow .
conduct the test by using the fallofpotential method as described in the institute of electronic and electrical engineers ieee standard num.if fallofpotential tests can not be performed it is acceptable to measure resistance at each accessible ground rod using a clampon ground resistance tester .
submit to the engineer certified test results for each testing location .
submit the following information on the test results num .
the formal name or id for the location where the test was performed num .
the gps latitude and longitude for the location where the test was performed num .
the date on which the test was performed num .
the make and model number serial number and last date of calibration by an independent testing facility within the previous num months for the grounding resistance testing device used num .
contact information including name signature and employer name for each person conducting witnessing or certifying the test num .
description of the local environmental and soil conditions at the time of testing num .
a rough sketch of the site grounding system along with the corresponding measured data points num .
page numbering showing the current page number and total page count e.g .
page num of num num inspection do not backfill belowgrade grounding installations and grounding connections until inspected and approved .
the engineer will inspect the installation for proper connection types tightness workmanship and conformance to the plans .
replace any exothermic bonds that are deemed unsatisfactory with new exothermic bonds .
repair or replace any mechanical connections that are deemed unsatisfactory .
measure the resistance at each accessible ground rod using a clampon earth tester .
the measurement at any individual rod is the cumulative resistance of all rods in a parallel circuit .
for grounding system inspections notify the engineer at least five days prior to completion of the installation .
record all test results in a standardized format approved by the engineer prior to testing .
all recorded test report data shall be dated witnessed and signed by at least one representative of the department and the contractor .
remedy all deficiencies at no cost to the department .
num basis of payment .
the work specified in this section will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental work .
num return to table of contents section num conduit num description .
furnish and install conduit for traffic control signals and devices highway lighting and other electrically powered or operated devices as shown in the contract documents .
num materials .
num conduit use materials that have been tested and listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory to the following industry standards schedule num and num polyvinyl chloride pvcnum ul num fiberglass reinforced epoxynum ul num intermediate metalnum ul num rigid galvanized metalnum ul num rigid aluminumnum ul numa pvc coated intermediate metalnum astm anumanumm astm anum astm anumanumm nema rnnum liquid tight flexible metal ul num high density polyethylene hdpe standard dimension ratio sdr num astm fnum hdpe sdr num astm fnum nema tcnum schedule num and num hdpe ul numa num .
use conduit with solvent weld slipfit plastic couplings unless approved by the engineer .
num .
use conduit having a minimum stiffness value of num .
ensure that each section has a duct bell with an integral gasket on one end and a duct spigot on the other end .
num .
use conduit that is hotdipped galvanized with a minimum coating of num ounces per square foot on both the inside and outside of the conduit .
the weight of the zinc coating shall be determined using astm anum .
num .
use conduit with both ends reamed and threaded .
num .
can be used with preassembled cable and ropeinconduit .
num locate wire ensure that locate wire is a single copper conductor with a minimum gauge of no .
num awg .
ensure locate wire is insulated using a num mil minimum thickness polyethylene sheath that is orange in color and marked to identify the manufacturer and the conductor size .
num locate wire grounding unit ensure that locate wires are attached to a wire grounding unit wgu dedicated to safely dissipate high transient voltages or other foreign electrical surges induced into the designated system .
ensure the wgu conforms to the following num .
allows signals generated by locate system transmitters to pass through the protection system without going to ground .
num .
the protection system automatically resets and passes locate system transmitter signals after the unit has been grounded to dissipate overvoltages .
num .
is intended for below or above grade applications .
ground the wgu to a driven rod within num feet of the system using a no .
num awg single conductor wire with green insulation .
num return to table of contents ensure that the wgu is enclosed for protection from environmental hazards and is accessible for the connection of portable locate system transmitters .
num .
the wgu system meets the minimum standards listed in table num for surge protection table num minimum standards for surge protection surge element numelement maximum duty failsafe gas tube .
rating num a surge capacity singlecycle num by num microsecond waveform .
life minimum num surges num a to ground .
failsafe integral failshorted device .
insulation resistance num megohm minimum at num volts of direct current vdc .
clamp voltages a .
impulse at num volts per microsecond typically num volts .
b .
direct current num to num volts .
num warning tape ensure that the buried cable warning tape is flexible elastic material num inches wide num mil thick intended for burial and use as an underground utility warning notice and that the surface of the warning tape is coated and sealed to prevent deterioration caused by harsh soil elements .
ensure that the warning tape color follows the american public works association color code for underground utilities and has the repeating message caution fdot cable or other wording approved by the engineer permanently printed on its surface .
ensure that the tape material and ink colors do not change when exposed to acids alkalis and other destructive chemical variances commonly found in florida soils .
num route markers route markers may be either a standard route marker srm type or an electronic route marker erm type .
ensure the srm is a rigid tubular driven post used for location and notification purposes only .
ensure the erm is physically identical to the srm but also includes a termination board to provide aboveground access to locate wire buried alongside conduit and cable runs .
ensure that each srm is labeled and identified as an fdot fiber optic cable marker unless otherwise shown in the plans .
the labels must include the departments logo contact information for the local fdot district and a telephone number to call prior to any excavation in the area .
ensure that the identification information is permanently imprinted on the top fitting and will not peel fade or deteriorate .
num standard route marker srm ensure that srm posts are white with an orange top fitting cover with black or white lettering and graphics .
ensure that the srm is a tubular configuration and both the marker post and the top fitting are made from virgin type num hdpe .
ensure that any fasteners used with the srm are constructed of stainless steel .
ensure that all srms have a minimum outside diameter of num inches with a minimum wall thickness of num inches .
ensure that the top fitting cover is a minimum of num feet long and has an outside diameter of num inches with a minimum wall thickness of num inches .
ensure that each srm provides a tensile strength of num pounds per square inch as required in astm dnum .
ensure that each srm is manufactured for use in temperatures range of minus num to numf in accordance with nema ts num .
ensure the srm can withstand an impact force of num pounds per foot at numf in accordance with astm dnum before and after uv conditioning for num hours in accordance with astm gnum .
ensure that the control sample of any material tested maintains a minimum of num percent of its original tensile strength .
num return to table of contents ensure that srms installed at the minimum num foot depth can withstand at least one impact at num miles per hour by a vehicle weighing at least num pounds and that after impact post returns to an upright position within num degrees of vertical alignment within num seconds from the time of impact .
num electronic route marker erm ensure erms meet the same material and performance requirements as the srms with the following exceptions .
equip each erm with a removable topfitting cover that is black with white lettering .
ensure that each erm contains a terminal board equipped with locate wire and ground connectors .
ensure that the terminal board is made from corrosionresistant materials and includes terminal facilities labeled according to function and provides uniform spacing between connection points .
num installation requirements .
num general install the conduit in accordance with nec or national electrical safety code nesc requirements and the standard plans .
consider the locations of conduit as shown in the plans as approximate .
construct conduit runs as straight as possible and obtain the engineers approval for all major deviations in conduit locations from those shown in the plans .
include buried cable warning tape with all trenched conduit .
mark the location of the conduit system with route markers as shown in the plans and approved by the engineer .
ensure that all route markers used are new and consistent in appearance .
for conduit installed by directional bore install in accordance with section num .
for conduit installed by jack and bore install in accordance with section num .
use only intermediate metal conduit rigid galvanized metal conduit rigid aluminum conduit or pvc coated intermediate metal conduit for aboveground electrical power service installations and rigid galvanized metal conduit or rigid aluminum conduit for underground electrical power service installations .
meet the requirements of section num for coating all field cut and threaded galvanized pipe .
use schedule num pvc or fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit in or on structural elements .
use hdpe with an sdr number less than or equal to num schedule num pvc or schedule num pvc for underground installations in earth or concrete for its and traffic control signal applications except use only hdpe with an sdr number less than or equal to num for blown fiber optic cable installations on limited access facilities .
use hdpe with an sdr number less than or equal to num schedule num pvc or schedule num pvc for underground installations of electrical conduit in earth for lighting applications and landscape irrigation applications .
use hdpe with an sdr number less than or equal to num schedule num pvc schedule num pvc or rigid galvanized metal for underground installations of electrical conduit in concrete for lighting applications .
do not place more than the equivalent of three quarter bends or num degrees of bends including the termination bends between the two points of termination in the conduit without a pull box .
obtain the engineers approval to use corrugated flexible conduits for short runs of num feet or less .
when a conduit installation changes from underground to aboveground make the change a minimum of num inches below finished grade .
num return to table of contents install a no .
num awg pull wire or polypropylene cord inside the full length of all conduits .
ensure that a minimum of num inches of pull wirecord is accessible at each conduit termination .
ensure the conduit includes all required fittings and incidentals necessary to construct a complete installation .
when earth backfill and tamping is required place backfill material as per section num in layers approximately num inches thick and tamp each layer to a density equal to or greater than the adjacent soil .
when backfilling trenches in existing pavement use a flowable fill meeting the requirements of section num .
provide a standard clearance between underground control cable and electrical service cable or another parallel underground electrical service cable that meets nesc requirements .
prevent the ingress of water dirt sand and other foreign materials into the conduit prior to during and after construction .
seal the ends of conduit after wiring is complete with a moisture resistant sealant that is designed for this specific application .
num fiber optic cable conduit install the conduit system so the fiber optic cable maintains a minimum bend radius of num times the cable diameter .
use approved methods for connecting inner duct or conduit within or between plowed portions trenched portions and bored portions .
submit the conduit manufacturers coupling method and material to the engineer for approval .
num conduit sizes size the conduit to be used on all installations unless otherwise shown in the contract documents .
use conduit of sufficient size to allow the conductor to be installed without any damage and meeting nec requirements .
use conduit that is at least num inches in diameter with the following exceptions for conduit protecting the ground wire on the side of a pole use conduit that is at least num inch in diameter .
for its applications where contractor chooses to install fiber optic cable by blowing use conduit that is at least num inch in diameter .
for traffic control signal and device electrical service conduit use the minimum conduit size required by the local maintaining agency and the electrical service provider .
num conduit joints make conduit joints using materials as specified by the manufacturer .
when conduit crosses an expansion joint of a structure and where shown in the plans install an expansion or expansiondeflection fitting as specified by the manufacturer .
certify that expansiondeflection fittings are rated to accommodate a minimum rotation of num degrees and that both the expansion and expansiondeflection fittings are rated to accommodate the anticipated longitudinal movement minimum of num inches for expansion fittings and num inches for expansiondeflection fittings .
ensure that all installed joints are waterproof .
as an exception to the threaded coupling for intermediate metal conduit at locations where it is not possible to screw the threaded coupling properly the contractor may use a waterproof slipjoint coupling approved by the engineer .
secure the joint and tighten threaded connections .
prior to insertion into the coupling clean prime and coat the ends of pvc conduit with solventtype cement as specified by the manufacturer .
num return to table of contents num pvc coating apply pvc coating to exposed metal surfaces of the conduit except for the threads to attain a nominal thickness of num mils .
ensure that the coating is free of sags and drips .
attach the coupling to the conduit prior to the application of the coating for conduit of num inch diameter or less .
use a coupling with sleeve extensions on conduit larger than num inch .
ensure that the sleeve extensions on all threaded female openings have a length equal to the diameter of the conduit up to and including size number num .
num conduit terminations where conduit enters a box fitting or other enclosure provide a bushing or adapter end bell conduit adapter etc .
to protect the conductor or cable from abrasion unless the box fitting or enclosure provides equivalent protection .
for conduit to be encased in concrete wrap with tape or otherwise protect all terminations to prevent the entrance of concrete .
connect new underground conduits to existing underground conduits with a pull box .
install conduit terminating in a concrete strain pole through the cable entry hole and up the center of the pole to a location approximately num inches below the handhole .
seal conduits terminating in a controller base pole pull box junction box or pedestal base with a moisture resistant sealant approved by the engineer .
for mast arm poles high mast poles and steel strain poles terminate conduit at least num inches above the top of the foundation .
for all other poles controller bases pedestal bases and junction boxes terminate conduit runs into the center of the base or box at least num inches above the surface of the base .
num restoration of trench areas restore the conduit trench construction area to an acceptable condition .
such work includes repair or replacement of all pavement areas sidewalks driveways curbs structures landscaping grass areas including removal of excavated materials and spoils removal and disposal of drilling fluids and backfilling areas disturbed by the conduit installation .
num aboveground installation use conduit designed and manufactured for use in longterm aboveground applications with uv stabilization to prevent material deterioration .
securely attach aboveground conduit installations to the surface of the supporting structure using conduit straps .
as a minimum use conduit straps located on num foot centers .
use galvanized metal conduit straps when installing intermediate metal conduit fiberglass reinforced epoxy conduit rigid galvanized conduit rigid aluminum conduit or pvc coated intermediate metal conduit above ground .
use the same pvc coating for the metal straps as the conduit when using pvc coated intermediate metal conduit .
num elbows the radius of curvature of the centerline of any bend shall not be less than shown below size standard radius num inch num inches num inch num inches num inch num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num return to table of contents size standard radius num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num inches num fiber optic cable locate wire install locate wire in the trench or bore with all underground conduits to provide endtoend electrical continuity for electronically locating the underground conduit system .
bury locate wire along the centerline of the top outer surface of installed conduit .
do not install locate wire in a conduit with fiber optic cable .
do not run locate wires into field cabinets .
terminate locate wires at the first and last pull boxes in the conduit run or as shown in the plans .
ensure that wire termination occurs in a pull box as shown in standard plans index num .
in a trenching operation install the locate wire no more than num inches above the conduit .
ensure that the locate wire enters all pull and splice boxes and that a minimum of num feet of slack locate wire is coiled and neatly stored in each box .
in a boring operation install the locate wire in an encasement install the conduit detection wire external to the conduit with no separation between conduit and wire or use conduit with integral locate wire .
locate wire may also be placed in the void between the inner wall of conduit and innerducts contained within the conduit as long as no other cables are present within the void .
perform continuity tests and insulation resistance tests on all locate wires and provide the engineer with all test results .
replace or repair defective locate wire at no additional cost .
make locate wire splices in a flush gradelevel box .
ensure that locate wire splices are waterproof and suitable for direct burial .
ensure that locate wire splices at the pull box meet nec requirements .
ensure that locate wire splices are constructed of and in the following order a mechanical crimp connection with a butt sleeve an oxidepreventing aerosol lacquer mastic electrical splicing tape and standard electrical tape .
at the completion of the installation provide the engineer with asbuilt drawings that document all splice locations .
install wgus in pull boxes and splice boxes as shown in the plans or directed by the engineer .
mount the device in a location high enough from the bottom of the box to allow access to terminal facilities without disturbing cables present within the box .
terminate the locate wires and connect the wgu to ground in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
test the locate wire system after installation to ensure that it functions and can be used to accurately locate the conduit system .
num route markers install route markers for fiber optic cable installations and ensure the following num .
markers are plumb and level and the notification information is clearly visible when viewed from the side facing the roadway .
num .
markers are set within the right of way .
num .
markers are placed at a num foot offset from the conduit system .
num return to table of contents num .
the top of the marker post is a minimum of num feet and maximum of num feet above the finish grade num .
markers are spaced a maximum of num feet apart .
num .
a clear line of sight is maintained from one marker to the next .
num .
markers are installed on both sides of the roadway at any crossing point where the conduit system changes to the opposite side of the roadway .
num .
markers are installed at the center point of any conduit run between two pull or splice boxes .
num .
markers are installed at gate locations when the conduit system is adjacent to a fence line .
num .
markers are installed on both sides of a stream river or other water crossing and on both sides of aboveground attachments such as bridges and walls .
remove and replace all marker posts damaged during installation at no additional cost .
ensure that route marker signs are labeled with a unique identification number as detailed in the plans or as approved by the engineer .
provide asbuilt documentation at the completion of installation that includes identification number and location of all installed route markers and correlates the marker to the fiber optic infrastructure that it signifies .
ensure that installation of erms includes connection of the route marker to the locate wire associated with the conduit run that the markers identify .
install locate wire through the base of the marker and terminate the locate wires to connectors mounted on the terminal board inside the marker .
install an underground magnesium anode a minimum of num feet away from the marker and perpendicular to the conduit system .
terminate the anode lead on the connector mounted on the terminal board inside the marker .
install the bond straps between the anode connector and all locate wire connectors to provide cathodic protection for the locate wire conductor .
num method of measurement .
num general measurement for payment will be in accordance with the following work tasks .
num furnish and install the contract unit price per foot of conduit furnished and installed will include furnishing all hardware and materials and all testing as specified in this section and the contract documents and all labor casings removal of excavated materials and spoils removal and disposal of drilling fluids locate wire trenching boring backfilling flowable fill and restoration materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
payment for conduit placed underground will be based on the horizontal length of the trench or bore measured in a straight line between the centers of pull boxes cabinets poles etc .
in linear feet regardless of the length or number of conduits installed .
no allowance will be made for sweeps or vertical distances below the ground .
payment for conduit placed aboveground or bridge mounted will be based on the actual length of conduit installed .
payment for conduit embedded in concrete will be based on the length of each conduit run measured in a straight line between centers of junction boxes regardless of the length of conduit installed and will include all expansion and expansiondeflection fittings .
conduit that does not both begin and end at a junction box will be considered incidental to their related items of work .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment for conduit placed under existing turf will be made as open trench .
payment for conduit placed under existing pavement roadway driveways or sidewalk will be made as directional bore .
if conduit is being placed under both existing turf and existing pavement between two pull boxes payment for the total pull boxtopull box length will be made as directional bore .
payment for conduit placed by jack bore will be made as jack bore for the total pull box to pull box length .
payment for conduit embedded in concrete structures or traffic railings will be made as embedded conduit .
no additional payment will be made for multiple conduits in the same trench .
no payment adjustment will be made if the contractor chooses to use an alternative method approved by the engineer .
no payment will be made for failed bore paths injection of excavatable flowable fill products taken out of service or incomplete installations .
payment will be made under item no .
num num conduit per foot .
num return to table of contents section num signal cable num description .
furnish and install underground and aerial signal cable as shown in the plans and in accordance with standard plans index num .
num materials .
use only new materials meeting the requirements of this section .
num signal cable use either polyethylene insulated polyvinyl chloride jacketed signal cable conforming to the requirements of the international municipal signal association inc. imsa specification no .
num or polyethylene insulated polyethylene jacketed signal cable conforming to the requirements of imsa specification no .
num .
use signal cable conductors of stranded copper no .
num awg or larger .
num cable support wire provide utilities grade zinccoated support wire meeting the requirements of astm anum whether separate or integral to signal cable having a minimum nominal diameter of num inches .
num cable attachment hardware ensure that all bolts and nuts less than num inch in diameter are passivated stainless steel type num or type num and meet the requirements of astm fnum and astm fnum for corrosion resistance .
ensure that all bolts and nuts num inch and over in diameter are galvanized and meet the requirements of astm anum .
use attachment hardware with sufficient tensile strength for the application .
use stainless steel lashing wire galvanized or stainless steel lashing rod cable rings or selflocking cable ties of uv stabilized black plastic having a minimum tensile strength of num pounds .
num installation requirements .
except for mast arm assemblies install signal cable in continuous lengths between the traffic signal controller cabinet and the first disconnect hanger or traffic signal head on the span and between the traffic signal controller cabinet and each pedestrian signal head and pedestrian detector .
do not use the neutral return conductor for pedestrian detectors as a neutral return for any other device .
conductors for the pedestrian signal head and the push button must be separated at the base of the pedestal and routed to the detection panel using separate raceways .
num number of conductors determine the number of conductors required for each signal cable unless specified in the contract documents .
provide three spare conductors for each signal cable used at all signal installations .
install the three spare conductors from the controller cabinet through each disconnect hanger or traffic signal head to the furthermost disconnect hanger or traffic signal head .
identify all spare conductors in a controller cabinet and ground them to the controller cabinet ground bus bar .
provide spare conductors within the controller cabinet of sufficient length to reach the furthermost field wiring terminals in the cabinet .
numprotection of cable ensure cable drawn through conduit ducts drilled holes protected by a rubber grommet or support structures is installed in such a manner as to prevent damage to conductors or insulation .
num return to table of contents num cabling for mast arm assembly continuous lengths of cable between the traffic signal controller cabinet signal heads or disconnect hangers pedestrian signal heads and pedestrian detectors will be allowed only when specified in contract documents .
num cable terminations terminate signal cable in the terminal by inserting the bared conductors into a compression type terminal block .
when barrier terminal blocks are specified in the contract documents crimp insulated fork or ring terminals to the bared conductors using a calibrated ratchetcrimping tool and connect the forks or ring terminals to the barrier terminal block .
neatly form and tie wrap all cable terminations .
if disconnect hangers are specified in the contract documents terminate spare wires at the terminal strip located inside the disconnect hangers .
individually cap or tape any additional spares in the disconnect hanger .
connect signal cables for a mast arm assembly in the terminal compartment when provided .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for signal cable furnished and installed will include furnishing all material hardware support wire cable ties cable clamps lashing wire terminal connectors cable grounding and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
for intersections where new strain poles monotubes or mast arms are installed payment for signal cable will be based on the number of intersections at which signal cable is furnished and installed .
for all other applications including repair and replacement of signal cable payment for signal cable will be based on the linear feet of cable used .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num signal cable num return to table of contents section num communication cable num description .
furnish and install underground and aerial communication cable as shown in the plans and standard plans .
num materials .
num fiber optic cable and connections .
num single mode fiber optic cable provide alldielectric dryfilled loosetube dispersionunshifted singlemode fiber smf with low water peak gel free and suitable for underground i.e .
in conduit and aerial outside plant installation .
all fiber optic cable shall be splicecompatible with the departments existing dispersionunshifted smf and require no electronic equipment for dispersion compensation between new and existing fiber .
ensure that all components that comprise a single length of cable are continuous and of the same material .
furnish only commercial offtheshelf materials equipment and components .
num optical fiber ensure that the optical fibers used in the cable meet or exceed the telecommunications industry association tia and electronic industries alliance eia tiaeianumcaab specification the u.s. department of agriculture rural utilities service rus num cfr num and international telecommunication union itu t g.num.d requirements .
use only optical fibers meeting the additional requirements as follows geometry cladding diameter numm num m coretocladding concentricity num m cladding noncircularity num mode field diameter num nm num m num m coating diameter num m num m colored fiber nominal diameter num num m optical cabled fiber attenuation num nm num dbkm num nm num dbkm point discontinuity num nm num dbkm num nm num dbkm cable cutoff wavelength ccf num nm .
total dispersion num nm num psnmkm macrobend attenuation turns num outer diameter od of the mandrel num mm num mm num db at num nm cabled polarization mode dispersion num km ps ensure that all fiber in the buffer tube is usable fiber that complies with attenuation requirements .
ensure that fibers do not adhere to each other .
ensure that the fiber is free of surface imperfections and inclusions .
ensure that all fiber optic core glass is from the same manufacturer .
num return to table of contents num buffer tubes ensure that the fiber optic cable includes loose buffer tubes that isolate internal optical fibers from outside forces and provide protection from physical damage as well as water ingress and migration .
ensure that buffer tubes provide freedom of movement for internal optical fibers .
ensure buffer tubes allow for expansion and contraction of the cable without damage to internal optical fiber .
ensure that fiber does not adhere to the inside of the tube .
ensure that buffer tubes permit intentional scoring and breakout without damage to the fiber .
ensure that each fiber optic cable buffer tube contains num fibers per tube unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num color code ensure that the marking and colorcoding of the fibers and buffer tubes conforms to the e iatianumb standard .
ensure that colors are permanent and stable during temperature cycling and not subject to fading or smearing onto each other or into the waterblocking material .
ensure that fibers are colored with uv curable inks that remain clearly distinguishable as the intended color .
num strength member ensure that the fiber optic cable contains a dielectric central strength member and dielectric outside strength member to prevent buckling of the cable and provide tensile strength .
ensure that the fiber optic cable can withstand a pulling tension of num lbs .
without damage to any components of the fiber optic cable .
num water blocking compound ensure that the fiber optic cable contains a dry waterblocking material to prevent the ingress of water within the outer cable jacket .
ensure that waterblocking materials are nonnutritive dielectric and homogeneous and free from dirt and foreign matter .
use dry waterblocking material for fiber optic cables used for either aerial or underground installations .
apply dry waterblocking compound longitudinally around the outside of the central buffer tubes .
construct all cables with waterblocking material that complies with the requirements of the eiatianumb standard and is subjected to water penetration tests as defined in the eiatianumb standard .
num ripcord ensure that the cable contains at least one ripcord under the sheath .
ensure that the ripcord permits the removal of the sheath by hand or with pliers .
num filler fillers or rods may be included in the cable core to lend symmetry to the cable cross section if required .
num outer jacket ensure that the fiber optic cable is jacketed with medium density polyethylene mdpe that is free of blisters cracks holes and other deformities .
ensure that the nominal jacket thickness is a minimum of num inches .
ensure the outer jacket provides uv protection and does not promote the growth of fungus .
mark the jacket with the cable manufacturers name fiber type fiber count date of manufacture the words fdot fiber optic cable unless otherwise shown in the plans and the sequential cable lengths marked in feet .
ensure that the actual length of the cable is within num of the length indicated by the marking .
provide legible marking with contrasting color to that of the cable jacket .
num performance requirements num operating temperature ensure that the shipping and the operating temperature range of fiber optic cable meets or exceeds minus num to num f. ensure that the installation temperature range of fiber optic cable meets or exceeds minus num to numf .
num return to table of contents num bend radius ensure that the fiber optic cable is capable of withstanding a minimum unloaded bend radius of num times the cable diameter and a minimum loaded bend radius of num times the cable diameter when loaded to pulling tension of num pounds .
test the cable as required in the tiaeianuma standard .
ensure that bending the fiber optic cable up to the minimum bend radius does not affect the optical characteristics of the fiber .
num cable strength ensure that the fiber optic cable is capable of withstanding a pulling tension of num pounds during installation without increasing the fiber attenuation more than num decibel per mile and without changing other optical fiber characteristics after the tensile load is removed .
ensure that optical fiber is prooftested by the fiber manufacturer at a minimum of num kilo pounds per square inch .
ensure that the cable will withstand num impact cycles and the change in attenuation does not exceed num decibel at num nanometers when tested according to the requirements as detailed in the tiaeianumb standard .
ensure that the fiber optic cable can withstand a minimum compression load of num pounds per square inch when applied uniformly over the length of the sample at the rate of num inches to num inches per minute and maintained for num minutes as defined in the tiaeia numa standard .
ensure that the change in attenuation will not exceed num decibel during loading at num nanometers and that no fiber displays a measurable change in attenuation after load removal .
num water penetration ensure that the fiber optic cable is capable of withstanding the tests for water penetration defined in the tiaeianum standard .
ensure that a onemeter length of cable is able to withstand a onemeter static head of water applied at one end for num hours without water leaking through the other open cable end .
num fiber optic connection hardware ensure that all splice enclosures organizers cable end preparation tools and procedures are compatible with the fiber optic cable and are approved by the engineer .
num splice enclosures contain all optical fiber splices within a splice enclosure .
ensure that the enclosures provide storage for splices fiber and buffer tubes .
ensure that the splice enclosure restores the mechanical and environmental integrity of the fiber optic cable encases the sheath opening in the cable and organizes and stores optical fiber .
ensure all hinges and latching devices are stainless steel .
ensure that the enclosure is airtight and prevents water intrusion .
ensure that the splice enclosure can accommodate pressurization and has the ability to be reentered without requiring specialized tools or equipment .
ensure that the enclosure provides fiber and splice organizers including splice trays and strain relief .
ensure that splice enclosures are hermetically sealed to protect internal components from environmental hazards such as moisture insects and uv light .
fiber optic splice enclosures shall also comply with the telcordia technologies grnumcore standard and all applicable nec requirements .
provide space for future expansion equal to num of the initial utilization .
provide fiber optic cable penetration end caps to accommodate a minimum installation of two trunk fiber optic cables and two fiber optic drop cables .
ensure that the enclosure end caps are factorydrilled to the proper diameter to accept and seal the fiber optic cable entries .
ensure that the cable entry locations can accommodate an assortment of cables num return to table of contents with outside diameters ranging from num inches to num inches plus num without jeopardizing the waterproof characteristics of the enclosure .
provide fiber optic splice enclosures meeting the following requirements mechanical resist compression deformation to a maximum of num pounds .
withstand an impact energy to a maximum of num footpounds at numf .
axial tension num pounds for num minutes .
cable torsion ten numdegree rotations .
cable flexing ten numdegree bends .
environmental hydrostatic pressure head up to num footpounds num pounds per square inch .
withstand num freezethaw temperature cycles .
ultraviolet resistant during a maximum numday exposure in compliance with the requirements detailed in the astm bnum standard .
chemical withstand a numday exposure to solutions of num sulfuric acid num normal of sodium hydroxide num igepal kerosene and be fungus resistant as required in the astm gnum standard .
num splice trays ensure that splice trays are securely attached and accessible and provide sufficient storage for the fiber cable .
ensure splice trays provide access to individual fibers without disrupting other fibers in the tray .
ensure that splice trays hold the buffer tubes rigidly in place and provide protection for fusion splices .
ensure that the raceway accommodates the minimum bend radius of the fiber .
ensure that splice trays allow visible inspection of the fiber .
ensure that splice trays include a cover with a locking mechanism to hold it in place .
num cable terminations use type st sc lc or fc connectors only as specified in the plans or by the engineer .
ensure that all sttype fiber optic connectors whether factory preterminated or fieldinstalled are num inch physical contact with preradiused tips .
ensure that st and fc connectors include a ceramic ferrule and a metallic body and provide a strain relief mechanism when installed on a single fiber cable that contains strength elements .
ensure that the sttype connector provides a minimum num pound pullout strength .
ensure that the optical fiber within the body of all connectors is mechanically isolated from cable tension bending and twisting .
ensure that all connectors are compliant with the tiaeianuma and tiaeianum standards as applicable and are tested according to the telcordiabellcore gr numcore standard .
when tested according to the tia and eias fiber optic test procedure fotpnum tiaeianum ensure that the connectors test to an average insertion loss of less than or equal to num decibel and a maximum loss of less than or equal to num decibel .
test the connectors as detailed in fotpnum tiaeianum to reflectance values of less than or equal to minus num decibels .
num preterminated connector assemblies pigtails ensure that preterminated cable assemblies consist of fiber optic cables with factoryinstalled num return to table of contents connectors on one end of the cable and an unterminated optical fiber on the other .
ensure that the preterminated connector assemblies are installed with fusion splices .
ensure that all buffer tubes and fibers are protected once the attachment of preterminated connector assemblies is complete .
num buffer tube fanout kits ensure that a buffer tube fanout kit is installed when fiber optic cables are terminated .
use a kit compatible with the fiber optic cable being terminated and that is colorcoded to match the optical fiber color scheme .
ensure that the buffer tube fanout kit supports num fiber strands .
ensure that output tubing and the fiber strands contained therein are of sufficient length for routing and attachment of fiber optic cable to connected electronics or as directed by the engineer .
ensure that the kit and the connectors are supplied by the same manufacturer .
num patch panels ensure that the patch panel is compatible with the fiber optic cable being terminated and color coded to match the optical fiber color scheme .
ensure that the patch panel has a minimum of num sttype panel connectors unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ensure that the patch panel dimensions do not exceed num inches x num inches x num inches for fiber counts of twelve or less .
ensure the patch panel is suitable for mounting within an approved cabinet at the field device location .
ensure patch panels are sized to accommodate specified coupler housings and maintain sufficient bend radius for cables .
ensure the patch panel is sized to occupy the minimum space required for capacity .
num preterminated patch panels ensure that the preterminated patch panel includes a factory installed alldielectric smf cable stub .
ensure that the panel includes factory installed and terminated sttype panel connectors unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ensure that the cable stub is of sufficient length to splice the stub and provide a fiber connection between the panel and the backbone fiber cable or as directed by the engineer .
num field assembled and terminated patch panels ensure that the fieldassembled patch panel is a termination panel that includes a connector panel and the hardware required to mount the patch panel within an approved cabinet at the field device location and connect the panel to the backbone fiber cable .
num connector panel ensure that the connector panel provides num sttype bulkheadmount coupling connectors unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ensure that each coupling connector allows connection of a cable terminated on one side of the panel to a cable on the opposite side .
ensure that each bulkheadmount coupling connector includes a locknut for mounting the connector in predrilled or punched holes in the connector panel .
num handling num cable end sealing ensure that fiber optic cable ends are capped or sealed to prevent the entry of moisture during shipping handling storage and installation .
equip one end of the fiber optic cable with flexible pulling eyes .
num protective wrap ensure that the fiber optic cable is shipped and stored with a protective wrap or other approved mechanical reel protection device over the outer turns of the fiber optic cable on each reel .
ensure that the wrap is weather resistant and protects the cable reel from environmental hazards .
ensure that the cable reel remains wrapped until cable is to be installed .
num return to table of contents num packaging shipping and receiving ensure that the packaging and delivery of fiber optic cable reels comply with the following minimum requirements num .
ensure cable is shipped on reels of marked continuous length .
num .
ensure each cable is shipped on a separate strongly constructed reel designed to prevent damage to the cable during shipment and installation .
num .
ensure each reel has a minimum of num feet on each end of the cable available for testing .
num .
ensure that all fiber optic cable is continuous and free from damage .
num .
ensure no point discontinuities greater than num decibel per reel .
num .
submit the transmission loss test results as required by the eiatianum standard as well as results from factory tests performed prior to shipping .
num .
ensure that the manufacturer submits the date of manufacture product and serial numbers cable data including the reel length refraction index the project name and location type of fiber and quantity of strands used technical product data sheets and reel numbers .
num manufacturer testing and certification submit documentation of all factory tests performed by the manufacturer for all fiber optic cable splicing material cable terminations and patch panels .
num twisted pair cable use shielded underground and aerial cable with separate support wire conforming to rural electrification administration rea specification penum filled telephone cables .
use shielded aerial copper communication with integral support wire conforming to rea specification penum aerial telephone cables .
use only no .
num awg solid cables for copper connections in traffic signal closed loop systems .
num cable support wire meet the requirements of num .
num cable attachment hardware meet the requirements of num .
num installation requirements .
num fiber optic cable installation install all materials and equipment according to the latest version of the manufacturers installation procedures .
ensure that all materials and installation practices are in accordance with the applicable osha requirements as found in num cfr part num safety and health standards for construction .
in addition perform the following num .
ensure conduit and innerduct is clean and free from damage prior to installing fiber optic cable .
num .
document the sequential cable length markings at each splice box and pull box wall that the cable passes through and include the information with the asbuilt documentation .
provide all incidental parts needed to complete the installation but not specified in the plans as necessary for a complete and properly operating system .
num cable identification develop a nomenclature plan for identification of fiber optic cable .
submit the nomenclature plan to the engineer for approval .
use approved cable nomenclature to create cable tags for the identification of fiber optic cable .
provide cable tag identification on all test results or fiber related documents submitted to the engineer .
install cable tags within num foot of each splice andor termination point indicating the cable type fiber count and each fiber optic cable origination and termination points .
ensure that the cable tags are permanent labels suitable for outside plant applications and num return to table of contents are affixed to all fiber optic cables .
ensure that lettering is in permanent ink and displays the phrase fdot fiber optic cable .
num pulling install the fiber optic cable by hand or by using a mechanical pulling machine .
if a mechanical pulling machine is used equip the machine with a monitored or recording tension meter .
ensure that at no time the manufacturers recommended maximum pulling tension is exceeded .
ensure that the central strength member and aramid yarn are attached directly to the pulling eye during cable pulling .
use pulling attachments such as basket grip or chinese finger type to ensure that the optical and mechanical characteristics are not degraded during the fiber optic cable installation .
ensure that excess cable is coiled in a figure eight and fed manually when pulling through pull boxes and splice boxes by hand .
if pulleys and sheaves will be used to mechanically pull through pull boxes and splice boxes submit a drawing of the proposed layout showing that the cable will never be pulled through a radius less than the manufacturers minimum bend radius .
use large diameter wheels pulling sheaves and cable guides to maintain the appropriate bend radius .
provide tension monitoring at all times during the pulling operation .
ensure that cable pulling lubricant used during installation is recommended by the optical fiber cable manufacturer .
num blowing use either the high airspeed blowing hasb method or the piston method .
when using the hasb method ensure that the volume of air passing through the conduit does not exceed num cubic feet per minute or the conduit manufacturers recommended air volume whichever is more restrictive .
when using the piston method ensure that the volume of air passing through the conduit does not exceed num cubic feet per minute or the conduit manufacturers recommended air volume whichever is more restrictive .
num slack cable storage provide and store fiber optic cable at each pull box and splice box to allow for future splices additions or repairs to the fiber network .
store the fiber optic cable without twisting or bending the cable below the minimum bend radius .
store a total of num feet of fiber optic cable in splice boxes with num feet of cable on each side of the cable splice point or as shown in the plans .
store num feet of spare fiber optic cable in pull boxes .
num fiber optic connection splicing perform all optical fiber splicing using the fusion splicing technique and according to the latest version of the manufacturers cable installation procedures industry accepted installation standards codes and practices or as directed by the engineer .
ensure that all splices match fiber and buffer tube colors unless shown otherwise in the plans .
where a fiber cable is to be accessed for lateral or drop signal insertion only open the buffer tube containing the fiber to be accessed and only cut the actual fiber to be accessed .
if a fiber end is not intended for use cut the fiber to a length equal to that of the fiber to be used and neatly lay it into the splice tray .
treat any fibers exposed during splicing with a protective coating and place in a protective sleeve or housing to protect the fiber from damage or contaminants .
neatly store all splice enclosures within a splice box .
attach the splice enclosure to the splice box interior wall to prevent the enclosure from lying on the bottom of the splice box .
num splice plan submit a splice plan showing the location and configuration of splices in the system for approval by the engineer .
perform all splicing according to the splice plan .
document each splice location and identify the source and destination of each fiber in each splice tray .
document all fiber colors and buffer jacket colors num return to table of contents used during installation and develop a sequential fiber numbering plan as required in the tiaeianuma standard for colorcoding in the documentation .
num splice equipment use a fusion splice machine to splice all optical fiber .
ensure that splice equipment is new from the factory or serviced and certified by the factory or its authorized representative within the previous num months from the commencement of its use .
submit to the engineer documentation from the manufacturer or his authorized representative certifying compliance .
clean all splicing equipment and calibrate according to the manufacturers recommendations prior to each splicing session at each location .
num cable termination installation ensure that cables buffer tubes or strands are neatly routed secured and terminated in a patch panel .
ensure all cable termination points include documentation regarding the identification route and function of each fiber installed at that location .
ensure that a copy of this information is placed alongside the installed equipment for instance in a document pouch or drawer within a field cabinet .
num patch panel installation ensure that patch panels are neatly installed and secured in a weather proof enclosure .
ensure all patch panel connectors are clearly and permanently labeled .
ensure all installed patch panels include documentation regarding the identification route and function of each patch panel connector at that location .
ensure that a copy of this information is placed alongside the installed equipment .
num installation testing notify the engineer of cable testing at least num calendar days in advance .
submit the testing procedures to the engineer for approval prior to commencement of testing .
perform all tests at num nanometer wavelengths and include the last calibration date of all test equipment with the test parameters set on the equipment in the test documentation .
test all installed fibers terminated and unterminated using methods approved by the engineer .
num end to end attenuation testing perform testing on all fibers to ensure that end to end attenuation does not exceed allowable loss num dbkm for num nanometer wavelength num dbkm for num nanometer wavelength plus num db for any connectors and num db for splices .
repair or replace cable sections exceeding allowable attenuation at no cost to the department .
num otdr tracing test all fibers from both cable end points with an optical time domain reflectometer otdr at wavelengths of num and num nanometer .
test the fibers that are not terminated at the time of installation using a bare fiber adapter .
present the results of the otdr testing i.e .
traces for each fiber and a loss table showing details for each splice or termination tested to the engineer in an approved electronic format .
ensure all otdr testing complies with the eiatianum standard .
num splice loss testing ensure that the splice loss for a smf fusion splice does not exceed a maximum bidirectional average of num decibel per splice .
repair or replace splices that exceed allowable attenuation at no cost to the department .
num connector loss testing ensure that the attenuation in the connector at each termination panel and its associated splice does not exceed num decibel .
repair or replace connectors exceeding allowable attenuation at no cost to the department .
num twisted pair cable installation install all materials and equipment according to the latest version of the manufacturers installation procedures .
install copper communication cables in continuous lengths to and between cabinets and junction boxes .
the contractor may install junctions at intervals less than shown in the plans however the contractor must provide any additional materials such as junction num return to table of contents boxes cabinets risers and mounting hardware and labor for additional junctions and terminations at no expense to the department .
obtain the engineers approval for any additional junctions or terminations .
num cable type and number of conductors determine the appropriate cable type and conductor count required for each twisted pair communication cable unless specified in the contract documents .
identify all spare conductors .
num number of cables do not install more than four separate cables at any point on a single support wire .
num protection of cable ensure cable drawn through conduit ducts drilled holes protected by a rubber grommet or support structures is installed in such a manner as to prevent damage to conductors or insulation .
num warranty .
ensure that the fiber optic cable the splice enclosures and terminations have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of two years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
ensure the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
num general the quantities to be paid will be the length in feet of fiber optic cable the number per each of fiber optic connections the number per each of fiber optic connection hardware and the length per foot of twisted pair cable accepted by the engineer .
num furnish and install the contract unit price for communication cable furnished and installed will include furnishing placement and testing of all material and for all tools labor equipment installation hardware such as support wire cable ties cable clamps and lashing wire supplies support personnel training documentation and incidentals necessary for a complete installation .
payment for conductive cable terminal connectors and conductive cable grounding is considered incidental and shall be included in the price for twisted pair communication cable .
fiber optic splices and terminations as shown in the plans shall be measured per each fiber optic connection furnished and installed .
num furnish the contract unit price for communication cable furnished will include the cost of the required cable as specified in the contract documents plus all shipping and handling costs involved in delivery as specified in the contract documents .
num install the contract unit for communication cable installed will include all tools labor equipment installation hardware such as support wire cable ties cable clamps and lashing wire supplies support personnel training documentation and incidentals necessary for a complete warranted tested and accepted installation .
the engineer will supply all cable .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num fiber optic cable per foot .
item no .
num fiber optic connection each .
item no .
num fiber optic connection hardware each .
num return to table of contents item no .
num twisted pair cable per foot .
num return to table of contents section num span wire assembly num description .
install a span wire assembly for supporting traffic signals signs and other traffic control devices .
provide fiberglass insulators when required .
num materials .
num general requirements for a single point attachment use only a catenary wire to support the imposed dead and wind load from the attached signs and traffic signals .
for a single point attachment the catenary wire also supports the signal conductor cables and interconnect cables .
for a two point attachment the catenary wire is used to support the imposed dead load and a portion of the imposed wind load from the attached signs and traffic signals .
the two point attachment also includes a messenger wire to resist a significant portion of the imposed wind load and to support the signal conductor cables and interconnection cables .
use a tether wire for maintaining the alignment of signal heads when specified in the plans .
num wires for span wire assemblies only use wire cables of sevenwire strands manufactured and provided with a class a zinc coating in accordance with astm anum .
provide utility grade catenary or messenger wires .
the contractor may use siemensmartin grade tether wires .
meet the following additional requirements for span wire assembly strands span wire assembly strand type nominal diameter inch required minimum breaking strength pounds catenary wire or messenger wire num num num num num num tether wire num num supply catenary or messenger wire of the nominal diameter as specified in the contract documents .
num hardware and fittings for utility or siemensmartin grade wires use the connection hardware as specified herein .
for installations that use other grades of wire provide the hardware and fittings indicated in the plans .
provide only hardware and fittings made of galvanized steel or noncorrosive metal unless the fiberglass insulators specified in num are also required .
provide hardware and fittings of sufficient strength to resist the breaking strength of the wire with which they are used .
use an alloy steel eyebolt meeting the requirements of astm fnum type num and a matching heavy hex nut meeting the requirements of astm anum grade c or d to connect the automatic compression deadend clamp of the catenary wire or messenger wire to the wood or concrete strain poles .
eyebolts and hex nuts must be zinc coated in accordance with astm anum class c. sizes of eyebolts supplied with nuts and washers are as following use a num inch diameter bolt for maximum of one num inch diameter catenary or messenger wire or num return to table of contents maximum of two num inch diameter catenary or messenger wires .
use a num inch diameter bolt for maximum of one num inch diameter catenary or messenger wire or maximum of two num inch diameter catenary or messenger wires .
use num inch diameter bolt for maximum of two num inch diameter catenary or messenger wires .
for two point attachments connect the messenger wire at the lower attachment location .
do not use thimble eye bolts for these connections .
only use thimble eye and eye bolts num inch in diameter minimum to connect the automatic compression deadend clamps of tether wires to wood or concrete strain poles .
only use s hooks num inch in diameter minimum when connecting the tether wire to all poles .
ensure that other hardware and fittings as required for the attachment of a span wire assembly to support poles or structures are in accordance with the details shown in the standard plans .
furnish and install new catenary and messenger wire clamps for steel strain pole s when existing poles are to remain and the span wire assemblies will be replaced or modified .
num fiberglass insulators install fiberglass insulators of the length specified in the plans on span wire assemblies located within num feet of overhead electric power lines .
use a fiberglass insulator of a cylindrical shape fabricated from epoxyresin impregnated fiberglass strands and having a breaking strength num greater than that of the structural support wire to which it is to be attached .
equip the insulator with thimble eye fittings on each end for attachment of the wire .
furnish all fittings and hardware necessary for the complete installation with the insulator and ensure that such fittings and hardware are of at least equal strength to the insulator .
num cable attachment hardware meet the requirements of num .
num installation requirements .
num span wire assembly types use either of the following span wire assemblies as shown in the contract documents num .
single point attachment assembly this type of assembly requires a catenary wire with an optional tether wire if specified in the plans .
num .
two point attachment assembly this type of assembly requires a catenary wire a messenger wire and an optional tether wire if specified in the plans .
num span types install span wire assemblies on the following span types num .
perpendicular span use this type span at an intersection to support a single span wire assembly upon which traffic signals signs and other traffic control devices are attached .
attach the span wire assembly to two support poles or structures located on opposite sides of the roadway and extend the assembly across the roadway at an angle of approximately num degrees to the roadway approach .
num .
diagonal span use this span type at an intersection to support a single span wire assembly upon which traffic signals signs and other traffic control devices are attached .
attach the span wire assembly to two poles located in opposite quadrants of the intersection and extend the assembly across the intersection at an angle of approximately num degrees to the approach lanes of the intersection .
locate traffic control devices for all approaches at appropriate locations on the span wire assembly .
num .
box span use this span type at an intersection to support a perimeter system of four span wire assemblies upon which traffic signals signs and other traffic control devices for num return to table of contents each approach to the intersection are attached .
attach the span wire assembly to four poles one located in each quadrant of the intersection and extend each span wire between two poles at an angle of approximately num degrees to the roadway approaches .
place traffic control devices for an approach on the span wire on the far side of the intersection .
num .
special design span or suspended box span use this span type to support two or more span wire assemblies upon which traffic signals signs and other traffic control devices for one or more roadway approaches are attached .
attach the span wire assembly to three or more poles .
num general requirements provide a span wire assembly with catenary messenger and tether wires of one continuous length of wire cable with no splices except when an insulator is required by num .
connect the insulator if required to the cable with automatic compression deadend clamps .
attach the span wire assemblies to the support poles or structures by means of automatic compression clamps and accessory hardware .
assemble the washer and nut on the oval eye bolt with the flat washer next to the pole .
tighten the nut sufficiently to prevent the oval eye bolt from rotating .
for two point attachments install the messenger wire with the following tensions per num feet .
linearly prorate cable tensions for other lengths from these values cable size inch wire tension lbs .
num num num num num num the catenary wire shall be tensioned to provide a num plus or minus num sag .
install the span wire assemblies in accordance with standard plans index num num and at a height on the support poles which will provide a clearance from the roadway to the bottom of the signal head assemblies in accordance with num .
connect all span wires to the pole grounding system in accordance with section num .
obtain and meet all provisions of the national electric safety code ansicnum regarding clearance from electric lines contacting of utility owners and safety requirements prior to span wire installation .
prior to installation of the two point attachment span wire assembly submit the method of providing the required tension in the messenger wire to the engineer for approval .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price per intersection for span wire assembly and per foot of fiberglass insulator furnished and installed between supporting poles and structures will include furnishing all materials and hardware as required in num and all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
when a tether wire is specified in the plans the payment of the tether wire shall be included in the compensation for the span wire assembly .
payment will be made under item no .
num num span wire assembly per intersection .
item no .
num num fiberglass insulator per foot .
num return to table of contents section num pull splice and junction boxes num description .
furnish and install pull splice and junction boxes as shown in the plans .
num materials .
num general use pull and splice boxes listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num pull and splice boxes num general manufacturers of concrete pull and splice boxes and covers seeking inclusion on the apl shall meet the requirements of section num and this section and be listed on the departments production facility listing .
ensure box bodies and covers are free of flaws such as cracks sharp broken or uneven edges and voids .
ensure inground boxes have an open bottom design .
num marking ensure the following information is permanently cast into the top surface of all pull and splice box covers num .
unless otherwise shown in the plans mark application as follows fdot traffic signal for signalized intersections fdot fiber optic cable for fiber optic cable fdot lighting for highway lighting fdot traffic monitoring for traffic monitoring fdot electrical for other electrical applications num .
manufacturers name or logo num .
fdot apl approval number num .
tier rating ensure the date of manufacture monthdayyear or date code is permanently located on the top or bottom of the cover .
ensure the interior of the box body has a permanent marking that includes the manufacturer partmodel number and date of manufacture near the top of box in a location that is visible after installation when the cover is removed .
num dimensions unless otherwise shown in the plans provide pull and splice boxes with the following dimensions .
for signalized intersection and lighting applications provide pull boxes with nominal cover dimensions of num inches wide by num inches long or larger and no less than num inches deep .
ensure the inside opening area is a minimum of num square inches and no inside dimension is less than num inches .
for fiber optic cable applications provide pull boxes with nominal cover dimensions of num inches wide by num inches long or larger and no less than num inches deep .
provide rectangular splice boxes with nominal cover dimensions of num inches wide by num inches long or larger and no less than num inches deep .
provide round splice boxes with a nominal cover diameter of num inches or larger and no less than num inches deep .
num fabrication provide box covers constructed of concrete polymer concrete or other materials meeting the requirements of this section .
num return to table of contents provide box covers with lifting slots and a flushseating lockdown mechanism .
use pentahead lockdown lag bolts .
ensure lockdown bolts and lifting slots are type num num or num passivated stainless steel or brass .
ensure lockdown bolt assembly is designed to prevent seizing and can be removed without damaging the cover or box body .
ensure the lockdown bolt threaded insertnut assembly is field replaceable .
num testing requirements ensure pull and splice boxes meet the american national standards institutesociety of cable telecommunications engineers ansiscte num num specification for underground enclosure integrity for tier num loading with the following additional clarifications and requirements num .
apply all environmental tests to the box and its cover .
num .
all flexural testing must be conducted in accordance with an appropriate astm standard and clearly stated in the report .
num .
perform repetitions of cycle num in table xnum of astm gnum for a minimum duration of num hours for the simulated sunlight exposure test .
num .
use deflectionmeasuring devices positioned to measure vertical and lateral deflection wherever maximum deflection occurs for the vertical sidewall load test .
num .
conduct the lateral sidewall pressure vertical sidewall load and cover vertical load tests without any removable or permanent wall to wall supporting beams located in the interior or top of the box opening .
when testing pull and splice boxes of various sizes width x length x depth the cover impact test internal equipment protection test coefficient of friction test and all environmental tests can be completed using a single representative boxcover instead of samples from all boxcover sizes as long as the test report indicates the following num .
materials of construction compositions and manufacturing processes are identical for all box and cover sizes submitted for listing on the apl .
num .
size width x length x depth of the representative boxcover .
num junction boxes num fabrication provide galvanized steel aluminum or nema numx non metallic junction boxes .
ensure all attachment hardware is type num or num passivated stainless steel .
ensure the outside surface has a smooth uniform finish .
ensure boxes are free of burrs pits sharp corners and dents .
ensure all welds are neatly formed and free of cracks blow holes and other irregularities .
num aerial junction boxes unless otherwise shown in the plans provide aerial junction boxes with minimum inside dimensions of num inches wide by num inches long and at least num inches deep .
num mounted junction boxes provide mounted junction boxes fabricated of num sheet aluminum alloy with a minimum thickness of num inch .
ensure all mounted junction boxes have a hinged door and lock as specified in section num .
unless otherwise shown in the plans provide mounted junction boxes for the following installations for pole and cabinet mounted installations provide junction boxes with minimum inside dimensions of num inches long by num inches wide and at least num inches deep .
for base mounted installations provide junction boxes with minimum inside dimensions of num inches long by num inches wide and at least num inches deep .
num return to table of contents num embedded junction boxes provide weatherproof embedded junction boxes for use in concrete structures or traffic railings .
include gasketed weatherproof covers made of the same material as the box and stainless steel tamper resistant screws for securing the cover .
fabricate galvanized steel boxes and their covers from steel meeting the requirements of astm anum and galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
for embedded junction boxes not exposed to vehicular impacts provide the following types of junction boxes .
where the structures environmental classification is slightly or moderately aggressive provide a galvanized steel or nema numx nonmetallic box as approved by the engineer .
where the structures environmental classification is extremely aggressive provide a nema numx nonmetallic box unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
for embedded junction boxes exposed to vehicular impacts provide a galvanized steel box regardless of the structures environmental classification .
num barrier terminal blocks provide a barrier terminal block with a minimum of ten positions and rated at num vac in all aerial and mounted junction boxes .
ensure each terminal block position has two screws electrically connected by a shorting bar or other department approved method .
ensure all terminal block positions are numbered sequentially .
num installation .
num general do not install power and communication cables in the same box unless otherwise shown in the plans .
when signal or num volt or greater power is present ground all metal covers in accordance with section num .
num pull and splice boxes install pull and splice boxes in accordance with standard plans index num .
ensure pull and splice boxes are sized for the amount of cable to be placed inside .
ensure that the pull or splice box cover is flush with the concrete apron or sidewalk .
do not install pull or splice boxes in roadways driveways parking areas ditches or public sidewalk curb ramps .
avoid placing pull and splice boxes in lowlying locations with poor drainage .
ensure that pull and splice boxes house fiber optic cable without subjecting the cable to a bend radius less than num times the diameter of the cable .
num placement and spacing place pull and splice boxes as shown in the plans and at the following locations unless directed otherwise by the engineer num .
at all major fiber optic cable and conduit junctions .
num .
approximately every num feet for fiber optic cable applications in rural areas with any continuous section of straight conduit if no fiber optic cable splice is required .
num .
at a maximum of num feet for fiber optic cable applications in metropolitan areas .
num .
at each end of a tunnel and on each side of a river or lake crossing .
num .
on each side of an aboveground conduit installation such as an attachment to a bridge or wall .
num .
at all turns in the conduit system .
num .
near the base of a service pole or communication cabinet to provide a .
a transition point between the fiber optic conduits extending from the fiber backbone and the conduit feeding the communication cabinet .
b .
an assist point for the installation of fiber optic drop cable .
c. storage of slack fiber optic drop cable .
num return to table of contents num electronic box marker equip all pull and splice boxes buried below finish grade with an electronic box marker inside the pull or splice box to mark the location .
ensure that the electronic box marker is a device specifically manufactured to electronically mark and locate underground facilities .
ensure that the electronic box marker includes circuitry and an antenna encased in a waterproof polyethylene shell .
ensure that the outer shell is impervious to minerals chemicals and temperature extremes normally found in underground plant environments .
ensure that the electronic box marker does not require any batteries or active components to operate .
ensure that electronic box markers used to mark fiber optic cable and general telecom applications are orange in color and operate at num khz .
ensure that the electronic box markers passive circuits produce an rf field when excited by a marker locator to direct the locator to the markers position .
ensure that the electronic box marker has a minimum operating range of num feet from the marker locator .
num aerial junction boxes install aerial junction boxes in accordance with standard plans index num .
num mounted junction boxes install mounted junction boxes in accordance with standard plans index num .
ensure that the bottom surface of pole mounted junction boxes is a minimum of num feet above the finished grade .
num cable terminations make cable terminations in junction boxes in accordance with section num .
route and form the cable to allow access to the terminal screws .
do not cover the terminal identification numbers with the cable .
num relocation of pull splice and junction boxes .
relocation of pull splice and junction boxes shall consist of removing an existing box and installing the box at the location shown in the plans .
restore the area of the box removal and relocation to the condition of the adjacent area .
the costs for restoration will be included in the contract unit price of the relocation .
boxes damaged due to the contractors operations must be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the department .
replacement boxes must be of the same material and size of the existing box unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
num warranty .
ensure all pull splice and junction boxes have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of one year from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
ensure the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price each for pull splice and junction box furnished and installed will consist of the pull splice and junction box including all required hardware for the type of box and location as specified in the contract documents and all labor and materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section except grounding .
no separate payment will be made for the removal of pull splice and junction boxes .
num return to table of contents payment will be made under item no .
num num pull and splice boxes each .
item no .
num num junction boxes each .
num return to table of contents section num electrical power service assemblies num description .
power service assemblies are utilized for signals lighting its and other roadway applications .
install electrical power service assemblies for either overhead service or underground service in accordance with the details shown in standard plans index num or num .
coordinate with the power company to provide electrical service to the locations shown in the plans .
consult and cooperate with the power company when power is needed at the service point .
furnish and install only those parts of the metering equipment or connections that are required by the power company in the locality involved .
num definitions .
num .
overhead service a service assembly which is supplied electrical power from an overhead power company source .
include with an overhead electrical power service assembly the following components a. weatherhead b. conduit c. electrical service wire d. meter base when required e. service disconnect f. surge protective device num .
underground service a service assembly which is supplied electrical power from an underground power company source .
include with an underground electrical power service assembly the following components a. conduit b .
electrical service wire c. meter base when required d. service disconnect e. surge protective device num materials .
num weatherhead use a weatherhead made of a copper free aluminum alloy with three electrical service wire entrance holes meeting national electric code nec requirements .
num conduit use conduit meeting the requirements of section num .
meet the requirements of section num for coating all field cut and threaded galvanized pipe .
num electrical service wire for signal service points use no .
num awg stranded copper wire with xhhw crosslinked polyethylene xlpe high heatresistant waterresistant insulation rated at num v in dry and wet condition for connections between service disconnect and traffic cabinet unless otherwise shown in the plans .
for lighting service points use singleconductor cable type thwnnum no smaller than no .
num awg for connections between service disconnect and load center .
num meter base use meter bases approved by the local electric power company .
num service disconnect num return to table of contents num enclosure cabinet use an enclosure conforming to national electrical manufacturers association nema standards for type numr type nums or type num made of galvanized steel aluminum stainless steel or other materials approved by the engineer .
ensure that the enclosure has a hinged door which can be locked with a padlock .
provide padlock and two keys .
do not use external handles or switches .
ensure that the inside dimensions meet nec requirements .
num circuit breaker use a manually resettable circuit breaker which has a current rating above the current rating of the circuit breaker to which electrical power is provided .
do not use less than a numa circuit breaker .
num surge protective device use a lightning arrester rated for a maximum permissible line to ground voltage of num vac .
num attachment hardware use attachment hardware that meets the requirements of section num .
num installation requirements .
num general meet the following requirements for the installation of individual components of the electrical power service assembly use extreme care and caution in the installation of all components of the electrical power service assembly .
follow installation procedures recommended by nec and national electrical safety code nesc .
consider the location of electrical power service assemblies as shown in the plans to be approximate and coordinate with the appropriate electrical power company authority to determine the exact locations of each assembly .
num weatherhead securely attach the weatherhead to the upper end of the conduit which extends upward from the meter base or service disconnect if a meter base is not required to a minimum height of num feet above grade .
num conduit securely attach all conduit to the pole or cabinet with a maximum distance of num feet between conduit attachment hardware .
num electrical service wire install the electrical service wire in a manner which will ensure that damage to the installation will not occur .
ensure that the service wire is of sufficient length after installation in the conduit to provide for attachment to the power company service and for termination within the cabinet for which power is required .
num meter base when a meter base is required securely fasten the meter base to the pole or cabinet .
install pole mounted meter bases at a minimum height of num feet above grade when measured from the center of the meter base or meet the local electric power company requirement whichever is greater .
num service disconnect securely fasten the service disconnect to the pole or cabinet with the engineers approval and electrically position the service disconnect between the service meter and the traffic control device cabinet to which electrical service is being supplied .
install pole mounted service disconnects a minimum of num feet above grade when measured from the bottom of the disconnect .
for cabinet installations mount the service disconnect at a height approved by the engineer or as shown in the plans .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
num general measurement for payment will be in accordance with the following work tasks .
payment for electrical service wire between service disconnect and traffic cabinet is based upon the distance of the cable run and includes payment for all conductors used in the run .
for lighting applications payment for service conductors will be made in accordance with section num .
payment for conduit and electrical service wire which is vertically attached to the electrical power assembly is considered incidental and paid under item num .
num furnish and install the contract unit price per foot of electrical service wire or the contract unit price each for electrical service disconnect furnished and installed will include furnishing all materials and hardware as specified in the contract documents and all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num furnish the contract unit price per foot of electrical service wire or the contract unit price each for electrical service disconnect furnished will include the cost of the required materials and hardware as specified in the contract documents plus all shipping and handling costs involved in delivery as specified in the contract documents .
num install the contract unit price per foot of electrical service wire or the contract unit price each for electrical service disconnect installed will include all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
the engineer will supply electrical service wire or electrical service disconnect .
num electrical power service the contract unit price per assembly for electrical power service will include furnishing and installing all material and hardware as specified in the contract documents and all labor and equipment necessary to make a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num electrical power service per assembly .
item no .
num num electrical service wire per foot .
item no .
num num electrical service disconnect each .
num return to table of contents section num prestressed concrete poles num description .
furnish and install prestressed concrete poles as shown in the plans .
obtain precast prestressed concrete poles from a manufacturing plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
ensure that each pole is constructed and permanently and legibly marked in accordance with standard plans index num including the date cast .
concrete closed circuit television cctv poles must be constructed and permanently and legibly marked in accordance with standard plans index num unless shown otherwise in the plans .
the marking shall be visible after installation .
ensure that the shipment of the products to the job site meets the requirements of num num and section num .
num materials .
num poles meet the following requirements portland cement concrete section num class v special or class vi reinforcing steel num prestressed strands num spiral reinforcing astm a num num camera lowering device use lowering devices that are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
permanently mark the lowering device with manufacturer name or trademark model or part number date of manufacture and serial number .
the lowering device must provide the electrical connection between the control cabinet and the equipment installed on the lowering device without reducing the function or effectiveness of the equipment .
the lowering device system support arm must be capable of withstanding service tension and shear up to num kip minimum .
the lowering device must include a disconnect unit and power data and video cables as applicable for connecting equipment a divided support arm pole attachment provisions a rotatable poletop tenon and a poletop junction box unless otherwise shown in the plans .
all external components are to be made of corrosionresistant materials that are powdercoated galvanized or otherwise protected from the environment .
all finished castings must have a smooth finish free from cracks blowholes shrinks and other flaws .
all roller fairlead frames must be corrosion resistant stainless steel or aluminum .
all pulleys used in the lowering device and portable lowering tool must have sealed selflubricated or oiltight bearings or sintered bronze bushings .
provide a minimum of num feet of composite power and signal cable prewired to the lowering device at the factory unless otherwise shown in the plans .
splices will not be allowed .
use only lowering devices designed to withstand the design wind speeds defined in the departments structures manual .
num return to table of contents num equipment connection box include a num inch national pipe thread npt pipe connection point for attaching a camera .
ensure that the equipment connection box has an ingress protection rating of no less than ipnum .
num disconnect unit the disconnect units must have a minimum load capacity of num pounds with a num safety factor and be capable of securely holding the lowering device and any installed equipment .
fixed and movable components of the disconnect unit must have a locking mechanism between them with at least two mechanical latches for the movable assembly .
the fixed unit must have a heavyduty cast tracking guide that allows latching in the same position each time .
the load must be transferred from the lowering cable to the mechanical latches when the system is in the latched position .
interface and locking components must be constructed of stainless steel or aluminum .
num disconnect unit housing the disconnect unit housing must be weatherproof with an ingress protection rating of no less than ipnum .
num connector block provide modular selfaligning and self adjusting female and male socket contact halves in the connector block .
equip the lowering device with enough contacts to permit operation of all required functions of the camera up to a maximum of num contacts and include at least two spare contacts .
provide contact connections between the fixed and movable lowering device components that are capable of passing eia num eianum eianum and ethernet data signals and num volt peak to peak vpp video signals as well as num vac num vac and num vdc power .
the lowering device connections must be capable of carrying the signals voltages and current required by the devices connected to them under full load conditions .
use only corrosionresistant stainless steel hardware .
lubricate all components including the connector block and contacts in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that male contacts used for grounding mate first and break last .
all contacts and connectors must be selfaligning and selfadjusting mechanical systems .
provide a springassisted contact assembly to maintain constant pressure on the contacts when the device is in the latched position .
provide connector pins made of brass or goldplated nickel or goldplated copper .
ensure that the currentcarrying male and female contacts are a minimum of num inch in diameter and firmly affixed to the connector block .
ensure mated connectors do not allow water penetration .
num lowering tool provide a portable metalframe lowering tool manufactured of corrosionresistant materials with winch assembly and a cable with a combined weight less than num lbs that is capable of securely supporting itself and the load .
the lowering tool must include a quick release cable connector and a torque limiter that will prevent over tensioning of the lowering cable and be equipped with gearing that reduces the manual effort required to operate the lifting handle to raise and lower a capacity load .
ensure that the lowering tool can be powered using a num inch chuck variablespeed reversible industrialduty electric drill capable of matching the manufacturerrecommended revolutions per minute .
provide an adapter with a clutch mechanism and torque limiter for use with the drill .
the winch assembly must have a minimum drum size width of num inches and a positive braking mechanism to secure the cable reel during raising and lowering operations and to prevent freewheeling .
the lowering cable must wind evenly on the winch num return to table of contents drum during operation .
provide a manual winch handle that incorporates a nonshear pin type torque limiter that can be used repeatedly and will not damage the lowering system .
provide a minimum of one lowering tool and any additional tools as required in the plans .
deliver the lowering tool to the department before final acceptance .
num lowering cable the lowering cable must be num inch minimum diameter type num stainless steel aircraft cable num strands x num gauge with a minimum breaking strength of num pounds .
additionally the lowering cable assembly as installed with thimble and crimps on one end and a cable clamp inside the latch on the lowering device end must have a minimum breaking strength of num lbs .
all lowering cable accessories such as connecting links must have a minimum workload rating that meets or exceeds that of the lowering cable .
prefabricated components for the lift unit support system must prevent the lifting cable from contacting the power or video cables .
num wiring all wiring must meet nec requirements and be installed in accordance with the equipment manufacturers recommendations for each device connected on the pole at the lowering device and in the field cabinet .
num externalmount lowering system enclosure for mounting to existing structures the system must include an upper mountingjunction box winch assembly and all external conduit and cabling necessary for mounting to existing structures .
provide a nema num rated lower lockable polemounted cabinet constructed of corrosionresistant num sheet aluminum with a minimum thickness of num inch to house the winch assembly .
the cabinet must allow for unobstructed operation of the winch access for servicing and provide sufficient clear area for operation of the winch manually and with an electric drill .
the outside surface of the cabinet must have a smooth uniform natural aluminum finish .
all inside and outside edges of the winch cabinet must be free of burrs and all welds must be neatly formed free of cracks blow holes and other irregularities .
cabinet hinges must be vandalresistant and constructed of num gauge stainless steel or num inch aluminum with stainless steel hinge pins .
the cabinet door must be doubleflanged and include neoprene closedcell gaskets permanently secured on the interior door surfaces that contact the door opening .
the cabinet door must not sag .
include a pin tumbler lock keyed for use with a no .
num key and two keys unless otherwise directed by the plans .
the cabinet door handle must include a lock hasp that will accommodate a padlock with a num inch diameter shackle .
the upper mountingjunction box must include a maintenance access door with captive attachment hardware .
provide all necessary mounting hardware conduits standoffs and conduit mounts required for a complete and functional system .
the external conduit must be galvanized schedule num with national pipe thread taper npt threads and have a minimum id of num inches at the lower winch cabinet entrance and allow the lowering cable to wind evenly on the winch drum without binding .
all conduit couplings and connections between the polemounted cabinet and upper mountingjunction box must be watertight .
num concrete pole construction .
construct concrete poles in accordance with section num .
assume responsibility for performance of all quality control testing and inspections required by sections num and num however the pci personnel certifications are not required .
plant certification in accordance with section num is not required for plants that manufacture prestressed concrete poles .
num return to table of contents num installation requirements .
num general furnish poles of the type and length shown in the plans .
provide catenary cable of the size shown in the plans .
ground poles in accordance with section num .
install span wire assemblies in accordance with section num .
do not consider the poles acceptable for use if the camber of the pole measured as the maximum deviation between the centerline of the pole and a straight line connecting the centroids of the crosssections at each end of the pole is greater than the total pole length in inches divided by num .
num foundations provide foundations num feet num inches in diameter and of the depth specified in the plans for strain poles used for span wire support of traffic signals .
provide foundations for concrete cctv poles in accordance with standard plans index num .
provide foundations for all other pole applications as specified in the plans .
construct the foundation with concrete as specified in section num .
for the excavation and backfill of the foundation meet the requirements specified in num and num with the exception of the backfill density .
in lieu of the requirements for obtaining the specified density the contractor may hand tamp the backfill in num inch maximum layers or machine tamp the backfill in num inch maximum layers .
when performing such operations ensure that the material is neither dry nor saturated .
the contractor may backfill with concrete .
use forms when required meeting the requirements of num .
if the foundation is cast in an oversize hole place the concrete in the top num inches in a form .
trowel all exposed surfaces to a smooth finish .
num orientation of poles for poles supporting one catenary wire orient the pole so that the load face is perpendicular to the catenary wire .
for poles supporting two catenary wires orient the pole so that the load face is perpendicular to a line bisecting the angle between the two catenary wires .
rake pole back from the span wire as necessary to achieve a final rake of num inch per foot plus or minus num inch .
num camera lowering device install the lowering device in a manner that does not place the operator directly under the device when it is being raised or lowered .
submit documentation showing connector block pin assignment for approval prior to installation .
the divided support arm and receiver brackets must selfalign the contact unit with the pole centerline during installation .
additionally the lowering device support arm must selfalign the disconnect unit and attached device with the pole centerline and remain centered after installation without moving or twisting .
house the stainless steel lowering cable inside num inch pvc conduit and provide a conduit mount adapter for the interface between the conduit and the internal back side of the lowering device .
the connection between the lowering device and tenon must be weather resistant .
use conduit straps to secure lowering cable conduit to the pole for externally mounted lowering systems .
stainless steel bands will not be allowed .
ensure that only the lowering cable is in motion inside the pole when the lowering device is operated .
all other cables must remain stable and secure during lowering and raising operations .
label all wire leads with their function label spares as spares .
install the correct length of lowering cable to prevent cable slack and to prevent the cable from jumping off the winch spool .
the lowering cable strands must not twist or unwind when the lowering device is operated .
num return to table of contents ensure that crimps and other cable connection hardware associated with the lowering cable do not come in direct contact with the winch tool or guides when operating the system .
furnish the engineer with the manufacturer recommended field installation instructions inspection instructions including recommended schedules and procedures and operating instructions .
num pole removal .
when shallow pole removal is specified in the plans the remaining pole foundation and any protrusions such as pole keys dead men guying apparatus conduit anchor bolts or reinforcing steel must be removed to a minimum depth of num feet below existing grade .
when deep pole removal is specified in the plans completely remove each pole including the foundation and all accessories and attachments such as pole keys dead men guying apparatus conduit anchor bolts and reinforcing steel .
disconnect span wires carefully at the pole and salvage all usable hardware and attachment devices as determined by the engineer .
remove all devices supported by the span wire including wiring prior to the removal of the span wire .
num method of measurement .
num general measurement for payment will be in accordance with the following work tasks .
num furnish and install the contract unit price for prestressed concrete poles furnish and install will consist of the pole plus all labor concrete for the foundation and other materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation as specified in the contract documents .
num pole removal num pole removal shallow the quantity to be paid for will be the removal of each pole including the foundation and all accessories and attachments to a depth of not less than num feet below existing grade .
num pole removal deep the quantity to be paid for will be the complete removal of the pole foundation and all accessories and attachments .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num prestressed concrete poles each .
item no .
num concrete cctv pole each .
num return to table of contents section num aluminum poles pedestals and posts num description .
furnish and install aluminum poles pedestals and posts at the locations shown in the plans and in accordance with the details shown in the plans and standard plans .
an aluminum pedestal consists of a pole and a transformer base .
num materials .
num poles and posts use nominal num inch diameter schedule num aluminum poles and posts meeting the requirements of the aluminum association alloy numtnum and astm bnum .
poles used with transformer bases must be threaded with no .
num npt threads .
sufficient threads are required to fully seat the pole into the hub of the pedestal base .
num transformer base use transformer bases listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking apl approval of proprietary transformer bases must submit an application in accordance with section num independent laboratory test report and calculations and drawings showing details notes materials dimensions and sizes that the transformer base meets the following requirements num .
materials meets the material requirements of aluminum association alloy num or numtnum and astm bnum or astm bnum .
num .
height base is num to num inches in height with a threaded hub at the top for mounting a nominal num inch schedule num aluminum pole .
the threaded hub must be tapped to allow full pole engagement .
num .
fastening provides for fastening to a foundation with four num inch anchor bolts located num degrees apart .
the bolt circle diameter must be in accordance with the base manufacturer recommendations .
the base design must allow for bolts that are placed off center .
num .
door provides a door opening of not less than num inches by num inches .
the door must be constructed of fiberglass or other noncombustible nonaluminum material .
attach the door to the base with cleats and one stainless steel socket button head screw or by other means suitable for nema num electrical enclosures .
num .
moment capacity supports an ultimate moment capacity of num footpounds .
submit certified test reports from the manufacturer verifying that each base model meets the moment capacity without breaking cracking or rupturing in any manner .
num .
breakaway meets the requirements in the aashto lrfd specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
submit the fhwa certification for product approval .
num .
identification is legibly and visibly marked with the manufacturers name or logo and the model number .
num anchor bolts provide astm fnum grade num anchor bolts num inch diameter num inches long with double nuts per astm fnum grade num .
for each bolt provide two num inch astm anum grade a or higher heavy hex nuts and one num inch thick by num inch round astm anum plate washer or one astm fnum type num washer .
anchor bolts washers and hex nuts must be galvanized in accordance with astm fnum .
num return to table of contents num end caps provide end caps sized for nominal num inch diameter schedule num aluminum poles .
the cap must be a minimum of num inch thick and tapped for at least two set screws .
set screws will be provided with the end cap .
num shims provide ushaped galvanized steel shims num inches wide by num inches long shaped to fit around a num inch anchor bolt .
num concrete use class num concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
num installation .
num general verify the length of the column supports in the field prior to fabrication to permit the appropriate sign or signal height .
num foundations construct foundations in accordance with the applicable standard plans .
the contractor may use precast foundations in augered or excavated holes that are a minimum of num inches larger than each axis dimension of the precast foundation .
the holes must be clean and without loose material .
obtain precast foundations from a manufacturing plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
fill the voids around precast foundations with flowable fill meeting the requirements of section num or clean sand placed using hydraulic methods to a level of num inches below grade .
num setting anchor bolts set anchor bolts num degrees apart with a bolt circle diameter of num inches .
adjust anchor bolts to a plumb line and hold rigidly in position to prevent displacement while pouring concrete .
num installation do not erect poles until the concrete strength is at least num psi .
plumb the poles after erection using shims if necessary to obtain precise alignment .
num grounding meet the requirements of section num and the applicable standard plans .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price per each for aluminum pedestals and posts furnished and installed will include all materials and equipment as specified in the contract documents and all labor and materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
payment for removal of aluminum poles will include the complete removal of the pole and foundation pedestrian detector and pedestrian signal .
separate payment for the removal of the pedestrian detector and pedestrian signal will be made only when the polepedestal is to remain .
payment for grounding will be incidental to the pedestal or post .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num aluminum poles per each .
num return to table of contents section num galvanized steel poles mast arms and monotube assemblies num description .
the work in this section consists of furnishing and installing galvanized steel strain poles galvanized steel mast arms galvanized steel monotube assemblies and galvanized steel cctv poles in accordance with the details shown in the contract documents subject to a five year warranty period as defined herein .
the warranty period will apply only when poles mast arms or steel monotube assemblies are painted as called for in the contract documents .
num materials .
num pole assembly use pole assemblies as shown in the standard plans when standard mast arm assemblies standard strain pole assemblies or standard steel cctv pole assemblies are required by the contract documents .
obtain poles mast arm and monotube assemblies from a fabrication facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
use coating products meeting the requirements of section num .
use grouts meeting the requirements of section num and listed on the departments approved product list apl .
use water meeting the requirements of section num .
use membrane curing compounds meeting the requirements of section num .
num camera lowering device meet the requirements of num .
num fabrication .
fabricate poles mast arm and monotube assemblies and miscellaneous hardware in accordance with the contract documents .
cut all materials to the final dimensions and complete all welding prior to galvanizing .
obtain all components for individual strain poles mast arm and monotube assemblies from the same fabricator .
obtain the luminaire and bracket from other sources when necessary .
affix an aluminum identification tag which will be visible from the handhole or located inside the terminal box containing the information described in the standard plans .
before shipping assemble mast arm and monotube assemblies including luminaire and bracket to assure proper fit .
the mast arm and monotube assemblies may be separated for shipment .
ensure all components are protected from damage during shipping and handling by wrapping or other effective methods .
replace any component which the engineer determines is damaged beyond repair at no additional cost to the department .
if components are wrapped for shipment remove wrappings no later than five days after receipt of components or immediately if the wrappings become saturated .
post these instructions in brightly colored wording on the wrapper .
failure to comply with these instructions may lead to damage of the coating system and will be cause for the rejection of the component .
num return to table of contents num coatings .
num galvanizing galvanize all components in accordance with astm anum except galvanize all fastener assemblies in accordance with section num .
use galvanizing methods which provide surfaces suitable for painting .
num surface preparation prepare all galvanized surfaces to be painted in accordance with astm dnum and the manufacturer of the coating systems specifications .
provide a clean and suitable galvanized surface that maximizes coating system adhesion .
measure the thickness of the zinc coating after completion of surface preparation using a magnetic thickness gage in accordance with astm anum .
ensure sufficient galvanizing remains on the substrate to meet the requirements of astm anum and the contract documents .
correct any deficient areas to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num painting num general when required by the contract documents provide painted poles mast arms and monotube assemblies .
provide products from a fabricator on the departments list of prequalified fabricators of painted galvanized steel strain poles mast arms and monotube assemblies .
provide products that will meet specification requirements throughout the warranty period .
meet the color requirement as specified in the contract documents .
provide the engineer with two metal sample coupons a minimum of num inches by num inches painted concurrently and with the same paint as was used on the first lot of any poles mast arms and monotube assemblies delivered to the jobsite .
submit sample coupons and manufacturer product data sheets to the engineer along with the delivery of the first shipment of any painted poles mast arms or monotube assemblies delivered to the jobsite .
at the time of their delivery the sample coupons described in this paragraph shall match the color of the poles mast arms and monotube assemblies to within nume measured as specified in num .
if the delivered sample coupons exhibit a difference in color from the poles mast arms and monotube assemblies greater than nume then the sample coupons will be considered unacceptable and no payment shall be made for the materials which the sample coupons represent .
those materials shall not be accepted by the department until acceptable representative sample coupons in accordance with the requirements of this section have been submitted to the engineer .
num responsible party warranty when the contract documents call for painted galvanized steel poles mast arms or monotube assemblies the contractor shall designate a responsible party to accept responsibility .
the responsible party designated by the contractor must execute and submit to the department a form provided by the department prior to the first delivery to the jobsite of any painted poles mast arms or monotube assemblies stipulating that the responsible party accepts responsibility for ensuring the coating system adhesion and color retention requirements as specified in num are met for a period of five years after final acceptance in accordance with num .
the responsible party shall also bear the continued responsibility for performing all remedial work associated with repairs of any adhesion or color retention failure as defined in section num as to which notice was provided to the responsible party within the five year warranty period .
failure to timely designate the responsible party will result in the contractor being the responsible party unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the department .
the responsible party shall be either the contractor or the fabricator .
when the responsible party is the fabricator the responsible party shall be one of the fabricators listed on num return to table of contents the prequalified fabricators of painted galvanized steel strain poles mast arms and monotube assemblies .
this list may be viewed on the departments website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govconstructioncontractorissuescontractormain.shtm .
upon final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num the contractors responsibility to ensure that the coating system adhesion and color retention requirements specified in num will terminate .
the obligations of the responsible party set forth in this section shall start at final acceptance of the contract in accordance with num and continue thereafter until expiration of the five year warranty period .
num installation .
install foundations in accordance with section num .
do not install poles mast arm poles or monotubes until the foundation has achieved num of the specified numday concrete strength and verifying test results have been submitted to the engineer .
determine concrete strength from tests on a minimum of two test cylinders prepared and tested in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum .
before erecting the pole clean the top of the foundation of any laitance oils grease or any other deleterious materials .
erect strain poles in an orientation which considering the rake and the application cable forces will produce a plumb pole .
erect monotubes plumb at the time of installation .
plumb the pole supporting mast arms after the mast arms traffic signals or sign panels have been placed .
if the traffic signals andor sign panels are not in place within two working days after the mast arm is erected furnish and install a num foot x num foot blank sign panel on the bottom of each mast arm within num feet of the mast arm tip and plumb the pole .
replumb the pole supporting mast arms after installation of traffic signals and sign panels .
install astm fnum grade anum bolt nut and washer assemblies in accordance with the following .
use bolt nut and washer assemblies that are free of rust and corrosion and are lubricated properly as demonstrated by being able to easily hand turn the nut on the bolt thread for its entire length .
tighten nuts to a snug tight condition to bring the faying surfaces of the assembly into full contact which is referred to as snugtight .
snugtight is defined as the maximum nut rotation resulting from the full effort of one person using a num inch long wrench or equivalent .
after bringing the faying surfaces to a snugtight condition tighten nuts in accordance with table num nut rotation from the snug tight condition .
maintain uniform contact pressure on the faying surfaces during snugging and turnofnut process by using a bolt tightening pattern that balances the clamping force of each bolt as closely as possible with the equal clamping force of a companion bolt .
base plate installation steps are as follows num .
verify that the nuts can be turned onto the bolts past the elevation corresponding to the bottom of each inplace leveling nut and be backed off by the effort of one person on a num inch long wrench without employing a pipe extension on the wrench handle .
num .
clean and lubricate the exposed threads of all anchor bolts .
clean and lubricate the threads and bearing surfaces of all leveling nuts .
relubricate the exposed threads of the anchor bolts and the threads of the leveling nuts if more than num hours has elapsed since earlier lubrication or if the anchor bolts and leveling nuts have become wet since they were first lubricated .
num .
turn the leveling nuts onto the anchor bolts and align the nuts to the same elevation .
num .
place structural plate washers on top of the leveling nuts one washer corresponding to each anchor bolt .
num return to table of contents num .
install the base plate onto the leveling nut washers place structural plate washers on top of the base plate one washer corresponding to each anchor bolt and turn the top nuts onto the anchor bolts .
num .
tighten top nuts to a snugtight condition in a star pattern .
a star tightening pattern is one in which the nuts on opposite or near opposite sides of the bolt circle are successively tightened in a pattern resembling a star .
for an num bolt circle with bolts sequentially numbered num to num tighten nuts in the following bolt order num num num num num num num num .
num .
tighten leveling nuts to a snugtight condition in a star pattern .
the distance from the bottom of the leveling nuts to the top of the concrete must not exceed one anchor bolt diameter .
num .
before final tightening of the top nuts mark the reference position of each tip nut in a snugtight condition with a suitable marking on one flat with a corresponding reference mark on the base plate at each bolt .
then incrementally turn the top nuts using a star pattern until achieving the required nut rotation specified in table a .
turn the nuts at least num full tightening cycles passes .
after tightening verify the nut rotation .
do not exceed the table a value by more than num degrees .
num .
tighten each retainer or jam nut until it is in firm contact with the top surface of the anchor bolt nut then while preventing the anchor bolt nut from rotating tighten the jam nut unit it is snug tight .
num .
install a screen over the gap between the base plate and foundation concrete in accordance with num or place a structural grout pad in accordance with num .
table a anchor bolt diameter inches nut rotation from snugtight condition num num turn num num turn num camera lowering device installation meet the requirements of num .
num screen installation .
on steel strain poles and steel monotube assemblies install a screen that will prevent vermin and debris from entering the gap between the bottom of the base plate and the top of the concrete foundation .
cover the entire gap with a wire screen the bottom horizontal wire of which shall be in full contact with the surface of the concrete foundation and the top horizontal wire of which shall not extend beyond the top surface of the base plate .
for the screen use standard grade plain weave galvanized steel wire cloth with num inch xnum inch mesh and num inch diameter wires .
vertical screen wires shall not extend beyond the top and bottom horizontal wires of the screen .
use one continuous section of screen with only one overlapping splice where the ends come together and overlap the layers num inches minimum .
attach the screen to the vertical side of the base plate with selftapping stainless steel screws no .
num num inch long with stainless steel washers num inch inside diameter .
drill pilot holes into the base plate to facilitate screw installation .
install screws on num inch centers maximum and at least one screw shall be installed through the overlapping splice to clamp the layers together .
also clamp the overlapping splice layers together just above the concrete foundation with an all stainless steel fastener assembly consisting of a machine screw no .
num num inch long nut and two flat washers num return to table of contents num inch inside diameter and lock washer .
tightly clamp the screen layers between the flat washers .
num structural grout pads .
on mast arm support structures install a structural grout pad in accordance with the standard plans and manufacturers instructions .
prior to grout placement flush the top of the foundation with water to remove any dirt and debris .
mix grout to a fluid state in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
test the grout fluidity using astm cnum flow cone method .
discard any grout with an unacceptable efflux time .
do not use mechanical means to push or vibrate the grout .
clean any excess grout from the base plate .
verify that water inside the pole will drain freely through the installed drain hole .
num remedial work .
during the warranty period the responsible party shall perform all remedial work necessary to meet the requirements of this specification at no cost to the department .
such remedial work shall be performed within num days of notification of a failure by the department .
failure to perform such remedial work within the time frame specified will result in the work being performed by other forces at the responsible partys cost .
if the responsible party is the fabricator the fabricator will be removed from the list of prequalified fabricators of painted galvanized steel poles mast arms and monotube assemblies for a minimum of six months or until payment in full for the correction of the deficiencies or defects has been made whichever is longer .
if the responsible party is the contractor the department will suspend revoke or deny the responsible partys certificate of qualification under the terms of section numdnum florida statutes for a minimum of six months or until payment in full for the correction of the deficiencies or defects has been made whichever is longer .
num statewide disputes review board .
a statewide disputes review board will resolve any and all disputes that may arise involving administration and enforcement of this specification .
the responsible party and the department acknowledge that use of the statewide disputes review board is required and the determinations of the statewide disputes review board for disputes arising out of this specification will be binding on both the responsible party and the department with no right of appeal by either party .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price each for poles mast arms and monotube assemblies furnished and installed will include all materials specified in the contract documents including the foundation cover plates caps clamps blank sign panel luminaire bracket all labor equipment miscellaneous materials and hardware necessary for a complete and acceptable installation .
the contract unit price for removal of poles mast arms and monotube assemblies will include the removal of all attachments arms vehicle signals light fixtures pedestrian signals pedestrian detectors and other incidentals .
when shallow pole removal is called for remove the pole foundation and all accessories or attachments including pole keys dead men guying apparatus conduit anchor bolts and reinforcing steel to a minimum depth of four feet below existing grade .
num return to table of contents when deep pole removal is called for in the plans completely remove the pole including the foundation and all accessories or attachments as listed above .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
sign panels and signal assemblies will be paid for separately .
payment will be made under item no .
num steel mast arm assembly each .
item no .
num steel monotube assembly each .
item no .
num steel strain pole each .
item no .
num steel cctv pole each .
num return to table of contents section num vehicular traffic signal assemblies num description .
furnish and install vehicular traffic signal assemblies as shown in the plans and standard plans .
for additional requirements related to mounting and attaching the assemblies see section num .
num materials .
num general use vehicular signal assemblies listed on the departments approved product list apl .
vehicular traffic signal assemblies must meet the requirements of section num and the institute of transportation engineers ite standard for vehicle traffic control signal heads .
provide vehicular traffic signal assemblies as a complete and functioning unit .
components include but are not limited to signal housing light emitting diode led signal modules visors backplates and assembly hardware .
all sections of multisection assemblies must be from the same manufacturer .
fastening hardware such as bolts screws nuts washers latches and studs must be must be sae type num or num stainless steel .
horizontal signal assemblies must be constructed so the door hinges when installed are located on the bottom of the signal assembly .
vertical mounted fivesection cluster assemblies must be constructed so that the door hinges when installed are located along the outside edges of the complete assembly and each section opens away from the horizontally adjacent section .
vehicular traffic signal assemblies must be permanently marked with the manufacturers name or trademark part or model number and date of manufacture or serial number .
num twelve inch signal head assemblies construct the assembly of materials and alloys specified in the ite standard for vehicle traffic control signal heads .
construct signal housings to allow adjustment in multiple directions for proper signal alignment .
if a serrated connection is used for positioning and alignment of the signal the top and bottom opening of each signal head section must include a circular numtooth serrated connection num inch nominal i.d .
capable of providing positive positioning and alignment in num degree increments .
when assembled and tightened these connections must prevent rotation or misalignment of the signal head as well as misalignment between sections .
the serrated area must start at the outside of the num inch hole and be at least num inch wide .
the teeth must have a minimum depth of num inch between peaks and valleys be free from burrs or other imperfections and provide positive locking with the grooves of mating sections framework and brackets .
the serration on the top circular connection of a signal section must have a valley at the num degree position and the serration on the bottom circular connection must have a peak at the num degree position both aligned perpendicular to the front of the section .
connections must permit the assembly of a multisection signal with the front of each section aligned within num degree .
provide at least two latching points with latch pads and manual type num or num stainless steel latching devices that are tamper resistant .
num return to table of contents if backplates are mechanically attached each signal section must have four backplate mounting attachment points on the back of the signal on or no more than three inches from each section corner .
attachment points must be capable of accepting no .
numxnum inch or no .
numxnum inch type num or num stainless steel screws for attaching backplates .
tristud washers when utilized to secure signal sections must have a minimum thickness of num inches .
for fivesection cluster assemblies tristud washers used to attach the top signal section to the multisignal bracket and the multisignal bracket to the bottom four signal sections must have a minimum thickness of num inches .
when fastened together washer distortion is not allowed .
design each signal section to prevent the accumulation of standing water within the assembly .
all sections comprising a single multisection assembly must be securely fastened together to form a rigid and weatherproof unit .
num doors construct each signal section with at least two hinges for mounting a door .
hinge pins must be captive .
doors must remain captive and secure at all times and be capable of either left or right swing .
the door latch must hold the door tightly closed .
the door must include slotted pads that allow the door to be opened and closed by engaging or disengaging the latching device .
the outside face of the door must include four holes equally spaced around the circumference of the lens opening for the attachment of a visor .
the lens opening in the door must have a diameter of num to num inches .
num visors the rear of the visor must have four tabs notches or holes for securing the visor to the signal housing door .
the visor mounting method must permit the visor to be rotated and secured at num degrees for horizontal signal head installations .
all visors must have a minimum length of num inches and a minimum downward tilt of num degrees measured from the center of the lens .
tunnel visors must encircle and shield the lens from num degrees plus or minus num degrees .
louvers may only be used in combination with full circle visors .
light must not escape between the visor and the door .
num gaskets gaskets must be constructed of weatherresistant material and be glued or sealed where they meet to provide one continuous length of gasket capable of providing a weatherproof seal for the signal assembly .
provide seals between the housing and door between the lens and the door and between any other mating surfaces where dust and moisture could enter .
gasket material must meet nema num and be constructed of temperature stabilized material that prevents any residue from collecting on the internal surfaces of the signal head .
num terminal blocks provide at least one fiveconnection terminal block in all three or more section signal head assemblies and at least three fiveconnection terminal blocks in all five section signal head assemblies .
terminal block connections in the signal assembly must not require any tools other than a screwdriver .
mount terminal blocks to the signal housing with type num or num passivated stainless steel hardware .
use only noncorrosive wire attachment screws approved by the department .
num color and finish the housing doors visors and backplates must be powder coated dull black federal standard num with a reflectance value not exceeding num percent as measured by astm enum .
for plastic heads the black color must be incorporated into the plastic material before molding .
num return to table of contents the finish on interior and exterior surfaces of aluminum signal head assemblies visors doors and housing must be painted in accordance with military standard milprf numa or american architectural manufacturers associationnum and must meet the requirements of astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum .
surface erosion flaking or oxidation must not occur within the normal life expectancy under typical installation conditions .
num plastic signal housings and visors construct signal housing assembly door and visors of uv stabilized plastic with a minimum thickness of num inches plus or minus num inches with the following physical properties num .
specific gravity num minimum as per astm dnum num .
vicat softening temperature num f num c as per astm dnum num .
brittleness temperature below num f num c as per astm dnum num .
flammability selfextinguishing as per astm dnum num .
tensile strength yield num psi num mpa minimum as per astm dnum num .
elongation at yield num as per astm dnum num .
shear strength yield num psi num mpa minimum as per astm dnum num .
izod impact strength notched num inch num ftlbin num jm minimum as per astm dnum num .
fatigue strength at num mm cycles num psi num mpa minimum as per astm dnum num backplates backplates may be constructed of either aluminum or plastic .
minimum thickness for aluminum backplates is num inch and the minimum thickness for plastic backplates is num inch .
the required width of the top bottom and sides of backplates must measure between five to six inches .
color of backplates must be black in accordance with num .
backplate thickness measurement must not include the retroreflective sheeting thickness .
if backplates are mechanically attached provide a minimum of four corner mounting attachment points per signal section for example a threesection signal assembly would have num mounting points .
attachment points must not interfere with the operation of traffic signal section doors .
backplate outside corners must be rounded and all edges must be de burred .
if louvers are provided louver orientation must be vertical on sides and horizontal on top and bottom of the backplate and must be at least num inch from the inner and outer edge of the backplate panel .
universal backplates must fit all traffic signals listed on the apl .
mount the backplate securely to the signal assembly with type num or num passivated stainless steel installation hardware .
backplates if mechanically attached must be marked in accordance with num on the long sides of the backplate .
backplates must include retroreflective borders using type iv yellow retroreflective sheeting listed on the apl .
place a num inch border on the entire outer perimeter of the backplate panel no closer than num inch from any louvers .
num return to table of contents num lightemitting diode optical unit the led optical unit must conform to the requirements of ites latest led purchase specification vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led circular signal supplement with the following exceptions .
num physical and mechanical requirements retrofit led signal modules must be compatible with all traffic signal housings listed on the apl .
the rear of the led signal module must be marked in accordance with num .
num led signal module lens the lens must be tinted with an appropriate color red amber or green to reduce sun phantom affect and enhance onoff contrast .
the tinting must be uniform across the face of the lens and be free from streaks wrinkles chips bubbles or other imperfections .
if a polymer lens is used a surface coating must be incorporated to provide abrasion resistance .
num minimum maintained luminous intensity values red and green modules must meet the current requirements of ites performance specification vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led circular signal supplement dated june num num .
yellow modules must be num times brighter than the ite specification .
num electrical electrical conductors for led signal modules must be a minimum of num inches in length .
each lead from the led module must be terminated with insulated slideon terminals .
the conductors must be color coded to identify the color of the module as follows num .
white must identify the neutral lead .
num .
red circular signals must be identified with a red lead yellow circular signals with a yellow lead and green circular signals with a green lead .
num .
red arrows must be identified with a red and black tracer lead yellow arrows with a yellow and black tracer lead and green arrows with a green and black tracer lead .
num installation .
num preassembly preassemble the signal heads when more than one signal section is required prior to installation at the site .
furnish signal heads with led modules backplates and visors .
use tunnel visors unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
install the led circular module in the door so that the up arrow or the word up or top is in the up orientation of the signal housing .
install the led arrow modules in the signal housing door in the direction of the intended use .
num positioning of signals consider the locations of the installed signals as shown in the plans as sufficiently flexible as to allow for unanticipated field conditions at the site .
the engineer will direct any variations from the locations shown .
position adjacent signal faces no closer than num feet apart measured horizontally at num degrees to the traffic flow between centers of faces .
regardless of the results of any scaled dimensions consider the location shown in the plans to be approximate .
position a signal face mounted on a span wire or mast arm as near as practical to the line of the drivers normal view .
ensure that all sections are of the same manufacturer and the section assemblies are uniform in appearance and alignment .
num clearances unless directed otherwise by the engineer for unusual circumstances at the site provide a vertical clearance of not less than num feetnum inches and not num return to table of contents more than num feet for traffic signals placed over the roadway .
measure such clearance for each span directly under the most critical signal assembly in regards to clearance for that span .
place signal assemblies on each span as near as practical to the same elevation as the critical signal assembly .
ensure that the lowest point on pedestalmounted and sidemounted signal heads is num feet above finished grade at the point of their installation .
num aiming of signal indication for proper lateral orientation aim signals after installing and before locking them in position .
num wiring connections do not splice signal cable .
connect the proper signal cable to the terminals in each signal head in order to provide the proper signal indication display when the cables are connected to the signal controller .
wire a separate neutral circuit and return it to the controller cabinet from each vehicular movement as shown in the contract documents .
num special installation requirements for optically programmed signals install direct aim and conceal optically programmed signals in strict accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer using the materials furnished by the signal manufacturer and with the direction of the engineer .
position the signals for maximum performance in accordance with the requirements shown in the plans and install them with rigid mounting assemblies using elbows and plumbizers of such type as will provide for stability of the position of the signals .
do not use clevises in the supporting attachments .
seal the cable routing to the signals to provide permanent water tightness .
num vertically mounted plastic signal head assemblies the top section of all multisection numsection numsection vertically mounted plastic signal assemblies must be constructed of die cast aluminum unless the entire num or moresection plastic signal assembly is specifically approved and listed on the apl as a num inch plastic num or moresection vehicle assembly .
single section signals may be constructed of die cast aluminum or plastic .
num backplates install backplates on all signal head assemblies .
num sealing installed signal head assembly ensure that the installed signal head assembly is sealed to exclude dust and moisture .
drill two num inch drain holes in the bottom of the installed signal head assembly .
num concealing signals not in use where traffic signals are installed and not put into service immediately or placed outofservice temporarily conceal the signal head assembly by securely placing burlap bags or other covering approved by the engineer over a weather resistant covering of nontransparent material open at the bottom to prevent condensation buildup .
num installation sequence install all traffic signal assemblies at any intersection as a single operation unless a staged operation is approved by the engineer .
num emergency signal heads for new emergency fire stations signals install num inch signal heads for all three indications .
for existing num inch emergency fire station signals retrofit with num inch led modules .
the num inch led optical unit must conform to the requirements of the ites performance specification vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led circular signal supplement .
num transit signal heads for transit signal priority at signalized intersections with bus queue jumper lanes install num inch twolens signal head assembly per the mutcd num return to table of contents figure numcnum .
the num inch led optical unit indications must comply with the mutcd section numc.num and as illustrated in figure numcnum .
the num inch led optical unit must conform to the requirements of the ites performance specification vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode led circular signal supplement regarding environmental requirements transient protection operating voltage range and electronic noise .
the indication bar symbol must measure num inches wide by num inches long .
the indication must be capable of being displayed in any angle of orientation from horizontal to vertical .
num warranty .
ensure that the signal housings backplates and any other signal assembly components have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of three years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
ensure the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
ensure that the led signal modules have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of five years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and num .
ensure that the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for any defective parts and equipment including falling below minimum intensity levels during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price per assembly for vehicular traffic signal furnished and installed will consist of the traffic signal and all components necessary to make a complete unit including mounting assemblies backplates visors led modules labor and materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num vehicular traffic signal per assembly .
num return to table of contents section num pedestrian signal assemblies num description .
furnish and install pedestrian signal assemblies as shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
num general use pedestrian signals listed on the departments approved product list apl .
pedestrian signal assemblies must meet the requirements of the latest edition of the federal highway administrations fhwa manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd and the institute of transportation engineers ite standard for pedestrian traffic control signal indications .
num housing and visor the housing must be weatherproof sectional and may consist of as many sections as optical units .
the housing must prevent light from escaping from one unit to another .
the top and bottom opening of the housing must include a circular numtooth serrated connection num inch nominal i.d .
capable of providing positive positioning and alignment in num degree increments .
when assembled and tightened these connections must prevent rotation or misalignment .
the serrated area must start at the outside of the num inch hole and be at least num inch wide .
the teeth must have a minimum depth of num inch between peaks and valleys free from burrs or other imperfections and provide positive locking with the grooves of mating sections framework and brackets .
the serration on the top circular connection of a signal section must have a valley at the num degree position and the serration on the bottom circular connection must have a peak at the num degree position both aligned perpendicular to the front of the section .
housings must include latch pads and manual stainless steel latching devices that are captive or nonremovable .
housings must have at least two latching points .
reinforce all mounting points and adjacent housing material .
the door enclosing the lens must be hinged and held securely to the housing .
provide a gasket meeting the requirements of astm dnum grade numbnum between the housing and door and between the lens and door .
if the fitting between the housing and door is weathertight the gasket may be omitted .
provide a visor for each signal face .
light must not escape between the door and visor .
the visor must be threesided and extend a minimum of num inches at the top from the face of the lens .
the visor must be constructed of noncorrosive sheet metal not less than num inch thick no .
num gauge in thickness or polycarbonate .
all metal housings and visors must be powdercoat painted black in accordance with military standard milprfnuma or aamanum with a reflectance value not exceeding num percent as measured by astm enum .
for polycarbonate heads the black color must be incorporated into the material before the molding process .
the housing must be constructed of a noncorrosive material .
cast metal parts must have a minimum tensile strength of num ksi num mpa and sheet metal parts a minimum tensile strength of num ksi num mpa .
num die castings meet the requirements in astm bnum for the physical characteristics and chemical content for alloys snuma snumb scnuma scnumb sgnuma and sgnumb .
num return to table of contents num sand castings meet the requirements in astm bnum for the physical characteristics and chemical content for alloys snuma and csnuma .
num permanent mold castings meet the requirements in astm bnum for the physical characteristics and chemical content for alloys snuma and csnuma .
num polycarbonate polycarbonate housing assemblies doors and visors must be molded from ultraviolet stabilized polycarbonate plastic with a minimum thickness of num inches plus or minus num inch and provide the following physical properties table num test minimum requirement method specific gravity num astm d num vicat softening temp .
numf num numc astm d num brittleness temp .
below numf numc astm d num flammability selfextinguishing astm d num tensile strength yield num psi num mpa astm d num elongation at yield num num astm d num shear strength yield num psi num mpa astm d num izod impact strength numftlbin num jm astm d num fatigue strength num psi nummpa at num mm cycles astm d num num light emitting diode led pedestrian signal optical unit state standard provide a countdown pedestrian signal module meeting the requirements of the latest ite led pedestrian signal specifications .
num electrical wiring must be colorcoded no .
num awg or larger stranded wires with an approved num v outdoor insulation rating or equivalent .
wires must be a minimum of num feet long with selfinsulating slideon terminals with no bare wiring exposed where wires are secured .
the pedestrian signal must include a terminal block containing a minimum of five circuits each with two noncorrosive screwtype terminals .
each terminal must accommodate three no .
num awg conductors and be labeled for ease of identification .
the terminal block must not be obstructed and be visible when the housing is open .
num hardware all brackets used to mount pedestrian signals must be an aluminum alloy cast fitting pipe or equivalent material approved by the department .
aluminum and aluminum alloy bars rods wires profiles and tubes must meet astm bnum .
aluminumalloy sand casting must meet astm bnum .
all mounting hardware must be painted black with a reflectance value not exceeding num percent as measured by astm enum .
ensure that all assembly hardware including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
stainless steel bolts screws and studs must meet astm fnum .
nuts must meet astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized .
bolts studs and threaded rod must meet astm anum .
structural bolts must meet astm fnum grade anum .
num return to table of contents num installation .
num general use pedestrian signal assemblies capable of being maintained adjusted and disassembled with ordinary hand tools .
preassemble the pedestrian signal with the exception of mounting hardware prior to installation at the site .
construct the pedestrian signal assembly including the mounting hardware to be a weathertight unit .
conceal all conductors .
num placement position pedestrian signals and all mounting assembly members as either plumb or level and symmetrically arranged .
align signals in the line of the pedestrians vision for the crosswalk being used .
num installation sequence install all pedestrian signal assemblies at any intersection as a single operation unless a staged operation is approved by the engineer .
do not install signals at any intersection until all other signal equipment including the controller and pedestrian detectors are in place and ready for operation unless completely covered in accordance with num num .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price per assembly for pedestrian signal assembly furnished and installed including mounting hardware but not including poles or pedestals will include all materials and equipment as specified in the contract documents and all labor and materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
payment for removal of pedestrian signal assemblies will be made only when the polepedestal is to remain .
otherwise the removal of pedestrian signal assemblies are included in the removal of the pole or pedestal .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num pedestrian signal per assembly .
num return to table of contents section num midblock crosswalk enhancement assemblies num description .
furnish and install midblock crosswalk enhancement assemblies .
num materials .
use midblock crosswalk enhancement assemblies listed on the departments approved product list apl .
midblock crosswalk enhancement assemblies are classified as the following types in roadway light assemblies rectangular rapid flashing beacon assemblies rrfb and pedestrian hybrid beacon assemblies .
num inroadway light assemblies inroadway light assemblies must meet the physical and operational requirements of the latest edition of the mutcd chapter numn .
inroadway light assemblies shall be normally dark initiate operation only upon pedestrian actuation via a pedestrian pushbutton and cease operation at a predetermined time after the pedestrian actuation or with passive detection after the pedestrian clears the crosswalk .
the duration of the predetermined period shall be programmable and capable of matching the pedestrian clearance time for pedestrian signals as determined by mutcd procedures .
the timer that controls flashing must automatically reset each time a pedestrian call is received .
num rectangular rapid flashing beacon assemblies rrfb rrfb assemblies must include two rapidly and alternately flashed rectangular yellow indications having led array based pulsing light sources .
each rectangular yellow indication must be a minimum of five inches wide by two inches high .
num rrfb sign assemblies rrfb assemblies must be attached to a wnum num pedestrian or snum school crossing warning sign with a diagonal downward arrow wnum nump plaque a single column ground sign post and attachment hardware in accordance with standard plans index num .
the two rrfb indications shall be aligned horizontally with the longer dimension horizontal and with a minimum space between the two indications of approximately num inches measured from inside edge of one indication to inside edge of the other indication .
the outside edges of the rrfb indications including any housings shall not project beyond the outside edges of the wnum or snum sign .
num beacon flashing requirements the light intensity of the yellow indications shall meet the minimum specifications of society of automotive engineers sae standard jnum for class num directional flashing optical warning devices for authorized emergency maintenance and service vehicles .
the flash rate of each individual yellow indication as applied over the full onoff sequence of a flashing period of the indication shall not be between num and num flashes per second .
when activated the two yellow indications in each rrfb shall flash in one of the following patterns .
num num pattern the flash rate shall be num to num periods of flashing per minute .
each beacon shall have alternating flash rates but approximately equal periods of rapid pulsing light emissions and dark operation .
during each of its num to num flashing periods per minute the yellow indications on the left side of the rrfb shall emit two slow pulses of light after which the yellow indications on the right side of the rrfb shall emit four rapid pulses of light followed by a long pulse .
num return to table of contents num wws pattern the flash rate shall be num flash cycles per minute using the following sequence left side beacon on for num milliseconds msec both beacons off for num msec right side beacon on for num msec both beacons off for num msec left side beacon on for num msec both beacons off for num msec right side beacon on for num msec both beacons off for num msec both beacons on for num msec both beacons off for num msec both beacons on for num msec both beacons off for num msec .
num rrfb operation rrfb assemblies shall be normally dark initiate operation only upon pedestrian actuation via a pedestrian pushbutton and cease operation at a predetermined time after the pedestrian actuation or with passive detection after the pedestrian clears the crosswalk .
the duration of the predetermined period shall be programmable and capable of matching the pedestrian clearance time for pedestrian signals as determined by mutcd procedures .
the timer that controls flashing must automatically reset each time a pedestrian call is received .
all rrfbs associated with a single crosswalk including those with an advance crossing sign if used shall simultaneously commence operation of their alternating rapid flashing indications and shall cease operation simultaneously .
rrfbs must include an instruction sign with the legend push button to turn on warning lights mounted adjacent to or integral with each pedestrian pushbutton .
a confirmation light directed at and visible to pedestrians in the crosswalk must be installed integral to the rrfb to give confirmation that the rrfb is in operation .
num pedestrian hybrid beacon assemblies pedestrian hybrid beacon assemblies must meet the physical and operational requirements of the latest edition of the mutcd chapter numf .
the cabinet signals controller pedestrian detectors and other traffic control devices used to create a pedestrian hybrid beacon assembly must be listed on the apl .
num cabinets housings and hardware cabinets used as part of the midblock crosswalk enhancement assembly must meet the applicable criteria of section num .
all housings other than approved cabinets must be powder coat painted dull black fedstdnum with a reflectance value not exceeding num percent as measured by american society for testing and material enum .
cabinets and housings must prevent unauthorized access .
polemount assemblies shall allow installation on num inch outer diameter posts .
ensure all assembly hardware including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
stainless steel bolts screws and studs must meet astm fnum .
stainless steel nuts must meet astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized .
carbon steel bolts studs and threaded rod must meet astm anum .
structural bolts must meet astm fnum grade anum .
num electrical specifications equipment must operate on solar power or a nominal voltage of num v alternating current vac .
if the device requires operating voltages of less than num vac supply the appropriate voltage converter .
solar powered systems must be designed to provide num days of continuous operation without sunlight .
solar powered systems must automatically charge batteries and prevent overcharging and overdischarging .
solar powered systems must include a charge indicator and acdc battery charger .
num environmental specifications all electronic assemblies shall operate as specified during and after being subjected to the transients temperature voltage humidity num return to table of contents vibration and shock tests described in national electrical manufacturers association nema tsnum num num and num .
electronics must meet federal communications commission fcc title num subpart b section num .
num installation requirements .
restore any areas impacted by the installation of the crosswalk enhancement assembly to original condition unless otherwise shown in the plans .
install crosswalk enhancement assembly in accordance with the americans with disabilities act standards for transportation facilities .
num warranty .
ensure the midblock crosswalk enhancement assembly has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for two years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
ensure the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
num general all midblock crosswalk assemblies will include all materials equipment and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num inroadway light assembly the inroadway light assembly includes in roadway lights signs sign support structures cabinet electronics wiring and pedestrian detectors for a complete crossing .
solar panels are included in the cost of the assembly when shown in the plans .
num rectangular rapid flashing beacon assembly the rrfb assembly includes a rectangular beacon and signs for each approach sign support structure cabinet electronics wiring and pedestrian detector .
solar panels are included in the cost of the assembly when shown in the plans .
num pedestrian hybrid beacon assembly the contract unit price for each pedestrian hybrid beacon assembly will consist of all labor and materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
the assembly includes the numsection signal hardware and backplate .
pedestrian signals cabinet signs mast arms strain poles or other support structures and signal cable will be paid under the applicable sections for each item .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num inroadway light assembly per assembly item no .
num rectangular rapid flashing beacon assembly per assembly item no .
num pedestrian hybrid beacon assembly per assembly num return to table of contents section num mast arm span wire and pole mounting assemblies num description .
furnish and install mounting assemblies for vehicular and pedestrian traffic signals signs cameras detectors and other devices in accordance with the contract documents .
num materials .
num general use mounting assemblies listed on the departments approved product list apl .
meet the requirements of section num .
fastening hardware such as bolts nuts washers set screws studs ubolts cable and cable swags must be provided by the mounting assembly manufacturer must be sae type num or num stainless steel .
hardware studs bolts and ubolts must be a minimum of num inch diameter unless otherwise specified in this section .
sae grade num bolts and nuts are also acceptable .
metallic mounting assemblies must meet astm bnum for corrosion resistance .
connections that provide an entrance to the interior of a traffic device must be weatherresistant .
all assemblies must be constructed to support the weight of any combination of signal indications with all accessories such as back plates and visors .
connections between signal disconnect and disconnect hanging hardware must be of the tristud design unless otherwise specified .
tristud washers must be a minimum num inches thick unless otherwise specified in this section .
connections that use a serrated edge for positioning and alignment must have a num tooth serration connection two inch i.d .
capable of providing positive positioning and alignment of the signal in num degree increments .
the serrated teeth must be clean and sharp and at least num inch wide and num inch deep .
the connection between the teeth of the signal and the upper bracket must be weather resistant .
design mounting assemblies capable of providing adjustment in multiple directions for proper alignment of the attached traffic device and to prevent rotation around the vertical axis or misalignment after installation .
studs may be cast directly into the aluminum during the casting process or tapped and locked with a locking material .
in each case a pullout force must be provided .
messenger wire clamps must be extruded aluminum six inches long or cast ubolt type .
torque specifications must be included with all assembly installation instructions if torque specifications are specified by the manufacturer .
num product identification mounting assemblies must be permanently marked with the name or trademark of the manufacturer part number and date of manufacture .
identification must be cast into or metalmarked on the assembly in a legible manner .
when the assembly is made up of multiple components each component must be identified with the manufacturers name or trademark .
num finish unless otherwise specified mounting assemblies and components must be supplied with a natural finish with mill scale removed in accordance with military standard milprfnuma or aama num and must meet the requirements of astm num and astm dnum .
disconnect interior and exterior and disconnect hub must be powdercoat painted dull black federal standard numanum with a reflectance value not exceeding num return to table of contents num percent as measured by astm enum .
all finished surfaces must have a smooth finish free from cracks blowholes shrinks excessive material and other flaws .
num mast arm mounting assemblies mast arm mounting assemblies must include the following components mast arm saddle swivel attachment cables with cable clamp mechanism or bands support tube and top and bottom support arms .
mast arm mounting assemblies clamps must be aluminum or stainless steel and must have a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum astm bnum or astm anum .
mast arm mounting assemblies must be designed to be attached to a mast arm by cables or bands .
num saddle saddles must be aluminum or stainless steel and must have a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum astm bnum or astm anum .
the saddle must be designed to be secured to the mast arm with no movement when num pounds of downward force is applied to the completed vehicular traffic signal assembly .
num swivel swivels must be aluminum or stainless steel and must have a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum astm bnum or astm anum .
the swivel must provide at least two connection devices to secure the support tube to the swivel and be configured to permit the support tube to provide adjustment in multiple directions in a plane parallel to the mast arm .
any castings used to attach the support tube to the swivel must be manufactured from the same alloy as the swivel .
num saddle attachment cables and bands mast arm saddle attachment cables must be num inch minimum diameter type num or num stainless steel aircraft type wire strand cable .
the swage at the ends of the cable used to tighten the cable against the saddle must be type num or num stainless steel with a minimum num inch diameter thread .
the swage must permit use of a wrench to prevent rotation while tightening the nut at the end of the swage .
if the attachment cable does not have swaged clamp screws at each end doubleended the unclamped end of the cable must be sintered welded or otherwise secured without adhesives to prevent unraveling of the cable .
banding must use two type num or num series stainless steel num inch wide bands and type num stainless steel buckles clamp screws .
deburr the edges of the bands .
num cable clamp mechanism mast arm mount components used to secure the cable to the saddle must be aluminum or stainless steel and must have a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum astm bnum or astm anum .
num support tube support tubes used in mast arm mounting assemblies must be aluminum or stainless steel and must have a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum or astm anum .
a gusseted hollow design may be used to provide for the routing of necessary wiring .
the tube crosssectional areas principal moments of inertia must average at a minimum that of a num num inch standard aluminum schedule num pipe and the crosssectional metal area must not be less than that of a num inch schedule num pipe .
the bottom portion of the tube that supports the vertical load of the hanging device must be threaded using national pipe thread taper npt national pipe thread straight nps nonthreaded ubolt secured or a continuous arm support tube .
threaded support tubes that are fully slotted must have an aluminum insert in the num inch slot extending a minimum of num inch beyond the threaded section .
to provide easy installation num return to table of contents of wiring the tube must have a minimum num inch wire entrance slot running the full length of the tube or either stopping a minimum of num inches above the threaded or ubolt secured end .
edges of slot must be supported with internal gusseting .
the tube interior and slot must be free of sharp edges that may damage wiring .
provide an easily installed and removable uv stabilized seal to completely fill the wire entrance slot after installation .
num top support arm the top support arm of the mounting assembly must be of onepiece solid construction or continuous arm with support tube and capable of holding the signal head firmly in place .
top support arms must be aluminum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum or be die cast with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi .
a one or two piece top arm is acceptable .
for a one piece top arm use at least two num inch minimum diameter type num or num stainless steel set screws to secure its position on the support tube .
when a twopiece top arm is used hardware required to connect components of the top arm must be num inch minimum diameter type num or num stainless steel .
the top support arm must have three num inch num uncnumb threaded holes to accept bolts for a tristud washer and gasket or at least one imbedded or tapped and locked num inch num threaded stud within the industrys standard num tooth serrated circular design that facilitates num degree increment positioning .
provide num inch thick minimum type num or num stainless steel washers nuts and lock washers for attaching signal heads .
a rubber washer with dimensions similar to the large stainless steel washer must be provided for traffic signals .
when mast arm clamps are used to support illuminated signs with tristud arrangements a rubber washer with dimensions similar to the steel washer must also be used .
num bottom support arm the bottom support arm when not continuous arm with support tube must be hollow to allow the routing and enclosing of all signal wiring .
bottom support arms must be aluminum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum or be die cast with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi .
plastic bottom arm covers must be constructed of abs with a uv inhibitor and be strong enough to contain the signal cable in the bottom arm cavity without bending during installation and warping over time .
the end of the bottom support arm that attaches to the support tube must have a num num inch steel coupling imbedded and cast directly into the part during the solidification of the aluminum or a num inch npt or nps pipe thread cut directly into the casting .
for nonthreaded versions the arm must allow the support tube to sit a minimum of num inches into an arm pocket and be secured to the arm with minimum num full ushape ubolt to distribute the load evenly to the lower arm casting .
the end of the bottom support arm that connects to the signal must have either three equally spaced and plumb imbedded num inch type num or num stainless steel threaded studs located in the center of the num tooth serrated circular design or three num inch num unc numb tapped holes to accept bolts for a tristud washer .
num arms with steel coupling if a threaded steel coupling is imbedded into the casting the bottom arm must be aluminum alloy numf in accordance with astm bnum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi meeting all standards listed in astm bnum including chemical composition listed in table num and material mechanical properties listed in table num .
the end of the bottom support arm must have at least two num inch diameter type num or num stainless steel set screws to secure its position on the support tube .
num return to table of contents num threaded arms if threads are cut directly into the casting the bottom arm must be aluminum alloy numf in accordance with astm bnum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and elongation of num in a two inch section meeting all standards listed in astm bnum including chemical composition listed in table num and material mechanical properties listed in table num .
as an alternative the arm can be die cast in aluminum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi .
the end of the bottom arm must have at least two num inch minimum diameter type num or num stainless steel set screws to secure its position on the support tube .
num nonthreaded arms lower arm must be aluminum num having a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and meeting all standards listed in astm bnum including chemical composition listed in table num and material mechanical properties listed in table num .
the arm must have a locator tab to receive the support tube and be secured by a ubolt .
num continuous arm support tube the continuous arm support tube must be of single form construction to support the weight of any combination of signal indicators with all accessories such as backplates and visors .
continuous support tubes must be type num or num stainless steel with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm anum or aluminum with a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum .
the continuous arm support tube attachment to the signal head must have a minimum of two num type num or num stainless steel bolts nuts and washers .
a rubber seal must be provided between the support tube and signal head .
num span wire mounting assemblies span wire mounting assemblies must include a span wire clamp a hanging device such as a drop pipe adjustable hanger or adjustable pivotal hanger with extension bar messenger clamp disconnect hanger and multibrackets .
num span wire clamp span wire clamps must be aluminum or stainless steel and must have a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum astm bnum or astm anum .
num drop pipe drop pipe hangers must be galvanized num inch steel aluminum having a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum and have npt on each end for assembly .
num aluminum adjustable hanger aluminum adjustable hangers must be aluminum alloy numf in accordance with astm bnum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and elongation of num in a two inch section meeting the chemical composition listed in table num and material mechanical properties listed in table num in astm bnum .
num stainless steel adjustable hanger stainless steel adjustable hangers must be type num or num stainless steel with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm anum .
num aluminum adjustable pivotal hanger aluminum pivotal hangers must be aluminum alloy numf in accordance with astm bnum with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and elongation of num in a two inch section meeting the chemical composition listed in table num and material mechanical properties listed in table num in astm bnum .
num stainless steel adjustable pivotal hanger stainless steel pivotal hangers must be either type num or num stainless steel with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm anum .
num return to table of contents num aluminum extension bar extension bars used to extend the length of the adjustable hanger must be tnumtnum extrusion aluminum having a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum .
num stainless steel extension bar stainless steel extension bar used to extend the length of adjustable hangers must be type num or num stainless steel with a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi and a minimum yield strength of num ksi in accordance with astm anum .
num disconnect hanger attach signal heads to the disconnect hanger in a manner that removal does not disconnect or disturb the wiring leads terminated inside the signal head assembly .
the disconnect hanger must be supplied with the following as a minimum num .
wired screw typecompression terminal block and wiring rated at num vac root mean square rms with num or num circuits .
the terminal block must be easily accessible for connection of the field wiring .
attach the terminal block to the disconnect with type num or num stainless steel or brass fastening hardware .
num .
weather resistant grommets in each signal cable entrance of the disconnect hanger to prevent insect and animal access and to protect the signal cable from chafing .
num .
a two inch opening in the top of the disconnect hanger with an integral serrated area or num inch npt threaded top section to interface with the hanger method employed above it .
num .
a securable door that allows access to all areas of the interior .
the door securing device must be type num or num stainless steel and captive .
hinge or groove pins for the door must be type num num num or num stainless steel .
num multibrackets top and bottom multi brackets used in the assembly of span wire mounted multidirectional signals must be constructed of aluminum having a minimum yield strength of num ksi and a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi per astm bnum .
top brackets must be of onepiece hollow design with a crosssectional diameter of at least num inch i.d .
for receiving signal wires .
the wall thickness must be at least num inch .
each top bracket num way numway and numway must have a two inch diameter hole with integral serrated boss as specified above in the top side of the bracket for receiving a num num inch entrance fitting .
the underside of the top bracket must have a covered hole of at least three inches in diameter for the installation of the signal wires .
bottom brackets must be of onepiece solid construction and must hold the signal heads firmly in place .
for the five section cluster configuration provide num inch thick type num or num stainless steel tristud washers and nylock nuts with lock washers to secure the top and lower signal sections of the cluster to the top multi bracket .
washer distortion must not occur after assembly of the five section cluster .
multibrackets must include all fastening hardware necessary to attach to the signal .
num pole pedestal and post mounting assemblies all trunnions brackets and suspensions used in mounting vehicular and pedestrian signals to concrete steel aluminum or wood poles must be an aluminum alloy cast fitting pipe or equivalent as approved by the engineer .
the aluminum alloy must have a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num ksi in accordance with astm bnum astm bnum or astm bnum .
num return to table of contents pole sidemount brackets used for pedestrian signals may be constructed of polycarbonate material .
num mounting assemblies for signs cameras detectors and other traffic control devices mounting assemblies or assembly components used for signs cameras detectors and other traffic control devices must be constructed of the same material and meet the same mechanical and chemical properties as mounting assemblies for signals .
num miscellaneous mounting components miscellaneous mast arm span wire and pole mounting components and accessories included with assemblies must meet the mechanical properties for its associated main assembly components or be listed separately on the apl .
mounting assemblies not approved with a specific primary device such as a camera detector etc .
must be approved and listed separately on the apl .
num installation .
install all mounting assemblies in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num warranty .
ensure mounting assemblies have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of three years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
the warranty must include providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price per assembly for each mounting assembly furnished and installed will include all materials specified in the contract documents and all labor equipment and miscellaneous items necessary for a complete and acceptable installation .
no separate payment will be made for mounting assemblies for new installations .
all incidentals required by the plans for new installations including mounting hardware will be included in cost of the new signal sign camera detector or other traffic control device .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num mast arm span wire and pole mounting assemblies each num return to table of contents section num vehicle detection system num description furnish and install a vehicle detection system in accordance with the contract documents .
use vehicle detection systems and loop sealant that meet the requirements of this specification and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num materials num classification of types vehicle detection and data collection systems are classified by the type of function they perform and the type of technology that they employ .
num functional types provide the functional type detailed in the plans .
num vehicle presence detection systems vehicle presence detection systems produce a corresponding output any time that a vehicle occupies the physical or virtual area of the detector .
num traffic data detection systems traffic data detection systems provide presence volume occupancy and speed data for the lanes they are configured to monitor .
num probe data detection systems probe data detection systems provide speed data and travel times for a road segment .
probe data detectors use automatic vehicle identification avi technologies to establish a unique identifier for each vehicle they detect .
this identifier is then transmitted to a central site where it can be matched to past or future detections of the same vehicle at different detector locations .
num technology types provide the detection technology type detailed in the plans .
detection technology types include inductive loop video thermal microwave wireless magnetometer and avi systems .
num inductive loop an inductive loop detection system uses a minimum of one inductive loop and loop detector .
the system operates by energizing and monitoring wire embedded in the road surface to detect vehicle presence and provide an output to traffic controllers or other devices that can generate volume occupancy and speed data detection output .
num inductive loop detector units ensure rack mount inductive loop detector units meet the requirements of nema tsnum .
ensure shelf mount detector units meet the requirements of nema tsnum .
num loop wire use no .
num awg or no .
num awg stranded copper wire with type xhhw crosslinked polyethylene insulation and an additional outer sleeve composed of polyvinylchloride or polyethylene insulation that meets the requirements of international municipal signal association imsa num .
num shielded leadin cable use no .
num awg two conductor stranded copper wire with shield and polyethylene insulation meeting the requirements for imsa num .
num splicing material buttend connectors may be used for splicing the loop wire to the leadin cable .
buttend connectors must be noninsulated .
use resincore solder for soldered splices .
splicing tape must be selffusing silicone rubber .
ensure insulated tubing used to cover splice is heatshrinkable crosslinked polyethylene with a silicon sealant inside the tubing and an insulation rating of at least num v. num return to table of contents num loop sealant ensure loop sealant is intended for traffic loop embedding in both asphalt and concrete pavement .
ensure sealant is furnished in a one part or premeasured two part formulation meeting the requirements specified herein .
ensure that loop sealant is selfleveling when applied and is designed to be installed flush with the roadway surface .
ensure that loop sealant does not run out of unlevel slots as tested for viscosity using astm dnum at numf .
ensure loop sealant is tack free within a maximum of num hours from time of application and when cured as tested for tack free time using astm cnum at numf .
ensure loop sealant securely adheres to concrete and asphalt when installed in a num inch by num inch saw cut cured for num weeks at numf as tested for adhesion using visual inspection .
ensure loop sealant shows no visible signs of shrinkage after curing when installed in a num inch by num inch saw cut cured for num weeks at numf as tested for shrinkage using a dimensional measurement .
ensure loop sealant resists weather oils gasoline antifreeze and brake fluid as tested for absorption using astm dnum for water no .
num oil gasoline antifreeze and brake fluid for num hours .
ensure loop sealant resists penetration of foreign materials as tested for durometer hardness using astm dnum shore a for num hours .
ensure loop sealant resists cracking caused by expansion and contraction due to temperature changes as tested for tensile strength and elongation using astm dnum .
ensure loop sealant does not become brittle with age or temperature extremes as tested for weight loss cracking and chalking using astm cnum .
ensure loop sealant has a minimum shelf life of num months when stored per manufacturer recommendations .
loop sealant containers must have a label showing the manufacturers name or trademark model number date of manufacture or manufacturers batch number and installation instructions .
num video a video vehicle detection system vvds uses one or more cameras or an integrated thermal sensor and video analytics hardware and software to detect vehicle presence provides a detection output and generates volume occupancy and speed data .
num configuration and management ensure that the vvds is provided with software that allows local and remote configuration and monitoring .
ensure that the system can display detection zones and detection activations overlaid on live video inputs .
ensure that the vvds allows a user to edit previously defined configuration parameters including size placement and sensitivity of detection zones .
ensure that the vvds retains its programming in nonvolatile memory .
ensure that the detection system configuration data can be saved to a computer and restored from a saved file .
ensure that all communication addresses are user programmable .
ensure that the detection system software offers an open application programming interface api and software development kit available to the department at no cost for integration with third party software and systems .
num return to table of contents num detection camera provide a camera that is furnished or approved by the video detection system manufacturer and listed with the detection system on the apl .
num machine vision processor ensure the vvds includes a machine vision processor that allows video analysis presence detection data collection and interfaces for inputs and outputs as well as storage and reporting of collected vehicle detection data .
num communications ensure that the vvds includes a minimum of one serial or ethernet communications interface .
ensure the serial interface and connector conforms to telecommunications industry association tianum standards .
ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num bps error detection utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
ensure that wired ethernet interfaces provide a num base tx connection .
verify that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables and connectors comply with tianum .
ensure wireless communications are secure and that wireless devices are federal communications commission fcc certified .
ensure that the fcc identification number is displayed on an external label and that all detection system devices operate within their fcc frequency allocation .
ensure cellular communications devices are compatible with the cellular carrier used by the agency responsible for system operation and maintenance .
ensure the system can be configured and monitored via one or more communications interface .
num video inputs and outputs ensure that analog video inputs and outputs utilize bnc connectors .
num solid state detection outputs ensure outputs meet the requirements of nema tsnum num .
num electrical requirements ensure the system operates using a nominal input voltage of num v of alternating current vac .
ensure that the system will operate with an input voltage ranging from num to num vac .
if a system device requires operating voltages other than num vac supply a voltage converter .
num microwave a microwave vehicle detection system mvds transmits receives and analyzes a fcccertified lowpower microwave radar signal to detect vehicle presence provide a detection output and generate volume occupancy and speed data .
ensure that sidefire mvds sensors used for data collection have a minimum numfoot range and the capability to detect num lanes of traffic .
num configuration and management ensure that the mvds is provided with software that allows local and remote configuration and monitoring .
ensure that the system software can display detection zones and detection activations in a graphical format .
ensure that the mvds allows a user to edit previously defined configuration parameters including size placement and sensitivity of detection zones .
ensure that the mvds retains its programming in nonvolatile memory .
ensure that the detection system configuration data can be saved to a num return to table of contents computer and restored from a saved file .
ensure that all communication addresses are user programmable .
ensure that the detection system software offers an open api and software development kit available to the department at no cost for integration with third party software and systems .
num communications ensure that major components of the detection system such as the sensor and any separate hardware used for contact closures include a minimum of one serial or ethernet communications interface .
ensure the serial interface and connector conforms to tia num standards .
ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num bps error detection utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
ensure that wired ethernet interfaces provide a num base tx connection .
verify that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables and connectors comply with tianum .
ensure wireless communications are secure and that wireless devices are fcccertified .
ensure that the fcc identification number is displayed on an external label and that all detection system devices operate within their fcc frequency allocation .
ensure cellular communications devices are compatible with the cellular carrier used by the agency responsible for system operation and maintenance .
ensure the system can be configured and monitored via one or more communications interface .
num solid state detection outputs ensure outputs meet the requirements of nema tsnum num .
num electrical requirements ensure the microwave detector will operate with a nominal input voltage of num vdc .
ensure the microwave detector will operate with an input voltage ranging from num to num vac .
if any system device requires operating voltages other than num vac supply a voltage converter .
ensure that the detector is fcccertified and that the fcc identification number is displayed on an external label .
ensure that the detector has been granted authorization to operate within a frequency range established and approved by the fcc .
num wireless magnetometer a wireless magnetometer detection system wmds uses one or more batterypowered wireless sensors embedded in the road surface which communicates data by radio to a roadside receiver .
wireless magnetometer systems detect vehicle presence and provide a detection output to traffic controllers or other devices that can generate volume occupancy and speed data .
numconfiguration and management ensure that the detection system is provided with software that allows local and remote configuration and monitoring .
ensure that the wmds allows a user to edit previously defined configuration parameters .
ensure that the wmds retains its programming in nonvolatile memory .
ensure that the detection system configuration data can be saved to a computer and restored from a saved file .
ensure that all communication addresses are user programmable .
num return to table of contents ensure that the detection system software offers an open api and software development kit available to the department at no cost for integration with third party software and systems .
num communications ensure that components of the detection system such as sensors access points and contact closure cards include a minimum of one serial or ethernet communications interface .
ensure the serial interface and connector conforms to tia num standards .
ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num bps error detection utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
ensure that wired ethernet interfaces provide a num base tx connection .
verify that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables and connectors comply with tianum .
ensure wireless communications are secure and that wireless devices are fcccertified .
ensure that the fcc identification number is displayed on an external label and that all detection system devices operate within their fcc frequency allocation .
ensure cellular communications devices are compatible with the cellular carrier used by the agency responsible for system operation and maintenance .
ensure the system can be configured and monitored via one or more communications interface .
num solid state detection outputs ensure outputs meet the requirements of nema tsnum num .
num electrical requirements ensure the detection system will operate with an input voltage ranging from num to num vac .
if any system device requires operating voltages other than num vac supply a voltage converter .
num automatic vehicle identification avi an avi detection system uses one or more different methods to collect information that can be used to establish a unique identifier for each vehicle detected and the time and location that the vehicle was detected .
avi detection systems collect data using radiofrequency identification rfid optical character recognition magnetic signature analysis laser profiling bluetooth or other methods to establish vehicle identifier time and location .
num configuration and management ensure that the detection system is provided with software that allows local and remote configuration and monitoring .
num communications ensure that components of the detection system such as sensors controllers and processing hardware include a minimum of one serial or ethernet communications interface .
ensure the serial interface and connector conforms to tia num standards .
ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num bps error detection utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
ensure that wired ethernet interfaces provide a num base tx connection .
verify that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables and connectors comply with tianum .
ensure wireless communications are secure and that wireless devices are fcccertified .
ensure that the fcc identification number is displayed on an num return to table of contents external label and that all detection system devices operate within their fcc frequency allocation .
ensure cellular communications devices are compatible with the cellular carrier used by the agency responsible for system operation and maintenance .
ensure the system can be configured and monitored via one or more communications interface .
num probe data detector requirements num .
transponder readers ensure transponder readers are compatible with multiple tag protocols including allegro and the protocol defined in isonum numb .
num .
bluetooth readers ensure that bluetooth readers will operate using solar power and cellular communications .
ensure that bluetooth readers will operate with a nominal input voltage of num vdc .
num .
license plate readers ensure license plate readers do not require the use of visible strobes or other visible supplemental lighting .
num electrical requirements ensure the detection system will operate with an input voltage ranging from num to num vac .
if any system device requires operating voltages other than num vac supply a voltage converter .
num mechanical requirements for all detectors ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number and date of manufacture or serial number .
ensure that all parts are made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
ensure that all fasteners exposed to the elements are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
num environmental requirements for all detectors meet the environmental requirements of nema tsnum .
num vehicle presence detection system performance requirements ensure presence detectors provide a minimum detection accuracy of num .
ensure presence detectors meet the requirements for modes of operation in nema tsnum num .
num vehicle presence detection accuracy to verify conformance with the accuracy requirements in this section and as a precondition for listing on the apl sample data collected from the vehicle detection system will be compared against ground truth data collected during the same time by human observation or by another method approved by the fdot traffic engineering research laboratory terl .
ensure sample data is collected over several time periods under a variety of traffic conditions .
weight each data sample to represent the predominant conditions over the course of a numhour period .
samples will consist of num and numminute data sets collected at various times of the day .
representative data periods and their assigned weights are provided in table num .
table num data collection periods period intended to represent duration weight early morning predawn em num a.m. num a.m. num minutes num dawn da num a.m. num a.m. num minutes num am peak amp num a.m. num a.m. num minutes num late am offpeak laop num a.m. num p.m. num minutes num num return to table of contents noon no num p.m. num p.m. num minutes num afternoon offpeak aop num p.m. num p.m. num minutes num pm peak pmp num p.m. num p.m. num minutes num dusk du num p.m. num p.m. num minutes num night ni num p.m. num a.m num minutes num total sum of weights num for instance the sample gathered for the late am offpeak period is intended to represent typical traffic conditions between num a.m. and num p.m .
since the sample periods duration is num minutes and the actual period of time represented is num hours the multiplication factor or weight assigned is num the number of numminute intervals in a num hour period .
num calculation of vehicle presence detection accuracy compute presence detection accuracy as described in this subsection .
determine individual lane presence detection accuracy per period by subtracting from num percent the absolute difference of the total time monitored and the cumulative error time divided by total time expressed as a percentage .
in the equation in num em represents the early morning period .
the variable i represents a detector or detection zone and could vary from num n where n is the total number of detectors observed .
substitute other detector numbers and periods as necessary to determine accuracy for all detectors during each period i.e .
dawn am peak late am off peak etc .. variables used in the following equations are identified as follows pa presence detection accuracy tt total time cet cumulative error time duration of all false and missed calls ntotal number of detectors observed num early morning vehicle presence detection accuracy for a single detector expressed as a percentage num num det det det det x tt cet tt pa i i i i em em em em where i paem det presence detection accuracy of detector i during the early morning period .
i ttem det total time that detector i was monitored for instance the numminute minimum duration specified in table num for the early morning period .
i cetem det cumulative time that detector i was in an error state indicating a detection with no vehicle present or not indicating a detection when vehicle present during the monitoring period using human observation or another method approved by the engineer .
the period accuracy will be the arithmetic mean of all individual detector accuracies .
num return to table of contents in the equation in num em represents the early morning period and n is the total number of detectors tested .
substitute other periods as necessary to determine the accuracy for each period i.e .
dawn am peak late am offpeak etc .. num early morning vehicle presence detection accuracy for all detectors expressed as a percentage n pa pa n i em em i num det where paem average accuracy of all detectors during the early morning .
i paem det accuracy of detector i during early morning .
calculate the roadway segment accuracy over all periods using the equation in num .
num total vehicle presence detection accuracy for all detectors expressed as a percentage where patotal accuracy for all detectors for all periods paem accuracy of all detectors during early morning traffic conditions pada accuracy of all detectors during dawn traffic conditions paamp accuracy of all detectors during am peak traffic conditions palaop accuracy of all detectors during late am offpeak traffic conditions pano accuracy of all detectors during noon traffic conditions paaop accuracy of all detectors during afternoon offpeak traffic conditions papmp accuracy of all detectors during pm peak traffic conditions padu accuracy of all detectors during dusk traffic conditions pani accuracy of all detectors during night traffic conditions num vehicle presence detection system field acceptance testing verify presence detection accuracy at installed field sites using a reduced method similar to that described in num .
compare sample data collected from the detection system with ground truth data collected by human observation .
for site acceptance tests collect samples and ground truth data for each site for a minimum of five minutes during a peak period and five minutes during an offpeak period .
for presence detection at intersections ensure there are a minimum of three detections for each signal phase .
perform site acceptance tests in the presence of the engineer .
num traffic data detection system performance requirements provide a vehicle detection system capable of meeting the minimum total roadway segment accuracy levels of num for volume num for occupancy and num for speed for all lanes up to the maximum number of lanes that the device can monitor as specified by the manufacturer .
num data accuracy to verify conformance with the accuracy requirements in this section and as a precondition for listing on the apl sample data collected num num num num num num num num num num pa x x pa x pa x pa x pa x pa x pa pa x x pa pa ni du pmp aop no laop amp da em total num return to table of contents from the vehicle detection system will be compared against ground truth data collected during the same time by human observation or by another method approved by the terl .
ensure sample data is collected over several time periods under a variety of traffic conditions .
weight each data sample to represent the predominant conditions over the course of a numhour period .
samples will consist of num and numminute data sets collected at various times of the day .
representative data periods and their assigned weights are provided in table num .
num calculation of volume accuracy determine individual lane volume accuracy per period by subtracting from num percent the absolute difference of the total volume measured by the detector and the ground truth volume measurement divided by the ground truth volume measurement expressed as a percentage .
in the equation in num em represents the early morning period .
the subscript i represents a lane at the detection zone on the roadway segment and could vary from num n where n is the maximum number of lanes being detected .
substitute other lane numbers and periods as necessary to determine the accuracy for each lane during each period i.e .
dawn am peak late am offpeak etc .. variables and subscripts used in the equations below are identified as follows vt total volume vd vehicle detection data in this case count data gt ground truth measurement utilizing a reliable method approved by the engineer .
va volume accuracy num early morning volume accuracy for a lane expressed as a percentage num num ln ln ln ln x vt vt vt va i i i i gt em em gt em vd em where vaem lni volume accuracy for early morning traffic conditions in the i th lane .
vtem vdlni total volume for the numminute early morning period using the vehicle detector in the i th lane .
vtem gt lni total volume for the numminute early morning period in the i th lane using human observation or another method approved by the engineer .
the period volume accuracy will be the arithmetic mean of the lane volume accuracy over all lanes .
in the equation in num em represents the early morning period and n is the total number of lanes of detection on the roadway segment under test .
substitute other periods as necessary to determine the accuracy for each period i.e .
dawn am peak late am offpeak etc .. num early morning volume accuracy expressed as a percentage num return to table of contents n va va n i em em i num ln where vaem average volume accuracy for early morning traffic conditions for all lanes .
vaem lni volume accuracy for early morning traffic conditions in the i th lane .
calculate the total volume accuracy over all periods using the equation in num .
num total volume accuracy expressed as a percentage where vatotal volume accuracy for all lanes for all periods vaem volume accuracy for early morning traffic conditions vada volume accuracy for dawn traffic conditions vaamp volume accuracy for am peak traffic conditions valaop volume accuracy for late am offpeak traffic conditions vano volume accuracy for noon traffic conditions vaaop volume accuracy for afternoon offpeak traffic conditions vapmp volume accuracy for pm peak traffic conditions vadu volume accuracy for dusk traffic conditions vani volume accuracy for night traffic conditions num calculation of speed and occupancy accuracy calculate speed accuracy as discussed in this subarticle .
calculate occupancy accuracy using similar methods .
for computing the accuracy of the detector speed measurement the average speed readings obtained from the detection system are compared to ground truth values .
the equation in num represents the ground truth average speed computation procedure for a particular lane during a specific time period .
the equation in num represents the average speed computation procedure for a particular lane during a specific time period using data gathered from the detection system .
in the equations in num and num the time period described is the early morning period represented by em and the subscript k represents a vehicle traveling on the roadway and could vary from num k where k is the total number of vehicles in lane i during the time period under consideration .
the subscript i represents a lane in a roadway and could vary from num n where n is the total number of lanes of detection on the roadway segment .
substitute other lanes and periods as necessary and compute the accuracy for each lane for all time periods .
num va xnum xnum va xnum va xnum va xnum va xnum va xnum va xnum va xnum va va ni du pmp aop no laop amp da em total num return to table of contents variables and subscripts used in the equations below are identified as follows sa speed accuracy s speed of an individual vehicle k total number of vehicles in lane during time period veh vehicle num early morning average ground truth speed k k veh em gt avg em gt k i i s k s num ln ln num where saavg em gt lni represents the average ground truth vehicle speed for the i th lane during the early morning period .
i vehk sem gt ln represents the ground truth speed for the kth vehicle in the ith lane during the early morning period using human observation or another method approved by the engineer .
num early morning average vehicle detector speed k k veh em vd avg em vd k i i s k s num ln ln num where savg em vdlni represents the average speed recorded by the vehicle detector for the ith lane during the early morning period .
i vehk sem vdln represents the speed for the k th vehicle in the i th lane during the early morning period using the vehicle detector .
determine lane speed accuracy per period by subtracting from num percent the absolute difference of the average lane speed measured by the detector and the average lane ground truth speed divided by the average lane ground truth speed expressed as a percent .
in the equation in num em represents the early morning period .
the subscript i represents a lane of detection on a roadway and could vary from numn where n is the total number of lanes of detection on the roadway segment .
substitute other lanes as necessary to determine the accuracy for each period i.e .
dawn am peak late am offpeak etc .. num early morning lane speed accuracy expressed as a percentage num num ln ln ln ln i i i i em gt avg avg em gt avg em vd avg em s s s sa where saavg em lni represents the average speed accuracy during early morning traffic conditions for all vehicles that traveled in lane i of the roadway segment .
num return to table of contents the period speed accuracy will be the arithmetic mean of the lane speed accuracy computed using the equation in num over all lanes .
in the equation in num em represents the early morning period .
the subscript i represents a lane of detection on a roadway and could vary from num n where n is the maximum number of lanes on the roadway segment .
substitute data as necessary to determine the accuracy for each period i.e .
dawn am peak late am offpeak etc .. num early morning speed accuracy expressed as a percentage n sa sa n i em avg em i num ln where saem represents the average speed accuracy during early morning traffic conditions for all lanes of detection on the roadway segment .
calculate detector speed accuracy for the roadway segment over all periods using the equation in num .
num total roadway segment accuracy expressed as a percentage where satotal speed accuracy for all lanes for all periods saem speed accuracy for early morning traffic conditions sada speed accuracy for dawn traffic conditions saamp speed accuracy for am peak traffic conditions salaop speed accuracy for late am offpeak traffic conditions sano speed accuracy for noon traffic conditions saaop speed accuracy for afternoon offpeak traffic conditions sapmp speed accuracy for pm peak traffic conditions sadu speed accuracy for dusk traffic conditions sani speed accuracy for night traffic conditions num traffic data detection system field acceptance testing verify detector data accuracy at installed field sites using a reduced method similar to those described in num .
compare sample data collected from the detection system with ground truth data collected by human observation .
for site acceptance tests collect samples and ground truth data for each site for a minimum of five minutes during a peak period and five minutes during an offpeak period .
perform site acceptance tests in the presence of the engineer .
num probe data detection system performance requirements ensure that probe data detectors establish a unique and consistent identifier for each vehicle detected and the time and location that the vehicle was detected .
ensure that probe detectors provide a minimum penetration rate of num .
ensure probe data detection systems that match upstream and num num num num num num num num num num sa x x sa x sa x sa x sa x sa x sa x sa x sa sa ni du pmp aop no laop amp da em total num return to table of contents downstream detection of the same vehicle provide a minimum match rate of num .
ensure probe data detection systems meet a minimum total roadway segment speed and travel time accuracy level of num .
verify system performance over several time periods under a variety of traffic conditions as described in num .
num calculation of penetration rate penetration rate is defined as the volume of vehicles detected identified and time stamped divided by the number of qualified vehicles that passed within the detection area of the probe detector .
num early morning penetration rate expressed as a percentage num num gt em em gt em vd em v v r pr where prem penetration rate for early morning .
rem vd number of unique vehicle records captured by the vehicle detector .
vem gt total volume of vehicles that pass the detection area for the numminute early morning period using human observation or another method approved by the engineer .
num calculation of match rate match rate is the percentage of the total vehicle population of a road segment that is detected and matched at consecutive probe data detection sites .
num early morning match rate expressed as a percentage num num gt em em gt em vd em v v m mr where mrem match rate for early morning .
mem vd number of matched detections between two probe vehicle detection sites typically a pair of sites at each end of a roadway segment during early morning .
vem gt total volume of vehicles that pass the detection area for the numminute early morning period using human observation or another method approved by the engineer .
num calculation of probe data detection system speed and travel time accuracy calculate speed and travel time accuracy by comparing the speeds and travel times reported by the system against ground truth collected through human observation or another method approved by the engineer .
num installation requirements .
num installation requirements for all detectors install configure and demonstrate a fully functional vehicle detection system as shown in the plans .
connect all field equipment to the existing communication network and provide all materials specified in the contract documents .
install all equipment according to the manufacturers recommendations .
ensure that aboveground detectors can be mounted on existing poles or sign structures or on new poles as shown in the plans .
furnish all equipment with the appropriate power and communication cables .
install the power cable and the communication cables according to the manufacturers recommendation .
ensure that the cables comply with nec num return to table of contents sizing requirements and meet all other applicable standards specifications and local code requirements .
do not install communication cables in the same conduit or pull boxes as power cables carrying voltage greater than num vdcvac or current in excess of num amps .
cut all wires to their proper length before assembly .
do not double back any wire to take up slack .
neatly lace wires into cables with nylon lacing or plastic straps .
secure cables with clamps and provide service loops at all connections .
in the event that power to the vehicle detection system or a subcomponent thereof is interrupted ensure that the equipment automatically recovers after power is restored .
ensure that all programmable system settings return to their previous configurations and the system resumes proper operation .
num inductive loop detector installation install vehicle loops in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and standard plans index num .
num inductive loopdetector units adjust the operating frequency of each detector unit if required to prevent crosstalk of the units .
num saw cuts use a chalk line or equivalent method to outline the perimeter of the loop on the pavement and routes for leadin cables .
do not allow the saw cut in the pavement to deviate by more than num inch from the chalked line .
ensure that all saw cuts are free of any dust dirt or other debris and completely dry prior to installation of the loop wire loop wire twisted pair lead or leadin cable .
ensure that the top conductor of the loop wire or leadin cable is a minimum of num inch below the final surface of the roadway .
num loop wire ensure that all loops are wound in a clockwise manner and the first turn of the loop wire is placed in the bottom of the saw cut with each subsequent turn placed on top of the preceding turn .
push the loop wire to the bottom of the saw cut with a non metallic tool which will not damage the insulation .
tag and identify the clockwise lead of each loop .
use alternate polarity on adjacent loops .
ensure that the hold down material is nonmetallic is placed in the saw slot using segments num to num inches long spaced num inches apart and that the distance from the top of the hold down material to the final surface of the roadway is not less than num inches .
num loop wire twisted pair lead create a loop wire twisted pair lead by twisting the loop wire pair a minimum of num turns per foot to form a loop wire twisted pair lead from the edge of the loop to the pull box located adjacent to the roadway .
place only one loop wire twisted pair lead in a saw cut .
ensure that the distance between a twisted loop wire pair lead within the roadway is a minimum of num inches from any other twisted loop wire pair lead or loop until they are within num foot of the edge of pavement or curb at which point they may be placed closer together .
provide a minimum of num feet of twisted loop wire pair lead in the pull box located adjacent to the roadway .
do not route twisted loop wire pair lead directly through conduits to the cabinet unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num loop sealant prepare and apply loop sealant in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
ensure that the loop sealant has cured completely before allowing vehicular traffic to travel over the sealant .
num shielded leadin cable place the leadin cable in the bottom of the saw cut .
do not damage the insulation .
num return to table of contents install no more than four leadin cables in a saw cut .
ensure that the hold down material is not longer than num inch and that the distance from the top of the hold down material to the final surface of the roadway is not less than num inches .
num splicing perform the splicing in a pull box located off the roadway not in the roadway itself .
splice the black conductor of the leadin cable to the clockwise lead of the loop .
ensure that the ends of the cable jackets twisted pair and leadin are encased in the loop splice material .
ensure that each loop has an individual return to the cabinet and series splicing is performed on a separate terminal block in the cabinet .
num terminations using insulated terminal lugs terminate leadin cables or twisted pair loop wire on a terminal strip which is located in the controller or detector cabinet .
use a calibrated ratchet type crimping tool to attach the lugs to the conductors of the leadin cable or twisted loop wire .
num loop assembly identification identify and tag each loop assembly in the controller or detector cabinet by lane and movement number .
num inductive loop detector testing and turnon num series resistance obtain department of transportation traffic signal resistance measurement data sheets from the engineer .
measure and record the series resistance of each loop assembly on these data sheets .
leave a copy in the controller cabinet .
if the series resistance of a loop assembly is greater than num  inspect the loop assembly to find the cause of the excessive resistance .
correct the cause of the excessive resistance at no additional cost to the department .
num insulation resistance measure and record the insulation resistance of each loop assembly and verify that the resistance is greater than num m .
use a num vdc insulation tester to measure the resistance .
reference all measurements to a good earth ground ground rod metallic water pipe etc ..
disconnect the transient suppression devices from the loop assemblies before taking any measurements .
if the insulation resistance is less than num m determine if the leadin cable or the loop wire is causing the problem and replace the defective cable or loop wire at no additional cost to the department .
num loop detector turnon connect the loop assemblies to the appropriate inductive loop vehicle detectors and tune the detectors in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
separate the operating frequencies of vehicle detectors in adjacent lanes by at least num khz .
verify operation proper operation in accordance with num .
num video detector installation install cameras and configure detection zones and settings in accordance with the contract documents manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
submit configuration settings including but not limited to detector names communication settings and output assignments and configuration file backups to the engineer .
submit a graphical depiction of each camera site its pole location mounting height the ratio of distance away from the camera versus the mounting height the cameras mounting type i.e .
pole or structure camera aiming procedures and the placement of the proposed detection zone for each lane .
do not use coaxial cable runs in excess of num feet .
mount and aim cameras in a manner that eliminates as much environmentally generated glare as possible .
num return to table of contents num microwave detector installation install detector and configure detection zones and settings in accordance with the contract documents manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
submit configuration settings including but not limited to detector names communication settings and output assignments and configuration file backups to the engineer .
num wireless magnetometer installation install in accordance with the contract documents manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
ensure that materials used for the installation of magnetometers in the road surface have cured completely before allowing vehicular traffic to travel over them .
num avi detector installation install in accordance with the contract documents manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer .
num warranty .
ensure that the detection system has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of num years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
ensure the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each inductive loop detector and per assembly for loop assembly will include all equipment materials as specified in the contract documents and all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
the contract unit price for each component of an mvds vvds wmds or avi detection system will include furnishing placement and testing of all materials and equipment and for all tools labor equipment hardware operational software packages and firmware supplies support personnel training shop drawings warranty documentation and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num inductive loop detector each .
item no .
num loop assembly per assembly .
item no .
num vehicle detection system microwave each .
item no .
num vehicle detection system video each .
item no .
num vehicle detection system wireless magnetometer each .
item no .
num vehicle detection system avi each .
num return to table of contents section num signal priority and preemption systems num description .
furnish and install a signal priority and preemption system as shown in the plans .
the signal preemption system must recognize and respond to the priority of each user .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
use signal priority and preemption system equipment listed on the departments approved product list apl .
ensure that all materials furnished assembled fabricated or installed are new products .
signal priority and preemption system equipment may utilize optical gps and radio frequency based technologies .
num functional requirements ensure that invehicle equipment operates without requiring any action from the vehicle operator or occupants once power is applied .
num security the system must include features that secure the system and restrict its configuration and operation to authorized users and vehicles only .
num vehicle identification the system must be able to assign a unique identifier for each authorized vehicle .
the system must be able to associate the identifier with vehicle information such as vehicle classification e.g .
fire police rescue transit owneroperator and priority level .
num configuration and management the system must allow authorized local and remote users to set and read all userprogrammable features and retrieve data collected by the system .
the manufacturer must provide computer software required to configure operate and maintain the system at no additional cost to the department .
num logging the system installed in the field cabinet must store a record of events including time vehicle id class priority level and approaching direction for all vehicles detected .
the log must operate on a firstin first out fifo principle with a minimum capacity of num events .
num detection range and accuracy the priority and preemption system must be capable of detecting and identifying multiple authorized vehicles at various ranges up to num feet .
the system must be able to determine the approaching direction of authorized vehicles .
the detection range and programming of emergency high priority and transit signal low priority preemption shall be adjustable from within the traffic signal cabinet .
high priority calls must override low priority calls .
the system must service preemption calls having equal priority on a first come firstserved basis .
num preemption system cabinet electronics the priority and preemption system must be compatible with nema ts num nema ts num type num and type num traffic signal controllers and their respective cabinets .
the system must be able to provide calls to the controller via input file and detector rack .
the system must include two channel or four channel detector card units compatible with nema ts num vnum .
the system must include a shelf mount option .
the system must be able to provide emergency preemption high priority and transit signal low priority preemption calls to the controller .
detectors must include num return to table of contents programmable timers that allow the operator to configure detector call extension as well as limit the length of channel output calls .
channel outputs must deliver a constant signal while emergency vehicles are detected for high priority preemption activation .
channel outputs must deliver a pulsed output for low priority preemption activation .
inputs and outputs must be optically isolated .
num serial interface ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num kbps error detection procedures utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
serial interface ports may utilize rjnum connectors dsub connectors or screw terminals .
num network interface ensure that local area network lan connections support the requirements detailed in the institute of electrical and electronics engineers ieee ieee num standard for num ethernet connections .
ensure that the connector complies with applicable electronic industries alliance eia and telecommunications industry association tia requirements .
num optical preemption detectors optical preemption detectors must respond to light impulses generated from a visible or infrared light source .
num intersection radiogps modules radiogps preemption systems must include radiogps modules that transmit a beacon signal and receive data transmitted by radiogps vehicle equipment .
num mechanical specifications ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number and date of manufacture or serial number .
ensure that every conductive contact surface or pin is goldplated or made of a noncorrosive conductive metal .
do not use selftapping screws on the exterior of the assembly .
all external parts must be made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
detector cards must include indicators for power and vehicle detection .
detector cards must include a test switch that can be used to manually generate detector calls that the system provides during normal operations .
num electrical specifications provide equipment that operates on a nominal voltage of num volts alternating current vac .
if the device requires operating voltages of less than num vac supply the appropriate voltage converter .
num environmental specifications ensure system electronics perform all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema ts num sections num num and num .
detectors and detector connections that are exposed to the elements must be weatherproof and designed for outdoor use .
num installation .
installation of materials must be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
install the emergency preemption system including installation of detectors with all necessary hardware and software mounting hardware cabling and all other associated electronics in cabinet necessary to create a fully functional emergency preemption system .
ensure that status indicators remain unobstructed and visible .
num field testing subject the system to field acceptance tests fats .
develop and submit a test plan for fats to the engineer for approval .
the engineer reserves the right to witness all fats .
num return to table of contents num warranty .
ensure that the manufacturer will furnish replacements for any part or equipment found to be defective during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency within num calendar days of notification .
ensure that the priority and preemption system has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for five years .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each signal priority and preemption system furnished and installed will include furnishing placement and testing of all equipment and materials and for all tools labor hardware operational software packages and firmware supplies support personnel training shop drawings documentation and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num signal priority and preemption system num return to table of contents section num pedestrian detection system num description .
install a pedestrian detection system .
use pedestrian detection systems and components listed on the departments approved product list apl .
pedestrian detection systems are classified into three categories standard pedestrian pushbutton detectors accessible audibletactile pedestrian pushbutton detectors and thermal passive detectors .
the components of the pedestrian detection system include pushbuttons pedestrian actuation signs electronics wiring and mounting hardware .
num materials .
num standard pedestrian pushbutton detector pushbuttons must be raised from or flush with their housings and be a minimum of num inches in the smallest dimension .
the pushbutton must require no more than num pounds of force to activate .
the detector must be weathertight and tamper resistant .
num housing the housing must be a two piece unit consisting of a base housing and a removable cover .
the housing must be cast aluminum meeting the physical characteristics and chemical content established in astm bnum for alloys snuma and csnuma .
the housing or adapter saddle must conform to the shape of a pole and provide a flush secure fit .
saddles must be of the same material and construction as the housing .
pushbuttons for wood pole mounting must have threaded holes for num inch conduit provided in the housing top or bottom .
a num inch hole with an insulated bushing shall be provided through the back of the housing .
unused openings shall be closed with a weatherproof closure and painted to match the housing .
the housing must have a powdercoat finish and painted in accordance with military standard milprfnuma .
the housing must be permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number date of manufacture and serial number .
num pushbutton the pushbutton must include a normally open mechanical phenolic enclosed positiveacting springloaded audible i.e .
click snapaction switch with single pole single throw contacts or a piezo driven solid state switch rated for a minimum of num v. the piezo driven solid state switch when activated must give an audible i.e .
twotone chirp and visual indication of actuation .
the visual indication must remain illuminated until the pedestrians walking person symbolizing walk signal indication is displayed .
switch connections inside the housing must allow wiring and installation without binding .
the switch must have a design life of one million operations minimum at rated load .
num electrical requirements the wiring must be no .
num awg stranded minimum with num v outdoor insulation rating .
num accessible audibletactile pedestrian pushbutton detector the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must consist of all electronic control equipment wiring mounting hardware pushbuttons and pedestrian actuation signs designed to provide both a pushbutton with a raised vibrating tactile arrow on the button as well as a variety of audible indications for differing pedestrian signal functions .
num electronic control equipment the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must include electronic control equipment that is programmable and adjustable using a num return to table of contents laptop computer or vendor supplied programmer .
electronic control equipment must be able to be installed within a traffic controller cabinet or within a pedestrian signal housing .
electronic control equipment installed within a traffic controller cabinet must allow the use of up to num pushbuttons num maximum per channel with a single traffic controller cabinet .
the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must receive timing from walk and dont walk signals .
num audible messages audible messages must be programmable .
all audible messages and tones must emanate from the accessible pedestrian pushbutton housing .
the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must utilize digital audio technology .
the system shall have at a minimum three programmable locator tones .
the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must have independent minimum and maximum volume limits for the locator tone walk and audible beaconing features .
the wait message must only annunciate once per actuation .
num pushbutton locator tone the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must provide independent ambient sound adjustment for the locator tone feature .
the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must allow the locator tone to be deactivated .
num vibrating pushbutton vpb the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must include a vibrating pushbutton vpb .
the vpb must be a single assembly containing an ada compliant vibrotactile directional arrow button weatherproof audible speaker and pedestrian actuation sign with optional placard braille messages .
the vpb tactile arrow must be num inches in length be field adjustable to two directions and require no more than num pounds of applied force to activate .
num conflict monitoring the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must monitor the walk condition for conflict operation .
the accessible pedestrian detector system must disable the walk functionality if a conflict is detected .
num cabinet control unit ccu the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector may include a ccu for interfacing and connecting the system .
the ccu shall have labeled led indicators for each channel operation .
the ccu must reset upon loss of internal communication .
num inputs and outputs all inputs and outputs must use milspec multi pin connectors .
num inputs walk and dont walk inputs must be optically isolated num volts acdc numma max .
general purpose inputs must be optically isolated num num volts acdc numma max .
num outputs outputs must be optically isolated num volts acdc peak numma solid state fused contact closures .
ccus must include a normally open relay contact fault output .
num communication the ccu must include an ethernet interface .
the ccu must have an integral web server that provides information on audibletactile pedestrian pushbutton detector status access to event logs and provides for remote configuration of accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector system options .
vpbs must include an ethernet serial or usb programming interface .
num thermal passive detectors tpd the tpd must consist of all electronic control equipment wiring and mounting hardware .
num return to table of contents num general a tpd system uses one or more sensors and analytics hardware and software to detect pedestrian movement presence and provides a detection output .
num configuration and management ensure that the tpd is provided with software that allows local and remote configuration and monitoring .
ensure that the system can display detection zones and detection activations overlaid on live thermal inputs .
ensure that the tpd allows a user to edit previously defined configuration parameters including size placement and sensitivity of detection zones .
ensure that the tpd retains its programming in nonvolatile memory .
ensure that the detection system configuration data can be saved to a computer and restored from a saved file .
ensure that all communication addresses are user programmable .
num solid state detection outputs ensure outputs meet the requirements of nema tsnum num .
num electrical requirements ensure the system operates using a nominal input voltage of numv of alternating current vac .
ensure that the system will operate with an input voltage ranging from num to num vac .
if a system device requires operating voltages other than num vac supply a voltage converter .
num electrical all wiring must meet applicable nec requirements .
the accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector must operate using a nominal input voltage of num v alternating current vac .
if any device requires nominal input voltage of less than num vac furnish the appropriate voltage converter .
accessible pedestrian pushbutton detector control electronics that are mounted in a pedestrian signal head must be able to receive power from the walk and dont walk circuits of the signal head .
control electronics shall not require more than four wires for each pushbutton connection and no more than two wires for each controller pedestrian input .
voltage at the pushbutton shall not exceed num vac .
num mechanical equipment must be permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number date of manufacture and serial number .
do not use selftapping screws on the exterior of the assembly .
ensure that all parts are made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
ensure that all assembly hardware including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
stainless steel bolts screws and studs must meet astm fnum .
nuts must meet astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized .
bolts studs and threaded rod must meet astm anum .
structural bolts must meet astm fnum grade anum .
enclosures must have a nema numx rating .
pushbutton housings for intersections must be black .
num environmental ensure equipment performs all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema tsnum sections num num and num .
num warranty .
ensure that pedestrian detection systems have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of num years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num num and section num .
ensure the warranty includes providing replacements within num calendar num return to table of contents days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num installation .
install pedestrian detectors at the locations and in a manner as shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
ensure all detectors are the same manufacturer and model .
pushbuttons mounted on wood poles must be serviced by a conduit riser .
pushbuttons mounted on steel or aluminum poles pedestals or posts must be serviced by wiring inside the pole .
pushbuttons mounted on existing concrete poles may be serviced by a conduit riser .
pushbuttons mounted on new concrete poles or pedestals must be serviced by wiring on the inside .
a pedestrian actuation sign must be included with each pushbutton assembly .
provide the sign type size and legend as specified on the plans or as directed .
tactile arrows of accessible pedestrian pushbuttons must align parallel with the direction of the crossing .
the engineer will direct any variation from the locations shown .
when mounting place the detector housing or saddle in complete contact with the pole or controller cabinet .
when a post is required in the installation of the pedestrian detector restore the area around the post to its original condition or as required by the plans .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for pedestrian detectors will be paid per each and will include the pedestrian actuation sign all mounting hardware wiring materials and equipment and all labor and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
payment for poles pedestals and posts will be made under their respective pay item numbers .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num pedestrian detector each .
num return to table of contents section num traffic controller assemblies num description .
furnish and install a traffic controller assembly or flashing intersection control beacon controller assembly as shown in the plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
use only controller components listed on the departments approved product list apl .
traffic controller assemblies and intersection control beacon controller assemblies must be permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number and serial number .
markings must be visible after installation .
provide a traffic controller assembly consisting of a traffic controller traffic controller accessories including monitors load switches flasher flash transfer relay power supplies and other equipment wired into a controller cabinet to make a complete and operational assembly .
all traffic controller assemblies must provide functionality that meets or exceeds operational characteristics including ntcip support as described in nema tsnum .
num traffic controller meet the requirements of section num .
num traffic controller accessories meet the requirements of section num .
num controller cabinet meet the requirements of section num .
num flashing intersection control beacon controller assembly a flashing intersection control beacon controller assembly must consist of a type num flasher wired into a type num controller cabinet to make a complete and operational assembly .
num installation requirements .
num controller cabinets meet the requirements of section num .
num field wiring meet the requirements of sections num and num .
num grounding meet the requirements of sections num and num .
num equipment placement install all equipment in the cabinet in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price per assembly for traffic controller assembly or intersection control beacon controller assembly will include all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num intersection control beacon controller assembly per assembly .
item no .
num num traffic controller assembly per assembly .
num return to table of contents section num traffic controllers num description .
furnish and install a nema model num model num or atc controller unit as shown in the plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
use traffic controllers listed on the departments approved product list apl .
ensure equipment is permanently marked with the manufacturers name or trademark part number and serial number .
controllers must meet the following applicable industry standards nema tsnum controller nema tsnum nema tsnum controller nema tsnum model num controller caltrans tees num model num controller caltrans tees num atc controller aashtoitenema atc numb all nema tsnum model num and atc controllers must provide functionality that meets or exceeds operational characteristics including ntcip support as described in nema tsnum num .
if shown in the plans new installations must include controllers that will num .
deactivate the dimming circuit of led street lighting as shown in the plans during pedestrian activations .
pedestrian detector diagnostics must be activated when this feature is used .
num .
capture all mandatory eventbased data elements listed in supplemental requirement srnum supplemental traffic controller high resolution data logging requirements as published on the departments state traffic engineering and operations office website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govtraffictraf_sysproductspecifications.shtm .
num method of measurement .
no separate payment will be made for the controller payment is included with the traffic controller assembly .
num return to table of contents section num traffic cabinets num description .
furnish and install traffic cabinets as shown in the plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
num general use traffic cabinets and accessories that are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
cabinets must be permanently marked with a label including the manufacturers name or trademark modelpart number and the year and month of manufacture .
place the label on the inside of the main door using a water resistant method .
the label must be visible after installation .
if shown in the plans new installations must include controller cabinets that will interface with the dimming circuit of led street lighting with an auxiliary relay .
painted and unpainted cabinets must meet the applicable requirements in aluminum cabinets nema tsnum num .
num nema traffic signal controller cabinets provide nema traffic signal controller cabinets with all terminals and facilities necessary for traffic signal control meeting the following requirements nema tsnum controller cabinet nema tsnum nema tsnum controller cabinet nema ts num num num documentation provide four paper copies of the cabinet wiring diagram with each cabinet .
the nomenclature of signal heads vehicular movements and pedestrian movements on the wiring diagram must be in accordance with the signal operating plan .
documentation must include a list identifying the termination points of cables used for vehicular and pedestrian signal heads detector loop leadins and pedestrian pushbutton wires .
a heavy duty resealable plastic opaque bag must be mounted on the backside of main cabinet door for storing cabinet documentation .
num police switches provide the following police switches with type numand larger controller cabinets .
the switches must be mounted on the police panel and identified as to their function .
num .
autoflash when this switch is in the flash position all signal indications must immediately transfer to the flashing mode .
ac power shall be removed from the load switches and stop timing applied to the controller unit .
when this switch is placed in the auto position the controller unit must operate in accordance with the appropriate specification .
num .
manual onoff when this switch is in the on position a logic ground must be applied to the manual control enable input of the controller unit .
num .
manual jack install a manual jack on the police panel .
the jack must mate with a three circuit num inch diameter phone plug .
connect the tip and ring middle circuits of the jack to the logic ground and the interval advance inputs of controller unit .
when the manual hand cord is plugged into the jack and the pushbutton is pressed logic ground must be connected to the interval advance input of the controller unit .
num return to table of contents provide a manual pushbutton with type num and larger cabinets .
the pushbutton cord must have a minimum length of six feet with a num inch diameter three circuit plug connected to one end and a hand held manual pushbutton at the other end .
with the exception of the vehicular yellow and all red clearance intervals a complete cycle pushrelease of the manual pushbutton shall terminate the controller unit interval that is active .
cycling the push button during the vehicular yellow or all red clearance intervals must not terminate the timing of those intervals .
num service switches service switches must be mounted on the service panel or other locations approved by the department and identified as to their functions .
provide the following service switches with type num and larger cabinets .
num .
signals onoff when this switch is in the off position ac power shall be removed from all signal heads .
the signals onoff switch must be connected to the control input of a contactor displacement relay .
current supplied to the switch must not exceed five amperes amps total .
do not directly route the main signal head power buss and cabinet power through the service or police switches .
num .
autoflash when this switch is in the flash position all signal indications must transfer to the flashing mode in accordance with the uniform code flash ucf requirements .
ac power shall be removed from the load switches when the signal indications transfer to the flashing mode .
the controller unit must operate in accordance with appropriate specifications during the flashing mode .
when the switch is placed in the auto position transfer from the flash mode to normal operation shall be made in accordance with ucf requirements .
num .
controller onoff when this switch is in the off position ac power shall be removed from the controller .
num .
aux power onoff when this switch is in the off position ac power shall be removed from all circuits of the cabinet except for the duplex receptacle cabinet light and ventilation fan .
num .
vehicle detectors a detector test switch must be provided for each phase of the controller unit .
detector test switches must include a position for normal operation phase receives calls from detectors a position that provides a constant call and a position that provides a momentary call .
num doors and locks provide type num and larger cabinets with a hinged rain tight and dust tight police door which allows access to the police switches and manual jack .
locate the police door in the bottom half of the main door for type num and num pole mount cabinets .
locate the police door in the upper half of the main door for type num and larger base mount cabinets .
hinges and hinge pins must be constructed of stainless steel and prevent the door main or police from sagging .
hinges for the main and police doors must be num gauge and be located on the right side viewed from the front .
type num and larger cabinets must be furnished with a three point draw roller latching system consisting of the following latching points num .
center of the cabinet lock num .
top of the cabinetcontrolled by the door handle num .
bottom of the cabinetcontrolled by the door handle num return to table of contents the latching points on the top and bottom of the cabinet must remain in the locked position until the main cabinet door lock is unlocked .
the locking mechanism must be equipped with nylon rollers to secure the top and bottom of the door .
type num and larger cabinets must be furnished with a door stop which retains the main door open in a num degree and num degree position .
num police and service panels provide a police service panel with type num and larger cabinets .
the panels may be constructed of either sheet aluminum or cast aluminum .
locate the police panel behind the police door attached to the main door .
the service panel must be mounted on the back side of the police panel .
the police panel must have the following minimum dimensions num .
height num inches num .
width num inches num .
depth num inches num ventilation type num and num cabinets must be vented to allow dissipation of the heat generated by the equipment housed inside the cabinet .
type num and larger cabinets must have dual ul listed thermostatically controlled fans rated for continuous duty with a service life of at least three years .
mount thermostats on the inside top of the cabinet .
thermostats must be user adjustable to allow temperature settings ranging from a minimum of numf to a maximum of numf and capable of activating the fans within plus or minus num degrees of the set temperature .
the intake vent must be rain tight located on the bottom half of the cabinet and covered with a removable filter .
num shelves type num cabinets must be furnished with one shelf .
type num and larger cabinets must be furnished with two adjustable shelves .
shelves must be adjustable in a maximum of num inch increments from the top of the load panel to num inches from the top of the controller cabinet .
num mounting hardware type num num and num cabinets must be supplied with hardware for attaching the top and bottom half of the cabinet onto a flat or round surface .
optional wall or pole mount hardware must be provided for mounting type num cabinets in specific installations .
type num cabinets must have rigid tabs attached to the bottom of the cabinet .
type num cabinets must have rigid brackets attached to the bottom of the cabinet .
rigid brackets and tabs must be constructed of the same material used for the cabinet .
type num and larger cabinets must be provided with one of the following alternatives for fastening to a concrete base num .
galvanized anchor bolts nuts lock washers and flat washers in accordance with astm anum .
the anchor bolts must be at least num inch in diameter seven inches in vertical length with at least three inch horizontal or num .
heavy duty machine bolt anchors flat washers lock washers and machine screws with at least num inch thread diameter .
num electrical fabricate ground bussbars of copper or aluminum alloy material compatible with copper wire and provide at least two positions where no .
num awg stranded copper wire can be attached .
mount a ground bussbar on the side of the cabinet wall adjacent to the power panel for the connection of ac neutral wires and chassis ground wires .
if more than one ground bussbar is used in a cabinet a minimum of a no .
num awg copper wire must be used to interconnect them .
num return to table of contents num wiring all wiring must be laced .
all conductors in the cabinet must be stranded copper .
all inputs and outputs must be terminated on terminal strips .
a connector harnesses for the controller conflict monitor vehicle detectors and other controller accessory equipment must be furnished and wired into the cabinet circuitry .
a vehicle detector harness or rack must be furnished with the cabinet .
terminal strip circuits must be provided for connection of the loop leadin cable .
num terminal strips the voltage and current rating of terminal strips must be greater than the voltage and current rating of the wire which is terminated on the terminal strip .
conductors must be terminated on terminal strips with insulated terminal lugs .
a calibrated ratchet crimping tool must be used to terminate the conductor in the terminal lug .
when two or more conductors are terminated on field wiring terminal strip screws a terminal ring lug shall be used for termination of those conductors .
all terminal strip circuits must be numbered .
num cabinet light and receptacle for type num and larger cabinets provide one or more light fixtures that illuminate the entire interior of the cabinet .
all lighting fixtures must automatically turn on when the cabinet doors are opened and off when the doors are closed .
mount and wire a threewire num vac duplex receptacle in all cabinets .
the receptacle must be protected by a numa circuit breaker .
do not mount the receptacle on the main cabinet door or police and service switch panels .
num main circuit breaker provide a numa circuit breaker with type num and num cabinets and a numa circuit breaker with type num and larger cabinets .
the main circuit breaker must turn off all power to the cabinet and shall not be used for the power switch located in the service panel .
num radio interference suppression a radio interference suppressor must be provided in series with the ac power before it is distributed to any equipment inside the cabinet .
the suppressor must provide a minimum attenuation of num decibels over a frequency range of num khz to num mhz when used with normal installations and shall be hermetically sealed in a metal case .
the radio interference suppressor must have the same minimum current rating as the main circuit breaker .
the ground connection of the radio interference suppressor must be connected only to ac neutral and shall not be connected to earth ground directly .
num opto isolation the opto common input is the common reference pin for four optically isolated inputs .
the opto inputs are intended to provide optical isolation for pedestrian detector and remote interconnect inputs .
the opto inputs are intended to connect through external num ks num w resistors for num vac operation and are intended for direct connection to num vac from the cabinet power supply for pedestrian detector applications .
these inputs may alternatively be used for lowtrue dc applications when the opto common pin is connected to the num v supply .
the opto inputs shall provide electrical isolation of num ms minimum resistance and num vac rms minimum breakdown to all connector pins except the num return to table of contents opto common pin .
these inputs shall exhibit nominal impedance to the opto common pin of num ks plus or minus num percent and shall require num ma plus or minus num percent from a nominal num vac supply .
the opto inputs shall not recognize num vac rms or less relative to the common input and recognize num vac rms or more relative to the common input .
any steady state voltage applied between an opto input and the opto common shall not exceed num vac rms .
opto inputs shall not be acknowledged when active for num ms or less and shall be acknowledged when active for num ms or more .
num load resistors a load resistor or capacitor must be installed between the ac common and each signal field wiring terminal for the yellow green and walk indication .
all load resistors and capacitors must be on the front side of any panel used in the cabinet .
num surge protection furnish surge protective devices spds for the main ac power input all signal head field wiring terminals interconnect cable terminals and loop leadin cable terminals which are located in the cabinet .
spds must be unobstructed and accessible from the front side of any panel used in the cabinet .
cabinets utilizing din rail mounted spds must be grounded with a conductor to the cabinet bussbar .
the spd for the main ac power input of the cabinet must be connected on the load side of the cabinet circuit breaker .
spds for signal and interconnect cable field wiring terminals must meet the following num .
clamp the surge voltage to a level no greater than twice the peak operating voltage of the circuit being protected .
num .
withstand a surge current of numa with an num by num s waveform six times at num second intervals between surges without damage to the suppressor .
spds for loop leadin cables must be designed in accordance with the following requirements num .
protect the detector unit loop inputs against differential between the loop lead surges and against common mode between loop leads and ground surges .
num .
clamp the surge voltage to num v or less when subjected to repetitive numa surges .
num .
withstand repetitive numa surges with an num by num s waveform without damage .
spds must be installed according to the spd manufacturers instructions and not affect the operation of detectors .
spd leads must be kept as short as possible .
num type num traffic signal controller cabinets provide type num traffic signal controller cabinets with all terminals and facilities necessary for traffic signal control and meeting the following requirements model num num and nums cabinets caltrans tees num model nums cabinet must incorporate input surge protection mounted on a fold down termination panel at the input file .
model num cabinets must incorporate a lower input termination panel .
model num and num cabinets must be base mounted .
the model num cabinet must have an auxiliary model num output file and be configured for num vehicle num pedestrian and num overlaps .
num return to table of contents model numa designation is given to model num cabinet assemblies that include a swingout eia num inch rack cage .
cabinets must comply with figures for traffic control signals and devices available on the departments state traffic engineering and operations office website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govtraffictraf_sysproductspecifications.shtm all terminals and facilities on panels must be clearly identified using permanent silkscreened text .
num base plate and mounting brackets provide cabinets with a standard base mounting bolt pattern and a minimum of two aluminum plates welded inside for anchoring to a concrete or composite base .
num output file fabricate the output file using a hard wired harness .
printed board circuit boards are not acceptable .
num shelf provide an aluminum shelf with storage compartment in the rack below the controller for remote secondary monitorlap top computer use .
the storage compartment must have telescoping drawer guides for full extension .
the compartment top must have a nonslip plastic laminate attached .
provide an rsnum connector for communications to the cnums port .
num loads provide dummy loads consisting of numk resistors rated at five watts minimum for greens peds and yellows .
the dummy loads must be mounted on a terminal block in the rear of the output file or other approved location .
wire one side of each dummy load to ac return in a manner that allows a technician to easily attach the load to outputs from selected load switches .
num cabinet light provide one or more light fixtures that illuminate the entire interior of the cabinet .
all lighting fixtures must automatically turn on when the cabinet doors are opened and off when the doors are closed .
num surge protection provide each cabinet with devices to protect equipment from surges .
surge protector termination panels must be attached to the cabinet rack assembly and allow sufficient space for connections access and surge protector replacement .
ac isolation terminals must be on the same side of the cabinet as the ac service inputs .
dc terminals and loop detector terminals must be installed on the opposite side of the cabinet from the ac power lines .
surge protection for numa cabinets must be mounted on the lower input termination panel .
surge protection for nums cabinets must be mounted on a custom fold down termination panel at the input file .
under no circumstance normal operation or shortcircuit condition shall the amperage capacity of the internal wiring and printed circuit board traces be less than the protecting threshold of circuit breakers and surge protectors provided .
num power distribution assembly protection the power distribution assembly pda spd must be a two stage seriesparallel device that meets or exceeds the following num .
maximum ac line voltage num vac num .
num pulses of peak current each of which will rise in num microseconds and fall in num microseconds to onehalf the peak numka .
num .
the protector must include the following terminals num return to table of contents a .
main line ac line first stage terminal b .
main neutral ac neutral input terminals c. equipment line out ac line second stage output terminal numa d. equipment neutral out neutral terminal to protected equipment e. ground earth connection num .
the main ac line in and the equipment line outer terminals must be separated by a num microhenry minimum inductor rated to handle numa ac service num .
the first stage clamp shall be between main line and ground terminals num .
the second stage clamp shall be between equipment line out and equipment neutral num .
the protector for the first and second stage clamp must have a metal oxide varistor mov or similar solid state device rated num ka .
the main neutral and equipment neutral output shall be connected together internally and shall have an mov or similar solid state device or gas discharge tubes rated at num ka between main neutral and ground terminals .
the pda spd must have a peak clamp voltage of numv at num ka voltage measured between equipment line out and equipment neutral out terminals current applied between main line and ground terminals with ground and main neutral terminals externally tied together .
the pda spd must have a maximum let through voltage not exceeding num vpk using an num by num snum by num s num kv num ka surge .
the spd must either be epoxyencapsulated in a flame retardant material or utilize thermally protected varistors and be designed for continuous service current of numa at num vac rms .
power to the type nume controller and to the numv power supply must be provided from the equipment line out terminal of the pda spd .
num inductive loop detector protection protect each inductive loop detector input channel with an external spd that meets or exceeds the following num .
the spd must be a threeterminal device two of which shall be connected across the signal inputs of the detector .
the third terminal shall be connected to chassis ground to protect against common mode damage .
num.the spd must instantly clamp differential mode surges induced voltage across the loop detector input terminals via a semiconductor array .
the array shall be designed to appear as a very low capacitance to the detector .
num .
the spd must clamp common mode surges induced voltage between the loop leads and ground via solid state clamping devices .
num .
peak surge current a .
differential mode numa num by num s b .
common mode numa num by num s c. estimated occurrences num numa num .
response time num ns num .
input capacitance num pf typical num .
clamp voltage num return to table of contents a .
numv max numa differential mode b .
numv max numa common mode num signal load switch protection the outputs of each load switch in the output file shall be provided with a mov connected from the ac positive field terminal to the chassis ground .
the mov must be rated num vac and shall be a vnumlanuma or approved equal .
num communication input protection each low voltage communication input must be protected as it enters the cabinet with a hybrid twostage spd that meets or exceeds the following num .
the spd must be a dual pair fourwire module with a doublesided goldplated printed circuit board connector .
num .
the spd must be installed in a tencircuit card edge terminal block pcbnumbnuma .
num .
the spd must be utilized as two independent signal pairs .
the data circuits must pass through the spd in a serial fashion .
num .
peak surge current a .
numka num by num s b. occurrences at numa greater than num num .
response time less than num ns num .
clamp voltage numv maximum num .
series resistance greater than num ohms per line num .
primary protector num element gas tube num .
secondary protector solid state clamp num kw minimum the line side of the spd must be connected to the communication field wires the load side connected to the communication connector of the controller and the ground terminal connected to chassis ground .
num low voltage dc input protection each dc input must be protected by an spd that meets or exceeds the following a the spd must be a num terminal device .
two terminals must be connected to the line side of the low voltage pair two terminals must be connected to the input file side and the fifth terminal connected to chassis ground .
bpeak surge current num ka num by num s occurrences at peak current num typical c response time num ns d shock must withstand num foot drop on concrete e clamp voltage numv f series resistance greater than num ohms each conductor num preemption and numv ac signal input protection each preemption or ac signaling input channel must be protected by an external spd that meets or exceeds the following requirements a the spd must be a num terminal device b peak surge current numa num b num s occurrences at peak current num minimum num return to table of contents c response time less than num ns d peak surge trip point less than numv nominal num model num conflict monitor with absence of red monitoring the conflict monitor must be a model num plus conflict monitor capable of detecting fault sequencing of signals on a per channel basis i.e .
short or absence of yellow interval andor simultaneous dual indications .
all integrated circuits having num pins or more must be socket mounted .
num absence of red monitoring the conflict monitor must be capable of monitoring for the absence of voltage on all of the inputs of a channel defined here as red yellow and green .
if an output is not present on at least one input of a channel at all times the unit shall begin timing the duration of this condition .
if this condition exists for less than num milliseconds the unit shall not trigger .
if this condition exists for more than num milliseconds the unit shall trigger as if a conflict had occurred causing the intersection to transfer immediately into a flashing mode and stoptime to be applied to the controller .
a red signal shall require the presence of a minimum of num vac plus or minus num vac to satisfy the requirements of a red indication .
the red input signals shall be brought into the conflict monitor through an auxiliary connector on the monitors front panel .
provide a similar connector on the output file with a removable harness connecting the two .
provide an indicator on the front panel of the monitor to identify the triggering of the monitor in response to the absence of red condition .
num red monitor harness a connector and terminal assembly designated as pnum for monitoring the absence of red shall be an integral part of the output file .
the connector must terminate and be compatible with the cable and connector of a type num conflict monitor unit cmu capable of monitoring the absence of red .
provide the pin assignments of the pnum connector and terminal assembly with the cabinet plans .
the pnum connector shall be physically like the cable and connector of a type num cmu to prevent the absence of red cable connector from being inserted into the pnum connector num degrees out of alignment .
num programming of unused red channels provide all cabinet assemblies with a means of programming unused red channels by installing jumpers from red monitor inputs to num vac .
the connecting terminals for the jumpers must be accessible and located in the same terminal block for all num channels to assure full compatibility of all cabinet assemblies with num plus conflict monitor units .
num police door and panel provide cabinets with police doors and panels .
the police panel must include text informing officers that yellow and allred clearance intervals are timed internally .
num manual control police switch panels must include a manual jack .
the jack must mate with a three circuit num inch diameter phone plug .
connect the tip and ring middle circuits of the jack to the logic ground and the interval advance inputs of controller unit .
when the manual hand cord is plugged into the jack and the pushbutton is pressed logic ground must be connected to the interval advance input of the controller unit .
the pushbutton cord must have a minimum length of six feet with a num inch diameter three circuit plug connected to one end and a hand held manual pushbutton at the other end .
with the exception of the vehicular yellow and all red clearance intervals a complete cycle pushrelease of the manual pushbutton shall terminate the controller unit num return to table of contents interval that is active .
cycling the pushbutton during the vehicular yellow or all red clearance intervals must not terminate the timing of those intervals .
num technician service panel provide cabinets with a technician service panel which is mounted on the back side of the police panel inside the main cabinet front door .
num service panel switches there must be two switches located on the technician service panel clearly labeled according to the following functions a ucf this toggle switch shall place the intersection into flashing operation .
after meeting requirements for flashing operations all power shall be removed immediately from signal load switches .
b signal onoff this toggle switch shall disconnect all power to the signal lights through the use of a numa contact switch placed in series with the load switch packs .
labels must be silk screened directly on the panel .
num swingout rack assembly provide numa cabinets with a pullout and rotatable rack assembly as well as an interface panel mounted on the top of the rack assembly and attached to the top shelf .
the rack assembly must be constructed to house components designed to be installed in a standard eia num inch rack and shall house the controller input file output file no .
num pda no .
num and a storage compartment .
construct the rack and slidehinged mounting brackets so that when the rack assembly fully loaded can be pulled out with one hand with complete ease of operation including rotation of the assembly .
the rack assembly must have a springloaded latch mechanism to secure the rack assembly inside the cabinet while in the rest position .
when pulled out of the cabinet at any point from its resting position inside cabinet to its full extension and rotation the fully loaded rack assembly shall not cause any member of the assembly to bend warp or bind .
the rack must be made of one inch square aluminum tubing with welded joints and extend and retract smoothly without noticeable friction or stress on roller guides extension brackets or other mechanical components .
maximum deflection of the entire rack assembly with all equipment installed shall not exceed num inch .
the rack assembly must have num technician test switches mounted to the interface frame assembly .
technician test switches must be of the momentary type and shall have eight vehicle and four pedestrian inputs .
the front of the rack assembly must be tapped with num threads with eia universal spacing for num inch electrical equipment racks .
the rack assembly must be attached to the left cabinet wall through combination slidehinged mounting brackets .
the slidehinged mounting brackets must be fabricated from aluminum andor stainless steel only .
mounting bracket guides must utilize num inch stainless steel ball bearing rollers and allow extension and retraction of a loaded rack with minimal effort .
the rack assembly must be capable of rotating num degrees from its rest position after full extension from the cabinet .
the rack assembly must have an minimum num inch diameter aluminum rack stop rod attached to the inside left cabinet wall from the left side of the rack assembly to lock the rack into final position .
num return to table of contents all cabinet harnesses must be long enough to maintain cabinet connections and functionality when the rack assembly is fully extended and rotated to its maximum limit .
harnesses must not bind or crimp when the rack is fully retracted extended or in motion .
num service panels for numa the numa cabinet must include a field service panel auxiliary field service panel and interface panel all constructed of aluminum with a num inch minimum thickness .
all components must be accessible from the front of the panels .
do not mount components or attach wires behind panels .
num field service panel the field service panel must consist of terminal strips circuit breakers transient protection devices load resistors capacitors cable tie mounts and associated wiring for making all field wiring connections .
mount the field service panel in the cabinet on the lower right exterior cabinet wall .
the field service panel must provide the necessary interconnecting junction points between the rack assembly and cabinet for the field service wires .
the panel must be grouped for internal connections jumpers between terminals boards wiring from the panel to the rack assembly and wiring from the panel to the cabinet .
the field service panel wiring harness must have flexible wire covered by a flexible nonmetallic conduit from the field service panel to the pda output file and interface panel .
the harness must have a metal clamp with a rubber grommet center attached to the field service panel to secure the harness to the panel for proper orientation of the harness with the rack assembly .
terminal strips for the panel shall be as listed below a tbsnum terminal block deadfront type num position no .
num to no .
num awg wire range numa numv .
b tbsnum terminal block barrier num position .num density num x num bh screw open bottom double row no .
num awg max numa numv .
c tbsnum terminal block barrier num position .num density num x num bh screw open bottom double row no num awg max numa numv .
d tbsnum tbsnum terminal block barrier num position .num density num x num bh screw open bottom double row no .
num awg max numa numv .
the panel must have a main cabinet circuit breaker rated at numa and a cabinet accessory circuit breaker rated at numa for cabinet fans and light .
mount the circuit breakers near the back cabinet door on the panel .
the panel must include load resistors for all walk green green arrow yellow and yellow arrow switch pack outputs to prevent the conflictvoltage monitor from going into flash due to a failed signal lamp .
load resistors must be numk num watt .
movs must be physically tied to one side of each terminal on tbsnum and tbsnum and be physically secured to the field service panel with a num screw .
num auxiliary field service panel the auxiliary field service panel must be mounted on the lower left interior cabinet wall and consist of a minimum of four terminal strips num detector surge protectors and one pedestrian button isolation board assembly .
the num surge protectors must be a threeterminal device two of which are connected across the signal inputs of the detector for differential mode protection and the third terminal is grounded to protect against common mode damage .
mount the pedestrian button isolation board on the auxiliary field service panel .
terminal strips for the panel shall be terminal block barrier num return to table of contents num position .num density num x num bh screw open bottom double row no .
num awg max numa numv .
install a fourbutton pedestrian isolation board on the auxiliary field service panel to provide for the connection of the pedestrian buttons on phases num num num and num .
the board must provide electrical isolation of the field wiring to the internal cabinet wiring .
the inputs to this isolation board shall be wired to terminal block tbanum for connection to field wiring .
the outputs of this board shall be carried through the harness to the input file to the proper wires that go to the interface extension panel of the controller .
the pedestrian button isolation board must include a pc board mounted on an aluminum panel with the following minimum dimensions height num inches width num inches thickness num to num inches num interface panel the interface panel must consist of eight terminal strips one telephone line suppressor and mounting fixture two num vdc relays and mounting fixtures and all associated wiring for connecting the required interface equipment modules .
the front of the panel must be covered by a num inch clear plexiglass sheet supported from the panel by four num inch standoffs .
secure the panels and cover using wing nuts that are removable without the use of tools .
the plexiglass cover shall have num inch slot centered over each of the terminal strips .
all covers and panels must be interchangeable .
the panel wiring must provide the necessary interconnecting junction points between interface equipment cable harnesses and controller cabinet input and output signal .
the panel wiring provides the functional wiring information for connecting the interface equipment in the cabinet .
the panel wiring must be grouped for internal connections jumpers between terminal boards as well as wiring from the controller and related cabinet functions to the terminal boards on the interface panel .
ground wires must be no .
num awg wire minimum .
the internal harnesses must be located between tbnum tbnum and tbnum .
the external and internal wiring must be located outside of tbnum and tbnum between tbnum and tbnum .
terminal strips shall be barrier type .num density num x num bh screw open bottom double row no .
num awg max numa numv .
terminals must use nickelcadmium plated brass screws .
all terminals and facilities on panels must be clearly identified using permanent silkscreened the knump and knumf relays shall be numa miniature relays with polycarbonate cover num form c co contact arrangement dc coil input socket mount .num inch quick connectsolder terminals agcdo numa contacts and num vac coil voltage with matching socket and hold down spring .
all screws on the relay socket must be brass with nickelcadmium plating .
num storage compartment mount an aluminum storage compartment in the rack assembly .
the storage compartment must have telescoping drawer guides for full extension of drawer from rack assembly and have a continuous front lip for opening the compartment top for storage .
the top of the compartment must be nonslip plastic laminate .
num return to table of contents install a communication port on the right hand side of the drawer at the front for connecting to the communications port of the controller unit via the cabinet harness .
num cabinet rails provide the cabinet with four cabinet rails for mounting wiring panels and various brackets .
rails must be keyhole design with slots num inches on center with a top opening diameter of num inches to allow the insertion of a num inch by num inch carriage bolt .
the rails must be approximately num inch to num inches wide by num inches deep .
do not use unistruts or other rails .
num electrical do not use printed circuit boards in any controller cabinet subsystem file or panel including but not limited to the output file except for the red monitor program board service panel interface panel and input file .
num wiring cut all wires to the proper length and neatly laced into cables with nylon lacing .
no wire shall be doubled back to take up slack .
cables in the cabinet must not interfere with the routing and connection of field wiring .
cables must be secured with nylon cable clamps unless specified otherwise .
the position of cables between the components must be such that when the door is closed it does not press against the cables or force the cables against the various components inside the controller cabinet .
fabricate ground buss bars of a copper or aluminum alloy material compatible with copper wire and provide at least two positions where a no .
num awg stranded copper wire can be attached .
mount a num inch ground buss bar with screw terminals on the bottom flange on each side of the cabinet for connection of ac neutral wires and chassis ground .
attach a flexible ground strap between the left side ground buss bar and the left side bottom rear of the rack assembly .
wiring harnesses must be covered by a flexible nonmetallic conduit .
panel wire size must be a minimum of no .
num awg unless otherwise specified .
num terminals terminal connections must be soldered or constructed using a calibrated ratchet type crimping tool .
wiring must be traceable and without entanglement .
num controller cabinet flashing operation when a nonemergency flashing operation is required the selected operation shall be performed by the ucf format .
the following shall utilize ucf format a flash switch located on the cabinet service panel b time base coordination flash c time switch when flashing operation is initiated the controller assembly shall transfer from normal operation to flashing operation only at the end of the common major street red interval the common minor street yellow interval or the all red interval .
ucf shall be an internal function of the controller unit and must not be inhibited by the hold command .
external logic will not be allowed to provide this function .
in the event of an emergency when flashing operation is required the controller assembly shall immediately place the intersection on flash .
emergency flash may be initiated by the following a autoflash switch a switch located on the cabinet police panel b conflictvoltage monitor senses a conflicting indication or system error the transfer of the controller assembly from flashing operation to normal operation shall cause the controller unit to revert to its startup sequence unless the conflict voltage monitor has transferred the controller assembly to flashing operation .
if transferred to num return to table of contents flashing operation by the conflictvoltage monitor the controller assembly shall remain in flashing operation until the monitor unit is reset and automatic operation can be implemented through the normal startup sequence .
num intelligent transportation system cabinets the cabinet shell must conform to nema numr requirements be constructed of unpainted sheet aluminum alloy numhnum with a minimum thickness of num inches and have a smooth uniform natural aluminum finish without rivet holes visible scratches or gouges on the outer surface .
other finishes are acceptable if approved .
the minimum dimensions for cabinets are listed below .
table num minimum cabinet dimensions in inches cabinet type height width depth num num num num num num num nums num num num num num num num num num num num num num the cabinet must be weather resistant and constructed with a crowned top to prevent standing water .
all exterior cabinet welds must be gas tungsten arc tig welds and all interior cabinet welds must be gas metal arc mig or tig welds .
all exterior cabinet and door seams must be continuously welded and smooth and all inside and outside edges of the cabinet must be free of burrs rounded and smoothed for safety .
all welds must be neatly formed and free of cracks blow holes and other irregularities .
use ernum aluminum alloy bare welding electrodes conforming to aws anum requirements for welding on aluminum .
procedures welders and welding operators must conform to aws requirements as contained in aws bnum and cnum for aluminum .
the cabinet must have a lifting eye plate on both sides of the top of the cabinet for lifting and positioning it .
each lifting eye must be secured with a minimum of two bolts to the cabinet body and have a lift point opening diameter of num inches and capable of supporting a weight load of num pounds .
all external bolt heads must be tamperproof .
groundmount cabinets must include a removable base plate and two aluminum plates welded inside for anchoring the cabinet to a concrete or composite type base as shown in the plans .
fabricate the plates from aluminum alloy numhnum a minimum of num inches wide by num inches thick .
provide the cabinet with four num inch diameter holes for anchoring .
num doors provide cabinets with front and rear doors each equipped with a lock and handle .
doors must be full size matching the height and width dimensions of the cabinet enclosure with no fewer than three type num or larger stainless steel hinges or alternately one fulllength piano hinge .
hinges must be constructed of num gauge stainless steel with stainless steel hinge pins that are spotwelded at the top .
mount the hinges so that they can not be removed from the door or cabinet without first opening the door .
brace the door and hinges to withstand num pounds per vertical foot of door height load applied to the outer edge of the door when standing open .
ensure there is no permanent deformation or impairment of any part of the door or cabinet body when the load is removed .
door opening must provide a flange that allows the door gasket to mate with a flat surface .
include a gasket made of closedcell material resistant to uv weathering num return to table of contents elevated temperatures and permanent deformation that is permanently bonded to the inside of each door forming a weathertight seal when the door is closed .
num latches provide all cabinets with a threepoint draw roller latching system for the doors .
the latching system must have the following latching points .
num .
center of the cabinet lock .
num .
top of the cabinet controlled by the door handle .
num .
bottom of the cabinet controlled by the door handle .
the latching points on the top and bottom of the cabinet must remain in the locked position until the main cabinet door lock is unlocked .
the locking mechanism must be equipped with nylon rollers to secure the top and bottom of the door .
provide the cabinet with a door stop that retains the main door open in a num degree and num degree position .
outfit the doors with an industrial standard pin tumbler lock with no .
num key or an approved alternate and hardware that allows the door to be secured using a padlock .
provide two keys for each cabinet lock .
num rails provide the cabinet with four cabinet rails that form a cage for mounting miscellaneous wiring panels and various mounting brackets .
use rails constructed of either num inch thick plated steel or num inch thick stainless steel that extend the length of the cabinets sides starting from the bottom of the enclosure .
rails must be keyhole designed with slots num inches on center with a top opening of num inch in diameter to allow the insertion of a numinch by num inch carriage bolt .
rails must be num to num inches wide by num inches deep drilled and tapped for num screws or rack screws with eia universal spacing .
do not use unistruts or other rail types .
num racks the cabinet must include a standard num inch eiatia equipment rack centered in the cabinet for mounting devices to be installed inside .
clearance in the rack between the rails must be num inches .
num shelf provide a level rollout internal shelf with a minimum work area measuring num inches by num inches .
the shelf must be capable of sustaining a constant num pound load and the shelf position must be adjustable .
num sunshield sunshields must be mounted with tamper resistant hardware to standoffs that provide an air gap of at least of one inch between the exterior cabinet walls and the sunshields .
sunshield standoffs located on the roof of the cabinet must be welded to the cabinet body .
construct sunshields of num inch thick numhnum aluminum sheet with corners that are rounded and smoothed for safety .
num ventilation provide ventilation through the use of a louvered vent at the bottom of the door .
vent depth must not exceed num inch .
provide an air filter a minimum of num square inches and num inch thick behind the vent .
the filter must be removable and held firmly in place so that all intake air is filtered .
provide a bottom trough and a springloaded upper clamp to hold the filter in place .
the bottom trough must drain any accumulated moisture to the outside of the field cabinet .
its field cabinets must have dual thermostatically controlled fans rated for continuous duty with a service life of at least three years .
mount thermostats on the inside top of the cabinet .
thermostats must be user adjustable to allow temperature settings ranging from a minimum of numf to a maximum of numf and capable of activating the fans within plus or minus num degrees of the set temperature .
use ul listed exhaust fans having a minimum air flow num return to table of contents rating of num cubic feet per minute .
electric fan motors must have ball or roller bearings .
vent the exhaust air from openings in the roof of the field cabinet .
num electrical requirements all equipment must conform to applicable ul nec eia astm ansi and ieee requirements .
spds must be accessible from the front of any panel used in the cabinet .
connect the spd for the cabinets main ac power input on the load side of the cabinet circuit breaker .
all wiring must be laced .
all conductors must be stranded copper .
num service panel assembly provide a service panel assembly to function as the entry point for ac power to the cabinet and the location for power filtering transient suppression and equipment grounding .
provide branch circuits spds and grounding as required for the load served by the cabinet including ventilation fans internal lights electrical receptacles etc .
num terminal blocks terminate electrical inputs and outputs on terminal blocks .
the voltage and current rating of the terminal block must be greater than the voltage and current rating of the wire fastened to it .
terminate conductors on terminal blocks using insulated terminal lugs large enough to accommodate the conductor to be terminated .
when two or more conductors are terminated on field wiring terminal block screws use a terminal ring lug for termination of those conductors .
number all terminal block circuits and cover the blocks with a clear insulating material to prevent inadvertent contact .
num ground buss bar fabricate ground buss bars of copper or aluminum alloy material compatible with copper wire and provide at least two positions where a no .
num awg stranded copper wire can be attached .
mount the ground buss bar on the side of the cabinet wall adjacent to the service panel assembly for the connection of ac neutral wires and chassis ground wires .
if more than one ground buss bar is used in a cabinet use a minimum of a no .
num awg copper wire to interconnect them .
connect the equipment rack to the ground buss bar in the cabinet to maintain electrical continuity throughout the cabinet .
follow the pani recommendations of usdarusnum for connections to the ground buss bar .
producer p or electrical power and sources of stroke current connections shall be on the left end of the buss bar .
absorbing a or grounding wires shall be connected immediately right of the p connections .
nonisolated n connections such as doors and vents shall be connected to the right of the a connections .
isolated i equipment grounds from equipment in the cabinet shall be connected on the right end of the buss bar .
num power distribution assembly furnish a power distribution assembly that fits in the eia num inch rack and provides for protection and distribution of num vac power unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num interior lighting provide one or more light fixtures that illuminate the entire interior of the cabinet .
all light fixtures must automatically turn on when the main cabinet door is opened and turn off when the door is closed .
num generator and auxiliary power connection traffic signal controller cabinets must include a generator and auxiliary power connection .
its cabinets must include a generator and auxiliary power connection unless otherwise shown in the plans .
cabinets with generator and auxiliary power connection must include provisions for the connection of an external power source such as a portable generator through a weatherproof secure interface .
this feature must allow authorized personnel to access connect num return to table of contents and secure an external power source to the cabinet in order to restore power within five minutes of arrival time at the cabinet .
a num gauge numv ul rated cable fabricated with an lnumr on one end and standard num duplex plug on the other a minimum of num feet in length or as shown in the plans must be supplied with cabinet assemblies for field connection between generator and cabinet .
the generator access door and cable entrance must include means to prevent access to insects when cable is not present .
provide the cabinet with an automatic transfer switch as shown in the plans .
the transfer switch must meet ul num and be rated equal to or higher than the design load of the cabinets main breaker and the generator input twistlock connector rating .
the transfer switch must provide a means of switching between normal utility power and auxiliary backup generator power .
switching time can not exceed num milliseconds .
ensure that the transfer switch does not allow simultaneous active power from more than one source and does not allow generator backflow into normal utility ac circuits .
num automatic transfer switch provide the automatic transfer switch with indicators that display the status of connected power sources and indicate which power source is actively energizing the cabinet .
the utilityon indicator must be clearly visible outside the cabinet and the indicators onoff state must be obvious from a distance of num feet .
if a relay circuit is used to provide switching the normally closed circuits must be connected to normal utility power .
the relay must be energized solely by the generator .
when energized the relay must break the connection to normal utility power and make connection to the generator power input .
any automatic transfer switch or relay operated switch must include a bypass switch that disables automatic switching and permits manual selection of the power sources connected to the cabinet .
num generator access panel include a generator connection panel consisting of at a minimum the automatic transfer switch with a threeprong num amp lnump twistlock connector with recessed male contacts for generator hookup .
locate the access panel as close as possible to the main ac circuit breaker with the bottom of the access panel no less than num inches above the bottom of the cabinet .
do not place the generator access panel on the main cabinet door or back door .
locate and label the transfer switch and twist lock connector on a panel easily accessible behind a weatherproof lockable exterior access door equipped with a tamperresistant hinge .
label this access door generator access door provide the access door with a no .
num lock unless otherwise specified in the plans .
the access door and cable entrance must include means to prevent access to insects when cable is not present .
the generator hookup compartment must be recessed no more than six inches into the cabinet but be deep enough to allow closing and locking of the access door when the generator cable is connected .
avoid blocking access to any other equipment in the cabinet .
num small equipment enclosures small equipment enclosures such as equipment cabinets less than num inches high by num inches wide by num inches deep may be constructed of aluminum or nonmetallic materials .
enclosures must include a safe means of removing power from the installed equipment for servicing and replacement such as a switch fuse or breaker .
discrete markings such as manufacturer name and model are permitted on the outside of small enclosures .
all fasteners less than num inch exposed to the elements must be type num or num stainless steel .
num return to table of contents construct aluminum enclosures of num sheet aluminum alloy with a minimum thickness of num inches .
aluminum enclosures must have a uniform natural finish or be powder coat painted in accordance with aamanum specifications .
all welds bends and seams must be neatly formed and free of cracks blow holes and other irregularities .
all inside and outside edges of the enclosure must be free of burrs rivet holes visible scratches and gouges and have a smooth uniform finish .
nonmetallic enclosures must be ul numa listed be rated for outdoor use and resist chemicals corrosion and ultraviolet rays .
enclosures must be nema numr ip num rated minimum .
enclosure doors must include a vandal resistant hinge and be secured with a locking latch or a minimum of two quickrelease type num or num stainless steel latches with padlock hasps .
removal of the hinge or hinge pin must not be possible while the enclosure is closed .
provide two sets of keys with each lock .
enclosures may be vented .
holes larger than num inches must be covered by heavy duty screen .
post mounted enclosures must be supplied with mounting hardware for attaching the enclosure to a num inch od aluminum post .
num installation requirements .
num general ground all cabinets in accordance with the requirements of section num .
keep the ground wire from the cabinet ground bussbar to the ground rod assembly or array as short as possible .
ensure the ground wire is not in contact with any other part of the cabinet .
controller cabinets shall be wired in accordance with the signal operating plan specified in the contract documents .
if phases are omitted for future use the cabinet must be wired for these future phases .
however the load switches for the future phases do not have to be furnished .
all field drilled conduit entrance holes or other holes must be reamed and free of burrs .
all conduit connections to the cabinet must be weatherproof .
num traffic signal controller cabinet installation install traffic signal controller cabinets in accordance with standard plans index num .
num pole mounted cabinets a fasten the pole mounted hardware furnished with the cabinet to the cabinet using bolts no less than num inch threaded diameter .
ensure all connections are watertight .
b use stainless steel bands for mounting cabinets onto steel strain poles .
c use stainless steel bands or lead anchors or equivalent for mounting cabinets onto concrete strain poles .
d use stainless steel bands or lag bolts for mounting cabinets onto wood poles .
num base mounted cabinets a use anchor bolts to fasten base mounted cabinets to the concrete base .
b seal the joint between the bottom of the cabinet and the concrete base inside and outside of cabinet with a clear silicone rubber sealant .
c construct the base for the cabinets with concrete in accordance with section num .
make the concrete base for the cabinet level free of honeycombs and as smooth as possible .
temporarily seal the end of conduit risers located in the base before placing the concrete .
position the end of the conduit risers a minimum of num inches above the finished surface of the concrete base .
num field wiring num return to table of contents a terminate signal cable interconnect cable and loop leadin wires on the appropriate terminal strips in the controller cabinet with insulated terminal lugs .
use a calibrated ratchet type crimping tool to install the insulated terminal lugs onto the field wires .
b label spare circuits of the signal and interconnect cables and connect them to the cabinet ground bussbar .
c neatly bundle and identify all field wiring cables in the controller cabinet .
num intelligent transportation system cabinet installation mount the cabinet as shown in the plans and provide the cabinet with the necessary base or pole mount hardware .
ensure that pole and structuremounted field cabinets have mounting brackets on the side so that both cabinet doors are fully functional .
make provisions for all telephone data control and confirmation connections between the its device and field cabinet and for any required wiring harnesses and connectors .
place a heavyduty resealable plastic bag on the backside of the main cabinet door for storing a list of terminal block connections and other cabinet documentation .
place all equipment in the cabinet according to the recommendations of the manufacturer .
maintain a minimum clearance of num inches between the top of the cabinet and the top of any equipment placed on the top shelf of the cabinet and a minimum clearance of num inches between each side of the cabinet and any equipment placed on the cabinet shelves .
num small enclosure installation mount the enclosure on a pole or support structure as shown in the plans and provide any hardware necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num warranty .
ensure traffic cabinets have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of two years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
the warranty must include providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price each for traffic cabinet furnished and installed will include all materials specified in the contract documents and all labor equipment and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and acceptable installation .
no separate payment will be made for a traffic cabinet when included with the controller assembly as per section num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num traffic signal controller cabinet each .
item no .
num num its cabinet each .
item no .
num num small equipment enclosure each .
num return to table of contents section num equipment shelter num description .
furnish and install an equipment shelter as shown in the plans .
ensure that all materials furnished assembled fabricated or installed are new products .
num materials .
num general ensure that the shelter includes a secure door power distribution panels a heating ventilation and air conditioning hvac system lightning protection grounding and any other components necessary for a completely integrated communication building .
ensure that the shelter is constructed and installed according to local building codes .
provide a shelter designed for the following loads wind num mph floor num pounds per square foot slab num pounds per square foot roof num pounds per square foot .
submit design drawings that meet all minimum standards and are signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the state of florida .
the shelters exterior shall have an exposed concrete aggregate finish .
the shelter must have a bulletresistant exterior surface in accordance with ul num .
the shelters exterior color is to be earth tone .
alternative exterior finishes or colors may be approved by the engineer .
ensure that the equipment shelters heat transfer coefficient does not exceed num british thermal units btus per hour per square foot per degree fahrenheit f for the roof and num btus per hour per square foot per degree f for the exterior wall .
num shelter floor and foundation the floor is to be constructed of concrete or concrete composite material .
the foundation is a monolithic slab with appropriate footings and the final top of slab elevation is set a minimum of num feet above final grade or as shown in the plans .
concrete is to be class i for extremely aggressive environments and in accordance with section num .
perform concrete structures work in accordance with section num .
the equipment shelter must not bend or break during moving towing or hoisting .
the equipment rooms interior floor covering is to be industrialgrade vinyl flooring fastened to the shelter floor with waterproof adhesive .
provide an air gap between the equipment shelter floor and the foundation slab or alternatively construct the foundation slab with a vapor barrier to prevent moisture penetration .
insulate the floor to provide a minimum insulating factor of rnum .
num door the exterior door is to be num inches wide by num inches tall insulated bulletresistant corrosionresistant steel door with a door check and doorstop secured with a mortised deadbolt security lock keyed as directed .
the door is to have a lever type handle on both the inside and outside .
provide the department with four keys to each door lock .
num walls vapor shield the walls to prevent moisture penetration and insulate the walls for a minimum insulating factor of rnum .
interior surfaces are to have a white textured finish wall covering with molding on all corners .
all floorwall intersections are to have num inch vinyl baseboards installed using waterproof adhesive .
num ceiling and roof the interior room height is to be no less than num feet above the floor and capable of supporting the proposed electrical fixtures and cable trays .
the roof section shall have a num inch per foot minimum pitch for drainage .
fill all voids between the ceiling and roof with a vapor shield and minimum type rnum insulation .
num return to table of contents num entrance the entrance steps shall be concrete with ada approved hand rail .
the maximum distance from the final grade or final step to the shelter floor must not exceed num inches .
num lighting fluorescent light fixtures are to provide a uniform initial light level of num to num foot candles at num feet above the floor with a num ratio of maximum to minimum light levels as measured throughout the shelters interior .
mount a light switch inside the shelter adjacent to the entry door for the interior lighting .
install one num lumen floodlight that is vandal resistant and mounted on the outside near the entrance door with a photocell and interior light switch .
install an auxiliary powered interior emergency light that illuminates when primary power fails .
num hvac system install appropriately sized exterior wallmounted air conditioners .
ensure the system has a dry contact closure alarm output for failure monitoring and has an installed adjustable start time delay initially set to num minutes .
the hvac unit must be capable of operating when the outside temperature falls below numf and have sufficient capacity to cool from a numf ambient temperature to numf including the equipment heat load providing continuous interior equipment cooling and dehumidification .
the unit shall have a device installed to reduce the starting current required during a cold start or under highhead pressure conditions .
provide an ip addressable thermostat which provides a secure web based interface that displays the current thermostat settings and allows remote adjustments .
num cable trays cable trays are to be num inches wide capable of supporting the transmission lines control and data wires and alarm wires associated with communication equipment .
use cable trays constructed of aluminum or painted steel fabricated in an open ladder type arrangement that are suspended from the ceiling .
electrically bond by mechanical means on nonpainted surface areas all rack and cable tray units together .
after bonding all rack and cable tray units cover these areas with an antioxidant compound .
cable trays and rack frames are to be connected to the shelter interior ground .
the clearance height between the floor and bottom of the cable tray is to be no less than num inches .
equip the cable trays with overhead receptacles as shown in the plans .
num equipment rack include at least one standard num inch eiatia equipment rack capable of mounting and supporting all devices indicated in the plans .
include provisions for vertical and horizontal cable management and for power strips .
secure the top of each rack to the cable tray above using c channel or j hook hardware and to the floor in the location shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num firesmoke detection and suppression install at least one smoke detector that operates on alternating current .
mount the smoke detector on the ceiling num foot clear of all obstructions and ensure that it includes a dry contact closure that will activate during prescribed conditions .
where the equipment shelter is to be furnished with an automatic fire protection system it is to be an fmnum waterless residuefree fire suppression system that conforms to nfpa and iso num standards .
mount a handheld carbon dioxide abc fire extinguisher on the wall near the door .
verify that the extinguisher has a valid inspection tag and is rechargeable .
num alarm specification wire label and terminate all alarms on a type num block .
provide the following shelter alarms num return to table of contents num .
a magnetic dry contact door alarm .
num .
a dry contact air conditioner failure alarm for each installed unit .
num .
dry contact fire alarms .
num .
dry contact high and lowtemperature alarms with thresholds adjustable between num and numf .
num .
a power failure alarm that is wired from a dedicated circuit breaker .
num .
a main fuse alarm that is wired from the main fuse disconnect .
provide provisions on each exterior side of the shelter that can be used for installation of security cameras .
provide these weatherproof conduit entries at locations near the corner of the shelter just below the roofline to allow wiring for cameras and other security devices to pass into the shelter .
num electrical the standard electrical configuration is singlephase num vac at num hz with a num a minimum service and a num circuit distribution panel .
provide power service drop and sitespecific power needs in accordance with section num .
num primary ac surge protective device install a primary ac surge protective device spd that meets the requirements of section num wired to protect the system while utilizing either utility or emergency power .
num spds at point of use install spds that meet the requirements in section num so that all outlets are protected .
num communication cable wall entry install four num inch diameter exterior wall penetrations with weathersealed boots as shown in the plans .
num circuit termination backboard install a backboard for the termination of communication circuits of num inch acgrade plywood no less than num inches square and painted with two coats of gray flameretardant paint .
all ground wires and conductors are to be insulated from the backboard which must be securely mounted to the wall and capable of supporting the hardware fastened to it .
num warranty the equipment shelter its components and hardware must have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of one year .
num installation requirements .
num general provide and detail the equipment shelter installation including site layout fencing and all other features .
submit this drawing for approval prior to the start of construction .
concrete is to be class i in accordance with section num .
perform concrete structures work in accordance with section num .
obtain precast products from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
submit to the engineer all permit documents for approval prior to starting the work .
num electrical install and connect electrical power to the equipment shelter and install all wires and cables in a neat orderly fashion .
provide underground power service unless otherwise specified in the plans .
make all electrical connections from the service drop to the equipment shelters receptacles .
use a minimum of no .
num awg copper wires to install the receptacles switches and light fixtures .
run all wire in a minimum num inch inside diameter electrical metallic conduit .
divide the electrical loads among as many load centers as necessary to contain the quantity of circuit breakers required to protect the equipment shelter facility .
num return to table of contents load centers must contain separate appropriately sized circuit breakers for the hvac units each major branch as is necessary each receptacle and each remaining location in the num circuit panel .
each interior side of the four walls will have a duplex receptacle num inches above the floor or as shown in the plans .
protect receptacles with an individual num a circuit breaker .
install a separate num a singlepole circuit breaker to protect the lighting circuits .
num provision for backup power the equipment shelter must be capable of utilizing a mobile emergency generator during power outages .
the emergency generator connection shall allow department personnel to power the site from a portable generator in the event that both the utility power and emergency power is lost .
install a primary power switch to allow for the disconnection of commercial power at the main power entrance that is interconnected to an automatic transfer switch to facilitate a switch to emergency generator power in the event utility power is lost .
emergency generator power must route through a manual power switch on the outside of the shelter prior to connection to the automatic transfer switch panel .
num grounding meet the requirements of section num .
num site preparation meet the requirements of section num .
coordinate the extent and schedule for all land clearing activities with the engineer .
num fencing furnish type b chainlink perimeter fencing and gates according to the requirements of section num and standard plans index num with barbed wire attachment .
install the fence to form a rectangle or square shape unless otherwise specified in the plans .
allow for a minimum clearance of num feet between the fence and any enclosed item .
construct sliding gates in accordance with standard plans index num with barbed wire configure as shown in the plans .
provide a hardened four digit combination gate lock with the combination set as directed .
num weed prevention as necessary treat the fenced area with a department approved herbicide used in accordance with num .
install a woven plastic weed barrier in accordance with manufacturers recommendations prior to gravel installation with a minimum num overlap for each barrier section and secure the edges of the mat with stakes .
num compound gravel place gravel or crushed rock covering all unimproved areas within the limits of the fenced area to a depth of num inches .
gravel or crushed rock shall not exceed num inches in diameter .
num site restoration provide performance turf in accordance with section num .
num inspection and verification .
num general the department may perform an inspection witnessed by the engineer at completion of the work .
notify the engineer at least num days prior to completion of the installation to schedule the inspection .
the inspection will verify that all equipment is correctly installed and functional .
submit all test results in a format approved by the engineer prior to testing .
all recorded test report data shall be signed and dated witnessed and validated by signature from a department representative .
remedy all noted deficiencies at no cost to the department .
num mechanical inspection test all equipment associated with the shelter .
test and verify the hvac system performance for heating cooling and dehumidification .
inspect the building for the proper sealing of all wall penetrations .
correct any deficiencies at no cost to the department .
num return to table of contents num electrical inspection verify and submit a report to the engineer prior to acceptance that all shelter lights and smoke detectors operate properly and proper electrical power load balances are realized .
correct any deficiencies at no cost to the department .
num site inspection the site is to be free of debris and all excavations backfilled and restored to natural grade conditions .
num performance period following the completion of all acceptance testing and inspections subject the installed site to a minimum num day performance period or alternately the operational test period for the project whichever is greater .
for the purpose of a successful performance period failure of operation is defined as the failure of a major site component i.e .
hvac systems lighting alarms fire or smoke detection etc ..
conduct the performance verification inspection with the engineer present .
complete performance testing within num days of shelter installation and inspection .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each equipment shelter furnished and installed will include furnishing placement and testing of the shelter all its materials and equipment and for all tools labor equipment hardware site preparation site restoration fencing supplies shop drawings permit documents utility connections documentation and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num equipment shelter per each .
num return to table of contents section num traffic controller accessories num description .
furnish and install traffic controller accessories as shown in the plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
use traffic controller accessories listed on the departments approved product list apl .
ensure that all traffic controller accessories are permanently marked with the manufacturers name or trademark model or part number and serial number .
traffic controllers must meet the following applicable industry standards nema tsnum conflict voltage monitor nema tsnum section num nema tsnum malfunction management unit nema tsnum section num load switch nema ts num num section num flasher nema ts num num section num flash transfer relay nema ts num num section num num conflict monitor model num caltrans tees num power supply module model num caltrans tees num power distribution assembly caltrans tees num num flash transfer relay model num caltrans tees num num input file caltrans tees num num current monitor model num caltrans tees num num ensure all traffic controllers perform all specified functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema tsnum sections num num and num .
num time switch ensure the time switch is a numhour timer which controls the daily switching operation of circuit contacts at preselected times .
type num time switches must contain a single circuit contact and a solid state timer with at least num programmable on and off times .
type num time switches must contain two circuit contacts and a solid state timer with at least three independently programmable on and off times per circuit .
type num time switches must contain three circuit contacts and a solid state timer with at least three independently programmable on and off times per circuit .
num timing solid state timing must be accomplished by digital circuits utilizing the power line num hz frequency as the normal timing reference .
timeofday must be settable and displayed in maximum increments of one minute .
num return to table of contents num programming programming for selection of contact openings or closures must be provided in maximum increments of one minute for types num through num time switches .
a day omit device or circuit must be provided with types num through num time switches to omit the programmed switching operation for any combination of up to three days of the week .
a positive means of indicating the day of the week must be provided with types num through num time switches .
num reserve power type num type num and type num solid state time switches must be provided with a battery backup circuit which maintains time during a power failure of up to num hours .
the timing accuracy of battery backup circuits during a power failure must be plus or minus num seconds .
num output circuit contacts each output circuit contact must be rated for a numa num vac load .
the output circuit contact must have num vac present when the timer turns the circuit on .
num construction requirements time switches must be enclosed in durable sheet aluminum or approved alternate housing .
a terminal strip or screws must be provided with the time switch for ac power and all output circuit contacts .
num installation .
num general install all system control equipment in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
terminate wires on the appropriate terminal strips in the controller cabinet with insulated terminal lugs .
neatly bundle secure and identify all wiring and cables .
num time switch mount time switches on the inside wall of the controller cabinet in such a manner as to allow easy access for programming the switch .
ensure that the load current on the output circuits of the time switch does not exceed num a at num vac .
whenever time switches are used for transferring a controller assembly to and from flashing operation wire the controller cabinet for uniform code flashing as specified in section num .
num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for traffic controller accessories .
include the cost in the contract unit price for the traffic controller assembly .
num return to table of contents section num system control equipment num description .
furnish and install system control equipment as shown in the plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials .
num general use system control equipment and components that meet the requirements of these specifications and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num adaptive signal control system adaptive signal control systems external to the traffic controller place detector calls to the traffic signal controller to adjust signalization timing based on measured traffic conditions independently of the traffic signal controllers preconfigured timings .
the system must interface with the traffic controller using either the synchronous data link control sdlc port num interface and protocol or num vdc inputsoutputs available in the traffic controller cabinet .
dynamically modifying controller configuration settings through serial communications is not allowed .
the system must include a user interface that allows the configuration of subcomponents such as detectors and cameras and includes remote monitoring and reporting .
the system must include the option of incorporating existing vehicle detection in addition to the primary detection used by the adaptive signal control system .
the system must not affect the normal operation of the traffic signal controller upon any failure of communication detection or system component .
ensure adaptive signal control system hardware is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark as well as part number and serial number .
ensure that the markings are visible after installation .
numenvironmental requirements ensure system control equipment performs all required functions during and after being subjected to the transients temperature voltage humidity vibration and shock tests described in nema tsnum num num and num .
num installation .
install all system control equipment in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
terminate wires on the appropriate terminal strips in the controller cabinet with insulated terminal lugs .
neatly bundle secure and identify all wiring and cables .
num warranty .
ensure system control equipment has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of three years .
the warranty must include provisions for providing replacements within num calendar days of notification for defective parts and equipment during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for system control equipment furnished and installed will include all materials equipment hardware labor and miscellaneous materials necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num return to table of contents num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num system control equipment each .
num return to table of contents section num video equipment num cctv camera .
num description .
furnish and install a closedcircuit television cctv camera at the locations shown in the plans .
the installed equipment must provide unobstructed video images of the roadway traffic and other current conditions around a roadside cctv field site respond to camera control signals from the operator and transmit video images to remote locations for observation .
num materials num camera provide a cctv camera that is compatible with the current version of the departments sunguide software system and any other camera operating software indicated in the contract documents .
cameras are classified by camera type and video type .
camera types include dome pantiltzoom ptz external positionerptz and fixed .
video types include analog and internet protocol ip .
provide the appropriate type for the locations shown in the plans .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of this section and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
for analog cameras ensure that the camera produces national television system committee ntsc composite video output of numv peaktopeak vpp at num ohms with a minimum resolution of num horizontal and num vertical tv lines .
in addition ensure analog and ip cameras provide the following features and capabilities num .
day colornight monochrome switchover and iris control with userselectable manual and automatic control capabilities .
num .
ability to produce clear detailed and usable video images of the areas objects and other subjects visible from a roadside cctv field site .
ensure that video produced by the camera is true accurate distortion free and free from transfer smear oversaturation and any other image defect that negatively impacts image quality under all lighting and weather conditions in both color and monochrome modes .
num .
userselectable automatic gain control agc that is peak average adjustable to num db .
num .
a minimum signaltonoise ratio of num db .
num .
automatic color balance that references the white areas of the scene through the lens .
num .
an automatic electronic shutter that is user selectable from num to num of a second .
num .
ptz cameras must include a minimum numx digital zoom .
num .
ptz cameras must include programmable azimuth and compass display with ability to display pan and tilt position with a num degree resolution .
cctv cameras must provide titling and masking features including but not limited to programmable camera title programmable preset titles for each preset position and programmable privacy zones .
programmable titles must allow a minimum of num characters per line .
num lens standard definition ptz cameras must include a minimum numx motorized optical zoom lens with automatic iris .
high definition cctv cameras must include a minimum numx motorized optical zoom lens with automatic iris .
the lens must provide automatic and manual focus and iris control .
fixed cameras must have a nummm varifocal lens with num return to table of contents automatic iris unless shown otherwise in the plans .
the lens must have a maximum aperture of at least fnum and the depth of field must provide a clear image of roadside areas under all lighting conditions .
num pantilt mechanism for dometype cameras dome ptz cameras must meet the following requirements num .
have an integrated pantilt mechanism that provides num degree continuous pan with a minimum num degree tilt range i.e .
num degrees to minus num degrees num .
provide for variable speed control num .
have a preset position return accuracy of plus or minus num degree or less than num or better num .
support a minimum of num presets support a minimum of one tour with a minimum of num presets and support a minimum of eight programmable blackout zones .
the positioner within the dometype cctv camera must have a minimum automatic pan speed of num degrees per second to a preset camera position a maximum manual pan speed of num degrees per second minimum and ta maximum manual tilt speed of num degrees per second minimum .
num pantilt mechanism for external positionertype cameras external positionertype cctv cameras must include a pantilt mechanism that provides num degree continuous pan with a minimum num degree tilt range i.e .
minus num to plus num degrees provide for variable speed control have a preset position return accuracy of plus or minus num degree or less than num or better and support a minimum of num presets .
num communication all cctv cameras must support the national transportation communications for its protocol ntcip num vnum .
the camera must communicate with other devices using telecommunications industry associationelectronic industries alliance tiaeianum or tianum at a rate of num bps transmission control protocol tcpip or user datagram protocol udpip .
all cctv cameras must support the communication links shown in the plans and provide for remote firmware upgrades via the communication interface .
ip cameras must also support the open network video interface forum onvif core streaming and media service specifications .
the camera must implement all objects operations and commands required by srnum supplemental cctv camera ntcip and onvif requirements as published on the departments state traffic engineering and operations office website at the following url httpwww.fdot.govtraffictraf_sysproductspecifications.shtm .
num electrical specifications cameras must operate on a nominal voltage of num vac .
provide an appropriate voltage converter for devices that require operating voltages of less than num vac .
num mechanical specifications provide camera housings and hardware that are light in color or as noted in the plans .
camera housings must include a sunshield to reduce the solar heating of the camera .
the total weight of dometype cctv cameras including the housing sunshield and all internal components must be less than num pounds .
the lower dome of the camera housing must be constructed of distortion free clear plastic .
num return to table of contents pressurized dometype housings must be capable of pressurization at num psi using dry nitrogen have a lowpressure alarm feature and a nema numxipnum rating .
if a nonpressurized dometype housing enclosure is used the unit must be vented with a thermostatcontrolled heater and blower .
the nonpressurized enclosure must have a nema numipnum rating .
the total weight of external positionertype cctv cameras including housing sunshield all internal components and external pan and tilt mechanism must be less than num pounds .
num environmental specifications cctv cameras must perform all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema tsnum sections num num and num .
all cctv cameras mounting hardware and any other camerarelated material that is exposed to the environment must be designed for num mph wind speeds and meet the requirements of the departments structures manual .
num additional requirements for ip cameras num video encoding the camera must utilize the moving picture experts groups mpegnum part num h.num video compression technology in accordance with the iso and iec requirements detailed in the isoiec num standard .
cameras must provide unicast and multicast operation and provide for a num errorfree operation .
the encoded video must transmit using programmable bit rates and the camera supports at a minimum a fixed bit rate mode .
num encoded video interoperability the cameras encoded video must be able to be displayed using video display control systems listed on the apl .
num encoded video specifications the cameras encoded video must support resolutions that include but are not limited to those defined in table num .
the camera must deliver color and monochrome video at num frames per second fps regardless of resolution .
table num minimum resolution requirements format vertical resolutions h.num num num note the resolutions attained depend on the data transmission rate .
num network interface the cameras local area network lan connection must support the requirements detailed in the ieee num standard for num ethernet connections .
the camera must have a minimum of one num basetx connection ethernet port .
unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables must be compliant with the tianum standard .
the network communication must conform to tcp udp version num of the ip realtime streaming protocol rtsp and version num of the internet group multicast protocol igmp at a minimum .
the camera must be able to be controlled via ntcip using either tcpip or udpip .
num configuration management the camera must support local and remote configuration and management via serial login telnet login or a webbased interface .
configuration and management functions must include access to all userprogrammable features num return to table of contents including but not limited to network configuration video settings device monitoring and security functions. . num installation requirements install the cctv camera on a pole in accordance with standard plans indexes num num and num and as shown in the plans .
furnish and install the power supplies local control equipment and any other camerarelated field electronic equipment and transient voltage surge suppressors within a pole or basemounted lockable cabinet .
the cabinet must protect the electrical and electronic devices from rain dust dirt and other harmful elements of nature .
furnish and install all power video and data cables necessary to provide connection points for camera video and ptz control signals within the cabinet .
furnish and install any and all ancillary equipment required to provide a complete and fully operational cctv camera .
verify that all wiring meets national electric code nec requirements where applicable .
route the data and video cables from the pole or support structure to the camera inside the mounting hardware and protect from exposure to the outside environment .
coat the exterior of the dometype enclosures lower half with a clear rain repellant product prior to final acceptance .
num testing num general perform a field acceptance test fat on equipment covered in this section .
develop and submit a test plan to the engineer for review and approval .
the test plan must demonstrate all functional requirements specified for the device or system under test .
the engineer reserves the right to witness all tests .
num field test requirements perform local field operational tests at each local cctv field sites to verify and confirm the following num .
physical construction has been completed as specified in the plans and all existing and proposed lanes are clearly visible with no line of site obstructions .
num .
the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
num .
proper voltages for all power supplies and related power circuits .
num .
all connections including correct installation of communication and power cables .
num .
video signal from the camera is present and of consistent quality at all connection points between the camera the cabinet and any video devices therein .
num .
the communication link between the cabinet and the camera is functioning properly by performing ptz and focus in all directions and executing a minimum of three other unique programming commands .
num video display equipment .
num description .
furnish and install video display equipment as shown in the plans .
num materials use display devices of the types shown in the plans .
video display equipment must have the capability to display analog digital and other images associated with the operation of the transportation management center tmc .
these types of images include but are not limited to num .
cctv video images including feeds from other tmcs .
num .
video vehicle detection vvd system images .
num .
system infrastructure mapping images .
num .
graphical user interfaces from computers running typical tmc applications .
num return to table of contents num .
weather mapping images .
num .
television broadcasts .
num .
digital video discs dvds videocassette recordings or other video storage media .
provide equipment mounting hardware cabling and other video display components that are compatible with each other .
all equipment and materials furnished and installed must be reviewed and approved by the engineer .
num video display control system furnish a video display control system listed on the apl .
the video display control system must allow the operator to control and manage the display of video and computergenerated graphics on the display equipment connected to the system as well as provide selection and switching of multiple sources for display including video streams available on the tmc ethernet network .
the display control system must also allow for operator control of all displays from the same workstation that is used for the sunguide operator interface .
the video display control system must decode and display all video streams produced by encoders listed on the apl .
use a video display control system that simultaneously displays a minimum of num video windows each containing streaming video at a minimum resolution of num pixels x num pixels and frame rate of num fps .
the system must allow any display window to be sized from num of the total display area up to the total display area and any size in between .
the video display control system hardware must be designed to be rack mounted and secured in an eia num inch equipment rack .
any system incorporating personal computer pc hardware must use current microprocessor technology and commercial offthe shelf components including random access memory ram hard disk drives and network interface cards sufficient to provide the functional requirements of the system .
num display control software provide display control software that allows multiple operators to control all features and functions of the video display control system .
these features and functions include but are not limited to selection of video sources for display adjusting the size location and layout of video and other graphic information the system displays and system configuration and setup .
the control software must be able to operate a video wall composed of multiple display components as though it were a single high resolution display .
use display control software that is compatible with the departments sunguide software system .
the display control software must include a nonproprietary software development kit sdk including but not limited to an application programming interface api that describes interfaces and protocols which can be used to integrate system features and functions with thirdparty applications .
num inputs and outputs use a video display control system that supports and displays a variety of video and data inputs simultaneously including composite and component national television system committee ntsc video digital visual interface dvi video graphics array vga super video graphics array svga and super extended graphics array sxga computer graphics .
all inputs and outputs must allow for operator control in order to display any or all of this information on any number of display devices within the system .
ensure all inputs and outputs can be sized with and without constrained proportions across multiple screens and moved at will around any display area and combination of displays .
num return to table of contents the video display control system must be expandable and scalable to support any combination of inputs and outputs .
provide the video display control system with a minimum configuration of num composite video inputs num component red green and blue rgb video inputs and num dvi inputs as well as network connections decoders and associated hardware and software required to display num inputs simultaneously at a minimum resolution of num pixels x num pixels and a frame rate of num fps or as shown in the plans .
provide the video display control system with a minimum configuration of num composite video outputs num component rgb video outputs and num dvi outputs or as shown in the plans .
ensure the video display control system can be expanded to accommodate at least num discreet inputs and outputs .
ensure that a single input can be routed to multiple displays simultaneously and that multiple inputs can be routed to a single display simultaneously for viewing in separate windows .
all inputs and outputs must be synchronized by the video display control system and switching between inputs or outputs does not cause displayed images to unlock roll or otherwise exhibit visible distortion .
num analog video the video display control system must be able to accept svideo composite and component video sources and can digitize these signals for manipulation and display on any display device attached to the system .
all analog video inputs must use bnc connectors .
analog video sources must display within their own windows and can be resized up to or beyond their native resolution to conform to the wall display size .
num digital video the video display control system must be able to accept digital video sources and can manipulate and display these signals on any display attached to the system .
all digital video outputs must use dvi connectors .
each mpeg video stream must display within its own window and be freely movable and sizable up to or beyond its native resolution to conform to the wall display size .
num rgb video include an analog input that enables the tmc operator to project an exact copy of his or her workstation desktop display on the video wall display .
analog rgb inputs must allow native images up to num pixels by num pixels at num hz to be displayed on the video wall .
rgb inputs must be sizable up to or beyond their native resolution to conform to the wall display size .
num streaming media the video display control system must be able to display a minimum of num compressed video streams simultaneously in mpegnum over tcpudprtp over ip and supports multicasting as defined in version num of the internet gateway message protocol igmp .
ensure that the video display control system can display mpegnum and h.num .
ensure that the mpeg video input interface is at minimum a num megabit per second network port per every num streams .
num primary display output use a video display control system that can process the various signal input types to be viewed such as the rgb feeds from monitor outputs and streaming video feeds .
the unit must provide direct digital streaming video through cable feeds using a digital video decoder .
the video display control system must provide the layout definitions for each signal to be displayed and save the num return to table of contents predefined layouts and must also permit switching of the predefined layouts and accept external alarm triggers to change the layouts .
include output capacity with sufficient memory and processing speed to provide fast rendering of video and image displays .
ensure that the output has at a minimum a dual dvi connector that allows a digital connection of num horizontal pixels by num vertical pixels or greater resolution .
ensure that the color depth is a minimum of num bits per pixel .
if the projection device requires an analog signal then breakout cables may be used to convert the dvi output connector to a hdnum analog rgb connector .
num video wall display furnish and install a video wall display consisting of display devices described below arranged in a wall as shown in the plans together with a video display control system .
the video wall display must produce at a minimum a largescale high resolution video image having accurate color rendition sufficient image brightness and a high contrast ratio as described in num .
the display system must provide access to serviceable components for repair and replacement of electronics lamps and optical components without removing the device from service for a period longer than num minutes .
integrate the individual display units in a single seamless display that provides a continuous image across the entire active display area provided under the complete control of the tmc operators from their individual shared workstations .
source all major wall display components from a single provider or manufacturer to ensure that the various devices are compatible with each other and able to function together as an integrated display .
the individual video images must exhibit a uniformity of color quality across the multiple displays .
colors must be displayed evenly across the video wall and the video wall must maintain uniform brightness characteristics from one video display unit to the next in the tiled display with no degradation in color or brightness uniformity over time .
the video wall display must provide features that allow physical and electronic alignment of the separate high resolution display units that comprise the wall .
num video wall support structure furnish and install an aluminum or steelframe structure that supports the video display units as mounted and stacked to form the matrix for the video wall display .
the support structure must consist of stackable display units that maintain a consistent maximum horizontal and vertical spacing of num inches between adjacent display units in the video wall matrix .
fabricate the support structure specifically to ensure that a continuous accurate image is provided on the screens without any distortion or unused screen space and that no observable distortions are present in the installed video wall display due to normal building vibration .
each completed structure must be enclosed such that there is no ambient light effect on the screen from behind the display .
ensure that the components of the individual video displays can be serviced without disturbing the integrity of the entire video wall display .
num rear projection video display use rear projection video displays that are suitable for digital video wall applications in missioncritical tmcs where video wall image quality operational reliability and serviceability objectives as stated in this specification can be achieved .
use rear projection video displays that display a minimum of a single or quadsplit fourpaned cctv camera video image .
each video display must be able to be num return to table of contents independently controlled from any of the central operator or shift supervisor workstations and that each video display can be integrated with additional video units to form a single video display or a virtual desktop where video windows can be positioned and resized by the operator .
ensure that the rear projection video display facilitates lamp replacement without the need to readjust the image being projected on the screen .
the rear projection video display intensity must be sufficient for effective and comfortable viewing by tmc operations personnel under normal lighting conditions subject to approval by the department .
the units display engine must produce a minimum light output of num ansi lumens .
the rear projection video units must have the following minimum features and characteristics num .
screen brightness achieved by a combination of projection techniques and screen materials so that the video display has a minimum brightness measurement of num candelas per square meter cdmnum across the outside viewing surface of the projection screen .
num .
brightness uniformity that meets or exceeds num percent across the display unit as measured using a photometer .
num .
a multilamp optical engine must be provided for rear projection video units that do not use lightemitting diodes leds for illumination .
multilamp optical engines must provide a failover feature whereby a second lamp can be automatically activated when the first lamp fails .
ensure displays with multilamp optical engines provide indication of lamp status .
num .
multilamp optical engines must include both a hot standby mode in which failover to the second lamp takes no more than two seconds and a cold standby mode in which failover and the time for the display to return to full light output does not exceed num seconds .
num .
a display module that uses modular component architecture to permit service or replacement of serviceable parts without removing the projection engine .
num .
each unit must be completely enclosed and light tight with fixed panels for access to the lamp power supply and projection engine .
num flat panel display furnish and install a flat panel display unit to reproduce video and computer graphics information .
the device must display at a minimum a highresolution distortionfree image and maintain a consistent level of illumination across the entire screen area .
ensure that it has the following minimum features and characteristics num .
dimensions of num inches high by num inches wide by num inches deep or as shown in the plans .
num .
ability to be installed on the face of a standard wall or flush mounted within the wall system .
num cabling furnish each video display component with all required appurtenances including all the necessary cables with proper length and connectors for power and communication as defined by the manufacturer .
ensure that cabling conforms to applicable eiatia standards .
size the power cables to meet nec requirements .
provide communication cables from each video display component to the network communication devices that are appropriate for and compatible with the technology employed e.g .
fiber optic twisted pair or coaxial and meet the minimum size and bandwidth specifications the manufacturer requires .
num return to table of contents provide all cabling of adequate length along with the compatible connectors and any ancillary equipment necessary to fully interconnect the video components and display control systems needed to achieve the functions required .
label all cables at both ends as approved by the engineer .
num electrical specifications provide equipment that operates on num vac at a frequency of num hz .
furnish a transformer or other necessary means of power conversion for any device that requires another voltage or frequency .
conduct tmc field reviews to examine the electrical distribution panels allocated for various equipment items and the electrical schedules for each .
make any changes additions or corrections to the electrical panels wiring outlets and connectors that may be deemed necessary to adequately power all of the equipment proposed for a video display project at the intended location subject to the approval of the engineer .
make any changes to the buildings electrical wiring in accordance with applicable codes and permits and with the nec .
modifications to an existing buildings wiring or the video wall electrical wiring plans must be signed and sealed by a specialty engineer and submitted for approval .
num performance specifications use only display devices meeting the following minimum requirements .
flat panel display rear projection video display type direct view lcd dlp or lcd size dependent on tmc design as shown in the plans aspect ratio dependent on tmc design as shown in the plans resolution num x num num x num pixels num million colors num x num pixels viewing angle num degrees horizontally and vertically num degrees horizontally and vertically num degrees horizontally and vertically half gain angle num degrees horizontally and vertically contrast ratio num num num screen brightness num cdmnum num cdmnum num cdmnum lamp life num hrs .
avg .
video inputs analogdigital via num pin dsub hdnum connector dvid connector .
composite video ntsc on rca connector analogdigital via numpin d sub hdnum connector dvii connector composite video ntsc on bnc rgb via numpin d sub hdnum connector dvid connector .
num return to table of contents hdmi .
operating temperature and humidity num to numf .
num to num .
num to numf .
num to num .
num to numf .
num to num .
power requirements num vac at num hz num vac at num hz num vac at num hz measured using a photometer .
num installation requirements do not proceed with any part of the procurement construction or installation of the video display equipment until the construction plans and materials are approved by the engineer .
submit to the engineer documentation including the manufacturers product specification sheets and a detailed description of each items function as well as a compliance matrix that confirms all equipment meets or exceeds the requirements of these specifications .
configure each video display unit to provide individual independent control from each operator workstation .
create the video wall display by arranging individual video display units in a framework or apparatus that creates the video wall configuration as shown in the plans .
the finished video wall must provide a single apparently seamless display area .
the adjacent individual display units must be aligned physically and electronically so that image content stretched across multiple monitors align within plus or minus num lines of horizontal and vertical resolution .
all rear projection video unit controls must be accessible at all times when the devices are permanently installed .
ensure that installation and positioning does not conceal or limit access to any display unit controls at any time during active use .
follow proper ventilation and cooling procedures for the equipment installed as determined by the equipment manufacturers .
provide electrical requirements and power distribution units and power supplies for the video display components asneeded .
num testing submit a detailed system acceptance test plan to the engineer for review and approval .
prepare a test plan that covers all areas of system function described in this section and that is developed according to the various equipment manufacturers recommendations .
check and test the satisfactory operation of all video display components upon completion of the equipments installation .
at minimum include in the video display system test the testing of each color video monitor type each secondary display output at workstations each rear projection video display unit and the video wall displays image alignment and control functions .
num observation period subject the video wall display to a num day operational observation period .
during this time perform any and all maintenance recalibration system checking and display modifications required by the engineer .
the engineer has the option to require a restart of the observation period if a major system flaw or failure occurs .
num warranty .
ensure that cctv cameras and video display equipment have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of three years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
ensure that the warranty requires the manufacturer to furnish replacements for any part or equipment found to be defective during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency within num calendar days of notification .
num return to table of contents warranty repairs of the video display control system and related tmc display equipment must commence within num hours after notification by the department .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each cctv camera or video display device or system furnished and installed will include furnishing placement and testing of all equipment and materials and for all tools labor operational software packages and firmware supplies support personnel training shop drawings documentation and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the video display equipment will be measured as each major system component is furnished installed made fully operational and tested in accordance with this specification or as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num cctv cameraeach .
item no .
num video display equipmenteach .
num return to table of contents section num network devices num managed field ethernet switch .
num description furnish and install a hardened devicelevel managed field ethernet switch mfes for intelligent transportation system its projects .
ensure that the mfes provides wirespeed fast ethernet connectivity at transmission rates of num megabits per second from the remote its device installation location to the its network trunk interconnection point .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num materials num general ensure that the its network administrator will be able to manage each mfes individually and as a group for switch configuration performance monitoring and troubleshooting .
ensure that the mfes includes layer num capabilities including qos igmp rate limiting security filtering and general management .
ensure that the furnished mfes is fully compatible and interoperable with the its trunk ethernet network interface and that the mfes supports half and full duplex ethernet communications .
furnish an mfes that provides num errorfree operation and that complies with the electronic industries alliance eia ethernet data communication requirements using singlemode fiber optic transmission medium and category nume copper transmission medium .
provide a switched ethernet connection for each remote its field device .
ensure that the mfes has a minimum mean time between failures mtbf of num years or num hours as calculated using the bellcoretelcordia srnum standard for reliability prediction .
num networking standards ensure that the mfes complies with all applicable ieee networking standards for ethernet communications including but not limited to num .
ieee numd standard for media access control mac bridges used with the rapid spanning tree protocol rstp .
num .
ieee numq standard for portbased virtual local area networks vlans .
num .
ieee nump standard for quality of service qos .
num .
ieee num standard for local area network lan and metropolitan area network man access and physical layer specifications .
num .
ieee numu supplement standard regarding num base txnum base fx .
num .
ieee numx standard regarding flow control with full duplex operation .
num optical ports ensure that all fiber optic link ports operate at num or num nanometers in single mode .
ensure that the optical ports are type st sc lc or fc only as specified in the plans or by the engineer .
do not use mechanical transfer registered jack mtrj type connectors .
provide an mfes having a minimum of two optical num base fx ports capable of transmitting data at num megabits per second unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ensure the mfes is configured with the number and type of ports detailed in the contract documents .
provide optical ports designed for use with a pair of fibers one fiber will transmit num return to table of contents tx data and one fiber will receive rx data .
the optical ports shall have an optical power budget of at least num db or as detailed in the contract documents .
num copper ports provide an mfes that includes a minimum of four copper ports unless otherwise shown in the plans .
all copper ports shall be type rjnum and shall autonegotiate speed i.e .
num base and duplex i.e .
full or half .
all num base tx ports shall meet the specifications detailed in this section and shall be compliant with the ieee num standard pinouts .
ethernet over very high speed digital subscriber line eovdsl ports are permitted for use in applications where fiber optic cable is not available .
eovdsl ports must support standard telephonegrade twisted copper pair and automatically negotiate the fastest data rate possible depending on cable length and quality .
num management capability ensure that the mfes supports all layer num management features and certain layer num features related to multicast data transmission and routing .
these features shall include but not be limited to num .
an mfes that is a portbased vlan and supports vlan tagging that meets or exceeds specifications as published in the ieee numq standard and has a minimum numkilobit vlan address table .
num .
a forwardingfiltering rate that is a minimum of num packets per second for num megabits per second and num packets per second for num megabits per second .
num .
a minimum num kilobit mac address table .
num .
support of at a minimum version num of the internet group management protocol igmp .
num .
support of remote and local setup and management via telnet and secure webbased gui .
num .
support of the simple network management protocol snmp .
verify that the mfes can be accessed using the resident eianum management port a telecommunication network or the trivial file transfer protocol tftp .
num .
port security through controlling access by the users .
ensure that the mfes has the capability to generate an alarm and shut down ports when an unauthorized user accesses the network .
num .
support of remote monitoring rmon of the ethernet agent and the ability to be upgraded to switch monitoring smon if necessary .
num .
support of tftp and either network time protocol ntp or the simple network time protocol sntp .
ensure that the mfes supports port mirroring for troubleshooting purposes when combined with a network analyzer .
num mechanical specifications ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number and serial number .
ensure that every conductive contact surface or pin is goldplated or made of a noncorrosive nonrusting conductive metal .
do not use selftapping screws on the exterior of the assembly .
all parts shall be made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
num electrical specifications mfes must operate on a nominal voltage of num v alternating current vac .
supply an appropriate voltage converter for devices that require operating voltages of less than num vac .
num return to table of contents ensure that the mfes has diagnostic light emitting diodes leds including link tx rx and power leds .
num environmental specifications ensure that the mfes operates properly during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema ts num sections num num. and num .
num installation requirements mount the mfes inside a field site cabinet .
ensure that the mfes is resistant to all electromagnetic interference emi .
ensure that the mfes is mounted securely and is fully accessible by field technicians .
ensure that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair ethernet network cables are compliant with the eiatianumb standard .
num testing num general subject the mfes to field acceptance tests fats .
develop and submit a test plan for fats to the engineer for consideration and approval .
the engineer reserves the right to witness all fats .
complete the tests within five calendar days .
num field testing once the mfes has been installed conduct local fats at the mfes field site according to the submitted test plan .
perform the following num .
verify that physical construction has been completed as detailed in the plans .
num .
inspect the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
num .
verify proper voltages for all power supplies and related power circuits .
num .
connect devices to the power sources .
num .
verify all connections including correct installation of communication and power cables .
num .
verify configuration of the mfes internet protocol ip addresses and subnetwork mask .
num .
verify the network connection to the mfes through ping and telnet sessions from a remote personal computer pc .
num .
perform testing on multicast routing functionality .
num device server .
num description .
furnish and install a device server as shown in the plans .
provide a device server that allows connection of serial devices with eianum eianum and eianum connections to an ethernet network .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the apl .
num materials num general ensure that the device server provides a tcpip interface to one or more field devices using eianum standard connections .
ensure that the device server supports tcpip user datagram protocol udpip dynamic host configuration protocol dhcp address resolution protocol arp internet control message protocol icmp simple network management protocol snmp hypertext transfer protocol http and telnet .
ensure that the device server provides num errorfree operation and eiacompatible ethernet data communication by way of a category nume copper or fiber optic transmission medium as shown in the plans .
ensure that the device server is resistant to all electromagnetic interference .
num return to table of contents use a device server having an encryption feature that provides data security and prevents interception or sniffing of transmitted information by unauthorized parties .
data security shall comply with version num of the secure shell protocol sshvnum or the nist requirements as defined in the federal information processing standard fips publication pubnum for the advanced encryption standard aes .
ensure that the device server has a minimum mean time between failures mtbf of num years or num hours .
num serial interface ensure that the device server provides a minimum of one serial data interface and connector as specified in the plans that conforms to eia num standards .
ensure that the serial interface supports numwire and numwire eianum connections .
ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num kbps error detection procedures utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
ensure that the device server provides flow control request to send rtsclear to send cts and transmit ontransmit off xonxoff as well as allow control of the data terminal ready dtr data carrier detect dcd data set ready dsr cts and rts signals .
ensure that the device server supports rts toggle for halfduplex emulation .
num network interface ensure that the device server includes a minimum of one ethernet port which must provide a num base tx or a num base fx connection as specified in the plans .
verify that all copperbased network interface ports utilize registered jack rjnum connectors .
verify that the optical ports are type st sc lc or fc only as specified in the plans or by the engineer .
mechanical transfer registered jack mtrj type connectors are not allowed .
num configuration and management provide a device server that supports local and remote configuration and management which must include access to all user programmable features including but not limited to addressing port configuration device monitoring diagnostic utilities and security functions .
ensure that the device server supports configuration and management via serial login snmp telnet login and browserbased interface .
num mechanical specifications ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number date of manufacture and serial number .
do not use selftapping screws on the exterior of the assembly .
ensure that all parts are made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
ensure that the dimensions of the device server accommodate the units installation in a control cabinet as specified in the plans .
num electrical specifications verify that all wiring meets applicable nec requirements and that the device server operates using a nominal input voltage of num vac .
if the device requires nominal input voltage of less than num vac furnish the appropriate voltage converter .
verify that the maximum power consumption does not exceed num watts .
ensure that the device server has diagnostic leds including link tx rx and power leds .
num environmental specifications ensure the device server performs all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema tsnum sections num num and num .
num installation requirements mount the device server securely in a location in the equipment cabinet that allows the unit to be fully accessible by field technicians .
ensure that num return to table of contents all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair ethernet network cables are compliant with the eiatianumb standard .
num testing num general subject the device server to field acceptance tests fats .
develop and submit a test plan for fats to the engineer for consideration and approval .
the engineer reserves the right to witness all fats .
complete the tests within five calendar days .
num field testing perform local field operational tests at device server field sites according to the test procedures stated herein .
num .
verify that physical construction has been completed as specified in the plans .
num .
verify the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
num .
verify proper voltages for all power supplies and related power circuits .
num .
connect devices to the power sources .
num .
verify all connections including correct installation of communication and power cables .
num .
verify the network connection to the device server through ping and telnet session from a remote pc .
num .
verify serial data transmission through the device server .
num digital video encoder and decoder .
num description furnish and install digital video encoder dve and digital video decoder dvd hardware and software to create a videooverip network system as shown in the plans .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the apl .
num materials num general use dves and dvds that are specialized networkbased hardware devices and software which allow video and data signals to be transmitted across ip networks .
ensure that the video and data packets produced by the dve and placed onto the network allow reconstruction of digital video signals by hardwarebased and softwarebased dvds that are also attached to the network .
ensure that the complete video and data transmission system defined as the combination of dve and dvd hardware together with the existing or planned network infrastructure simultaneously transports video and data from multiple remote field locations to multiple monitoring locations for roadway surveillance and traffic management .
num software provide a software decoding and control package that allows the viewing of any video source connected to the network through a dve and which allows the pantiltzoom ptz control of any ptz camera on the network the discovery of dve and dvd devices on the network and the control and adjustment of programmable parameters in the dve and dvd equipment including the network addresses of these devices at no additional cost .
provide all setup control programs and diagnostic software related to the dve or dvd .
provide all equipment licenses where required for any software or hardware in the system .
num mpegnum format furnish dve and dvd components that utilize the moving picture experts groups mpegnum video compression technology in accordance with the international organization for standardization iso and international electrotechnical commission iec requirements detailed in the isoiec num standard .
ensure that the dve num return to table of contents and dvd are capable of unicast and multicast operation .
ensure dves support the session announcement protocol sap as recommended by the internet engineering task force ietf rfc num .
ensure that the dve provides num errorfree operation .
ensure mpegnum dve and dvd equipment supports programmable bit rates .
ensure that mpegnum equipment supports fixed bit rate mode .
num h.num format furnish dve and dvd components that utilize video compression technology in accordance with the international organization for standardization iso and international electrotechnical commission iec requirements detailed in the isoiec num standard .
ensure that the dve and dvd are capable of unicast and multicast operation .
ensure that dves support the session announcement protocol sap as recommended by the internet engineering task force ietf rfc num and real time streaming protocol rtsp .
ensure that the dve provides num errorfree operation .
ensure h.num dve and dvd equipment supports programmable bit rates .
ensure that h.num equipment supports fixed bit rate mode .
num digital video encoder provide a dve that is a hardwarebased network device able to accept a minimum of one analog national television system committee ntsc video input and digitize it for transport across ip networks .
use a dve that provides a minimum of one serial data interface for transmission of command and control data to other devices typically camera ptz commands as well as console and configuration functions .
provide compatible decoder software along with the dve at no additional cost .
num digital video decoder provide a dvd that is either a hardwarebased network device or a software application that resides on a workstation pc .
num hardwarebased decoder provide a hardwarebased decoder that has a minimum of one video output .
use a dvd that has a minimum of one data interface for configuration functions .
use a dvd that includes an ethernet interface for connection to ip networks .
num softwarebased decoder ensure that any softwarebased decoder applications do not interfere with sunguide software operating when installed and used together on a shared hardware platform .
ensure that the software application provides pc desktop display of ip network video streams .
ensure that the softwarebased decoder offers an open application programming interface api and software development kit available to the department at no cost for integration with third party software and systems .
num interoperability provide dve and dvd devices and software that are interoperable and interchangeable with dve and dvd devices and software from other manufacturers .
ensure that the dve is compatible and fully interoperable with software and hardware dvds from the dve manufacturer as well as a minimum of two software and hardware dvds from other manufacturers .
ensure that the dvd is compatible and fully interoperable with dves from the dvd manufacturer as well as a minimum of two other dves from other manufacturers .
ensure dve and dvd can be controlled using sunguide or support stream selection and switching using onvif commands .
num video specifications ensure that composite video inputs and outputs utilize bnc connectors .
ensure analog video inputs and outputs support num volt peaktopeak vpp ntsc composite video .
ensure that the dve and dvd operate with both color and monochrome video and that dves allow the user to select and adjust video resolution .
ensure that the dve and dvd support resolutions that include but are not limited to those defined in num return to table of contents table num .
ensure that the dve and dvd are capable of delivering color and monochrome video at num fps regardless of resolution .
table num resolution requirements format resolutions mpegnum num x num num x num num x num h.num num x num num x num num x num note the resolutions attained depend on the data transmission rate .
num serial interface ensure that hardwarebased dves provide a minimum of one serial data interface that supports eiatianum and tianum .
ensure that the serial ports support data rates up to num kbps error detection procedures utilizing parity bits i.e .
none even and odd and stop bits num or num .
ensure that hardwarebased dves provide a tcpip interface to their serial port using a network socket connection with configurable ip address and port number .
serial interface ports may utilize rjnum connectors dsub connectors or screw terminals .
num network interface ensure that the dvedvd local area network lan connection supports the requirements detailed in the ieee num standard for num ethernet connections .
provide a dvedvd having a minimum of one ethernet port which shall be a num base tx connection or a num base fx st sc lc or fc interface .
ensure that the connector complies with applicable eia and tia requirements .
provide copper based network interface ports that utilize rjnum connectors .
ensure that fiber ports are single mode with a minimum link budget of num db or the type and power detailed in the contract documents .
ensure that the network communication conforms to user datagram protocol udp version num of the internet protocol ip and version num of the internet group multicast protocol igmp .
num front panel status indicators provide dves and dvds that have led displays liquid crystal displays lcds or similar illuminated displays to indicate status for power and data activity .
num configuration and management provide dves and dvds that support local and remote configuration and management .
configuration and management functions shall include access to all userprogrammable features including but not limited to addressing serial port configuration video settings device monitoring and security functions .
ensure that the dve and dvd support configuration and management via serial login telnet login web browser or simple network management protocol snmp .
num mechanical specifications ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number date of manufacture and serial number .
do not use selftapping screws on the exterior of the assembly .
ensure that equipment intended for installation in a roadside cabinet uses parts made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
ensure that the dimensions of the dve accommodate the units installation in a control cabinet as specified in the plans .
num return to table of contents num electrical specifications provide equipment that operates on a nominal voltage of num vac .
if the device requires operating voltages of less than num vac supply the appropriate voltage converter .
num environmental specifications ensure dves and dvds installed in roadside cabinets perform all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema tsnum sections num num and num .
ensure that a hardware dvd installed in a climatecontrolled environment such as a tmc computer room has an operating temperature range of num to numf .
num installation requirements ensure that the dve is shelf andor rack mountable and designed for use in roadside control cabinets without climate control .
ensure that front panel status indicators remain unobstructed and visible .
ensure that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair network cables are compliant with the eiatianumb standard .
num testing num general subject the dves and dvds to field acceptance tests fats .
develop and submit a test plan for fats to the engineer for consideration and approval .
the engineer reserves the right to witness all fats .
complete the tests within five calendar days .
num field testing perform local field operational tests at the device field site and endtoend video streaming tests in order to demonstrate compliance with department specifications .
testing will include but not be limited to the following num .
verify that physical construction has been completed as detailed in the plans .
num .
inspect the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
num .
verify proper voltages for all power supplies and related power circuits .
num .
connect devices to the power sources .
num .
verify all connections including correct installation of communication and power cables .
num .
verify video image is present and free from oversaturation and any other image defect in both color and monochrome mode .
num .
verify network connection to the dve and dvd through ping and telnet session from a remote pc .
num .
verify serial data transmission through the dve and dvd serial ports .
num .
verify support of unicast multicast and sap .
num media converter .
num description furnish and install a media converter as shown in the plans .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the apl .
num materials num general use a media converter that connects different transmission media for the purpose of transmitting ethernet data .
the media converter must allow transition between the transmission media shown in the plans or required to construct a functional system such as conversion from twisted pair to optical fiber or from twisted pair to coaxial cable .
num network interface ensure that the media converter local area network lan connection supports the requirements detailed in the ieee num standard for num ethernet connections .
provide a media converter having a minimum of one ethernet port which shall be at a minimum a num base tx connection or a num base fx st sc lc num return to table of contents or fc interface .
ensure that the connector complies with applicable eia and tia requirements .
provide copperbased network interface ports that utilize rjnum connectors .
ensure that fiber ports are single mode with a minimum link budget of num db or the type and power detailed in the contract documents .
num mechanical specifications ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number date of manufacture and serial number .
ensure that every conductive contact surface or pin is goldplated or made of a noncorrosive nonrusting conductive metal .
do not use selftapping screws on the exterior of the assembly .
all parts must be made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
num electrical specifications ethernet to coax media converters must operate using power over ethernet poe .
media converters must operate on a nominal voltage of num vac if poe is unavailable .
supply an appropriate voltage converter for devices that require operating voltages of less than num vac .
ensure that the media converter has diagnostic leds including link tx rx and power leds .
num environmental specifications ensure media converters perform all required functions during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema tsnum sections num num and num .
num installation requirements ensure that status indicators remain unobstructed and visible .
all parts shall be made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized or painted aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
ensure that all unshielded twisted pairshielded twisted pair ethernet network cables are compliant with the eiatianum b standard .
num warranty .
num general ensure that the manufacturer will furnish replacements for any part or equipment found to be defective during the warranty period at no cost to the department or the maintaining agency within num calendar days of notification .
num mfes ensure that the mfes has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for five years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num device server ensure that the device server has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for five years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num digital video encoder and decoder ensure that the dve or dvd has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for two years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num media converter ensure that the media converter has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for five years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each mfes device server dve dvd or media converter furnished and installed will include furnishing placement and testing of all equipment and materials and for all tools labor hardware operational software packages and firmware num return to table of contents supplies support personnel training shop drawings documentation and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
provide softwarebased decoders at no additional cost when furnished in conjunction with dves .
a softwarebased dvd provided individually shall be paid under the pay item below .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num managed field ethernet switcheach .
item no .
num device servereach .
item no .
num digital video encoder with software decodereach .
item no .
num digital video decodereach .
item no .
num media convertereach .
num return to table of contents section num traffic control system auxiliaries num description .
furnish and install traffic control system auxiliaries as shown in the plans .
num materials .
num general use traffic control system auxiliaries listed on the departments approved product list apl .
equipment must be permanently marked with the manufacturers name or trademark modelpart number and serial number or date of manufacture .
num uninterruptible power supply ups use a line interactive or onlinedouble conversion ups as shown in the plans .
ups assemblies must be designed for installation in a roadside nema numr enclosure to provide battery backup functionality for traffic control systems including traffic signal and intelligent transportation system its devices .
ups assemblies must include batteries provided by the ups manufacturer or in accordance with manufacturers requirements .
loss of utility power transfer from utility power to battery power and transfer back to utility power must not interfere with normal operation of connected equipment .
in the event of ups failure or battery depletion connected equipment must be energized automatically upon restoration of utility power .
the ups must operate in hot standby mode with power transfer being accomplished in num milliseconds or less .
removal and replacement of the ups must not disrupt the operation of the equipment being protected .
all harnesses necessary to connect and operate the system must be included .
all connectors must be keyed to prevent improper connection .
num configuration and management provide a ups that supports local and remote configuration and management including access to all userprogrammable features as well as alarm monitoring event logging and diagnostic utilities .
configuration and management functions must be password protected .
alarm function monitoring must include the following loss of utility power inverter failure low battery battery temperature and inverter activeutility fail .
the ups must include an event log that indicates the date and time of the following events ac high ac low ac frequency high ac frequency low ac failblackout overload over temperature battery voltage high battery voltage low battery disconnected battery temperature high temperature probe disconnected and short circuit .
the ups event log must be able to store a minimum of num events .
the ups must include a front panel display and controls that allows programming of configurable parameters features and functions without the need for another input device .
the ups must have visual indications for poweron mode of operation utility power or inverter battery status alarm status load levels and ac output voltage .
num communication interfaces provide a serial data connection port and an ethernet port rjnum for local control using a laptop pc and remote control via a network connection .
num return to table of contents num batteries use only agm or gel type external batteries .
batteries must be sealed and require no maintenance cause no corrosion and be capable of maintaining num of original capacity and performance for a minimum of five years .
the ups must be supplied with a wiring harness for battery connections .
the battery wiring harness must allow num feet of separation between the ups and its battery bank .
battery terminals must include a protective covering to prevent accidental spark or shorting .
the ups must include battery management functions that includes active or equalized balancing monitoring of temperature voltage and amperage of charge and discharge and temperature compensated automatic charging to maximize the life of the batteries .
num electrical ups assemblies used to provide backup power in an its cabinet must provide a minimum of num watts at num vac of continuous backup power for a minimum of two hours unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ups assemblies used to provide backup power in a traffic signal controller cabinet must provide a minimum num watts at num vac of continuous power for a minimum of num hours unless otherwise shown in the plans .
frequency must be regulated to num hz plus or minus num hz while the ups is supplying power .
the ups must operate on num to num vac without requiring assistance from the batteries .
doubleconversion ups must be capable of simultaneously producing fully regenerated and regulated conditioned true sine wave power and hot standby ac output and have a minimum operating efficiency of num .
ensure the ups is listed to the requirements of ul num .
upstream backfeed voltage from the ups must be less than num vac .
num traffic signal ups cabinet cabinets used to house traffic signal ups assemblies must be designed to be mounted to the side of a traffic cabinet or base mounted .
cabinets must meet the requirements of section num and must include shelves and rack rails to house all ups system components including the ups batteries harnesses switches surge protective device power terminal block and a generator hookup with transfer switch .
the ups cabinet must allow a maintenance technician to safely insert power for traffic signal operation while the ups or associated equipment is serviced or replaced .
a surge protective device must be installed where the supply circuit enters the cabinet in accordance with num .
the cabinet must include a num a num volt num hz gfci receptacle .
the receptacle must be wired to utility power and not regulated by the ups module .
the cabinet must include a main breaker and a breaker for the technician gfci outlet .
num transfer switch and generator access panel the cabinet must include a manual transfer switch and generator access panel in accordance with num .
the generator access door must not protrude more than num inch when closed .
num mechanical all parts must be made of corrosionresistant materials such as plastic stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
all fasteners exposed to the elements must be type num or num passivated stainless steel .
num environmental ups assemblies including batteries must provide continuous power with specified wattage and operate properly during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema ts num sections num num and num .
num return to table of contents num installation .
install ups assemblies in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
all equipment used to keep the intersection signalized must be backed up and protected by the ups .
include a ups operation and maintenance manual in the cabinet where the ups is installed that includes cabinet wiring schematics electrical interconnection drawings parts layout and parts lists .
num testing .
provide a field acceptance test plan to the engineer for approval at least num days prior to commencement of testing .
after approval of the acceptance test plan perform testing of the installed ups equipment .
furnish all equipment software and supplies necessary for conducting the test .
num warranty .
ensure the ups includes a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of three years num years for the external batteries in accordance with num from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
the warranty must include provisions for providing a replacement ups within num calendar days of notification for any ups found to be defective during the warranty period at no cost to the fdot or the maintaining agency .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each ups furnished and installed will include furnishing placement and testing of all equipment and materials as specified in the contract documents and all tools labor operational software packages and firmware supplies support personnel training shop drawings documentation including the field acceptance test plan and incidentals necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num uninterruptible power supply each num return to table of contents section num traffic monitoring site equipment and materials num description .
furnish or furnish and install a complete operable traffic monitoring site tms as shown in the plans and standard plans .
the department uses tms to monitor the volume speed number of axles weight of wheels axles or vehicles or vehicular axle classification types .
num general .
num traffic monitoring site component approval use only components that meet the requirements of this section and are listed on the departments approved products list apl .
any electronics unit or software submitted for approval must be compatible with or convert the data into a format compatible with the departments polling and processing software .
any substitute software modules submitted must be tested and approved .
num marking of approved equipment num manufacturers identification all tms equipment must be permanently marked with the manufacturers name or trademark part or model number and date of manufacture or serial number .
num submittal data requirements submit forms in accordance with num num .
num notification notify the engineer num days prior to beginning work in the area of the tms to coordinate the removal of existing tms equipment .
a tms inspector must be onsite during tms installation .
notify the engineer num days prior to installation of the tms to coordinate the scheduling of a tms inspector .
num poles for cabinets nonintrusive sensors and solar panels num requirements meet the requirements of section num for aluminum poles .
num installation install cabinets in accordance with section num .
install the weather head and ground the pole in accordance with section num and standard plans index num .
num manufacturers warranty provisions num general secure all warranties provided by the equipment manufacturer for the specific equipment included in the contract .
ensure that all warranties are fully transferable from the contractor to the department .
transfer warranties upon final acceptance in accordance with num .
document all warranties and warranty transfers and submit to the engineer .
the engineer will submit warranty forms received from the contractor to the transportation statistics office transtat tms manager .
num terms and conditions ensure that the terms and conditions of warranties are documented by the manufacturer when submitting a request to the department for certification and for equipment submittal for construction projects .
include terms for a specified service performance with provisions for repair parts and labor or for replacement .
ensure the terms and conditions define the equipment installation date as the date for such warranty to be in effect .
the installation date for construction projects is the day the site is accepted by the transtat tms manager .
for warehouse purchases the installation date is the date of visual inspection approval not to exceed ten days after delivery date .
num return to table of contents ensure warranties require the manufacturer to furnish replacements within num calendar days of notification for any part or equipment found to be defective during the manufacturers warranty period at no cost to the department .
leave a copy of the warranty in the cabinet once it is installed and submit the warranty to the engineer .
the engineer will submit warranty forms received from the contractor to the transtat tms manager .
comply with the terms of the warranty .
the department may suspend the certification for noncompliance .
num vehicle sensor nonweight applications .
num general install tms vehicle sensors of the type and at the location shown in the plans .
use vehicle sensors listed on the departments apl and compatible with the electronics unit to which they will be connected .
num axle sensor inroadway physical characteristics axle sensor sensors sensor element dimensions num ft. to num ft. in length as specified in plans num in .
to num in .
in diameter varies by manufacturer sensor element material pressure sensing piezoelectric pavement operating temperature numf to numf output signal minimum nummv for passengerpickup truck axle numf with less than num negative signal num installation install sensors in accordance with the requirements of this section and standard plans index num .
ensure axle sensors are installed in the roadway and secured using an adhesive bonding material listed on the apl .
install axle sensors in the righthand wheelpath midway between the leading and trailing loops as detailed in standard plans index num .
install axles sensors in the lefthand wheelpath when no paved shoulder exists and sensor lead exit windows are installed at the righthand edge of the roadway surface or in a lane which is to the left of and adjacent to an open lane of traffic .
install the axle sensor such that the cable end is closest to the pull box to which the sensor lead cable will be routed .
install the end of the sensor midway into the edge line stripe or lane line stripe .
ensure that the axle sensor being installed has leadin cables of sufficient length to reach the cabinet without splicing .
do not splice axle sensor leadin cables .
route the sensor lead to the pull box then to the tms cabinet .
mark the sensor lead at the pull box and at termination in the cabinet .
submit lane numbering information as specified in standard plans index num .
allow newly applied asphalt to cure for a minimum of num days prior to the installation of inroad sensors .
use a chalk line or string and paint to layout the position of the sensor and leadin cable slots .
ensure saw cuts do not deviate more than num inches from the chalk line .
use a single blade or ganged blade saw wide enough to cut the axle sensor slot at full width in a single pass .
cutting two slots and chipping out roadway material between them is not allowed .
num return to table of contents cut the slot the length of the sensor plus an additional num to num inches .
ensure the depth and width of the slot is installed as recommended by the sensor manufacturer typically num inches wide by num to num inches deep .
use clips or jigs provided by the manufacturer to suspend the sensor at a uniform depth in the slot .
mix and apply the bonding agent ensuring the slot is completely full with no voids beneath the sensor .
num test requirements perform the manufacturers recommended onsite preinstallation test to determine the sensors condition using an inductive capacitance resistance meter .
install only those sensors that pass the preinstallation test .
record all test results by lane on the warranty form provided by the manufacturer and leave a copy in the cabinet .
repeat the test at the termination point in the cabinet after installation .
use an oscilloscope to view and record typical waveforms and signal intensity measurements for the axles of passenger cars and large trucks .
remove and replace any sensor that fails the test at no additional charge to the department .
num nonintrusive vehicle sensors offroadway num general install wireless radar or microwave vehicle sensors on a pole as shown in the plans .
physical characteristics of nonintrusive sensors detection zone a minimum of num distinguishable lanes within a minimum of num ft. of detection zone enclosure weatherproof aluminum stainless steel or polycarbonate housing dimensions typically up to num in .
x num in .
x num in .
weight typically less than num lb .
operating temperature ambient numf to numf operating frequency wireless transmission in fcc approved band or unlicensed rf range communications rsnumrsnum or rjnum ports and supports a minimum baud rate of num data interface compatible with the departments field storage devices counters and transmits detection data via contact closure signal using a hardwired connection num installation requirements install the sensor on a pole perpendicular to the target lanes of traffic with room to perform horizontal and vertical aiming adjustments .
ensure that the wireless vehicle sensor has sufficient cable length to reach the cabinet without splicing .
fasten the cable to the pole so wind does not move it or route the cable within the pole cavity to the cabinet termination point .
provide num to num inches of slack in the cable at the connections to the sensor and in the cabinet to ensure the cable is stressfree .
include the appropriate mounting hardware contact closure signal that corresponds to vehicle presence and the manufacturers recommended surge suppression as a part of the installation .
set up the lane detection zones using the manufacturers instructions and software and verify that the sensors orientation is perpendicular to the roadway .
num return to table of contents configure the wireless vehicle sensor for vehicle volume unless otherwise specified in the plans .
num test requirements conduct a visual test to determine that all detection zones are being counted accurately .
connect a personal computer pc to the electronics unit and observe traffic in every lane verifying that each vehicle is displayed onscreen .
a minimum of num vehicles should be observed for each lane of traffic with all vehicles counted assuming a clear line of sight between the sensor and the vehicle being observed is maintained .
if any vehicles are not counted reconfigure the wireless vehicle sensor and repeat the visual observation test until all lanes count correctly .
if the sensor fails to provide accurate counts after three test attempts it must be replaced with a new unit at no expense to the department .
provide a time synchronized video of testing if requested .
submit a num hour verification class speed and volume report for all tms to the engineer .
the engineer will submit video received from the contractor to the transtat tms manager .
submit all documents to the engineer and leave a copy in the cabinet .
num method of measurement .
the contract unit price for each vehicle sensor will include the vehicle sensor leadin cables bonding agent and all equipment materials testing and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms vehicle axle sensor inroadway nonweight applications each .
item no .
num num tms vehicle nonintrusive nonweight applications offroadway each .
num vehicle speedclassification unit .
num general furnish and install tms vehicle speedclassification unit electronics unit in the tms cabinet at the locations shown in the plans .
num materials num general use a vehicle speedclassification unit listed on the departments apl compatible with the other components installed at the tms .
ensure that the vehicle speedclassification unit and equipment cables are compatible and constructed in accordance with the standard plans .
ensure that the vehicle speedclassification unit is marked in accordance with num and the markings are visible after installation .
num vehicle speedclassification unit requirements provide an electronics unit that outputs data compatible with the departments polling computer system or furnish a software module that converts the data into a format compatible with the departments polling computer system .
the electronics unit operates in an unattended mode accumulating data for later retrieval by downloading via the polling computer system .
ensure that the electronics unit is capable of downloading data through direct connection with a pc without deleting or marking the files .
submit complete operating procedures with all software .
num return to table of contents num compatibility provide an electronics unit that is compatible with the embedded inductive loops axle sensors magnetometers and nonintrusive vehicle sensors in place at the tms .
ensure that each electronics unit is capable of determining the count and classification by type and speed of all vehicles for both directions of traffic on the roadway .
provide realtime polling software with each electronics unit capable of operating on a pc using the department recommended operating system and meeting the following requirements num .
capable of communicating with the traffic counterclassifier and downloading data via cellular modem and producing reports of num minute hourly weekly monthly and annual volume and classification data .
num .
capable of displaying and entering operating parameters into the vehicle classcounter and allowing the display of realtime traffic volumes in addition to routine data collection activities .
num .
capable of processing and storing all vehicle data retrieved in routine mode regardless of the selected parameters .
num functional requirements the electronics unit must be fully functional when receiving input from two num foot by num foot embedded inductive loops spaced num to num feet apart leading edge to leading edge with a single axle sensor located between the loops in each lane of a six lane minimum roadway .
ensure that each electronics unit is capable of collecting data from each of the lanes of traffic in any combination of counts classification speed or direction .
provide electrical components of solid state design constructed so that they will not be damaged by jolts and vibrations encountered during shipping and everyday use .
ensure that all electronics units are functionally identical and interchangeable except as follows num .
the electronics unit may be constructed utilizing plug in modules however when plug in modules are used each electronics unit must be identical except for the number and type of modules used .
ensure that modules of the same type are identical and interchangeable .
num .
should more than two electronics units be required in the same cabinet ensure that each electronics unit has a unique individual electronics unit number .
the electronics unit number must reside in nonvolatile memory so that it is not changed when a cold or warm boot is performed or by a power interruption .
provide an electronics unit having the capability of obtaining and providing the following num .
volume speed classification and classification by speed data simultaneously .
num .
volume data by lane .
num .
speed data by lane in a minimum of num bins programmable in num mph increments .
num .
classification by lane in vehicle type by axle class in num bins minimum in accordance with fhwa classification scheme f in floridas traffic forecasting handbook chapter num figure num which can be accessed on the departments website at the following url address httpwww.fdot.govplanningstatisticstrafficdataptf.pdf .
num return to table of contents num .
a minimum of num accuracy of vehicle class speed and volume .
ensure that each electronics unit has the capability of providing realtime monitoring of volume data by lane or direction in user selected intervals of as little as num minutes when required without disrupting the above selected programs .
provide an electronics unit capable of communicating directly with a pc or through a modem at a minimum rate of num bps .
ensure that at a minimum the following parameters are programmable by direct connection to the electronics unit or via modem num .
six digit site number .
num .
number of lanes and directions .
num .
date and time .
num .
data operating and transmission parameters .
num .
sensor spacing .
num .
recording interval .
num .
vehicle parameter table with axle spacing ranges for each type of vehicle .
num .
number and range of speed categories axle and length classifications and headway .
should an axle sensor or a loop in one or more lanes fail the electronics unit must continue to provide the speed and volume from the remaining functioning sensors .
ensure that the sensitivity level for each axle sensor is individually adjustable using software by direct pc connection and remotely via telemetry .
ensure that the loop detectors are internal and selftuning .
ensure that the sensitivity level and any additional parameters necessary to prevent loop crosstalk for each embedded inductive loop can be adjusted individually using software both by direct pc connection and remotely via telemetry .
provide a means of introducing a time delay or debounce value for ignoring spurious axle signals ghost axles in the electronics unit software .
num power requirements provide an electronics unit that is field configurable to be powered num vdc and does not consume more than a total of num watts .
if an internal battery is required it must be capable of being recharged and shall be furnished and included with the electronics unit at no extra cost .
num mechanical requirements provide a modular electronics unit which is completely enclosed in a durable housing of sheet metal or cast aluminum with a durable finish .
when configured for operation the electronics unit including all cables must fit into a type iv cabinet .
num environmental requirements provide an electronics unit which operates as specified when the ambient temperature and humidity inside the controller cabinet are within the following limits num ambient temperature the operating ambient temperature range must be between minus num to numf .
the rate of change in ambient temperature must not exceed numf per hour during which the relative humidity must not exceed num .
num humidity the relative humidity must not exceed num over the temperature range of num to numf .
above numf constant absolute humidity must be num return to table of contents maintained as seen in table num .
the relative humidity range shown in table num is for dynamic testing .
table num at num psi barometric pressure dry bulb f relative humidity wet bulb f num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cables and connectors furnish all cables and connectors for a complete and functional installation of each electronics unit in accordance with standard plans index num .
ensure that the cables are properly terminated for the prescribed use without further modification by the department .
furnish one serial port cable for interconnecting each electronics unit with a pc .
num installation requirements install the electronics unit and equipment cables in accordance with the manufacturers recommended installation procedure standard plans index num and the contract documents .
num method of measurement the contract unit price per assembly for electronics unit includes the electronics unit and equipment cable all equipment materials and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms vehicle speedclassification unit per assembly .
num wireless magnetometer sensor .
num general wireless battery powered magnetometers wireless sensors detect vehicular traffic by measuring disturbances in the earths magnetic field .
detection data is transmitted wirelessly to a central roadside communications point communications hub that collects the data itself or through another device .
the data may be transmitted to the num return to table of contents communications hub directly from the sensors or from an intermediary device wireless repeater which can amplify the signal for greater transmission distances .
num functional capabilities num wireless sensors use wireless sensors with the following functional capabilities num .
detection accuracy of the magnetometer sensors comparable to properly operating inductive loop sensors .
num .
automatic recalibration in the event of a detector lock .
num .
communicate wirelessly such that num of the traffic detected is transmitted to the communications hub .
num .
transmit a unique identifying code with detection data and periodically transmit status data ex .
power level rssi .
num .
capable of accepting software and firmware upgrades .
num .
operate at temperatures from num to numf .
the sensor housing or containment method shall conform to nema type nump and iec ipnum standards .
the sensor power source shall have a minimum life expectancy of three years when the sensor is configured for and operating under normal traffic conditions normal traffic conditions must be defined in writing by manufacturer and expressed as aadt .
num communications hub the wireless links between each sensor and communications hub and between each wireless repeater and communications hub shall conform to the following num .
meet the appropriate regulatory restrictions as is legally required .
num .
center frequencies bandwidths and transmit power levels of the radio links must allow operation in an unlicensed frequency band .
num .
user selectable settings must be available to avoid interference with other devices operating in the unlicensed band num .
detection data must be relayed from the communications hub to a local traffic controller via contact closure signals .
num .
support the relay of sensor detection data through several interfaces simultaneously as required by the application .
num .
be capable of accepting software and firmware upgrades .
num .
support enough sensors to support at a minimum six separate lanes of traffic data .
num .
be field configurable to be powered from num vdc .
num .
properly operate at temperatures from num to numf .
communications hub components which must be placed in a specific location for proper operation relative to other system components such as sensors or repeaters must conform to nema type numx and iec ipnum standards .
num wireless repeater use wireless repeaters with the following functional capabilities num .
reliably communicate at a minimum distance of num feet .
num .
be powered from a num vdc source .
num .
operate at temperatures from num to numf .
num return to table of contents wireless repeater components which must be placed in a specific location for proper operation relative to other system components such as sensors or repeaters must conform to nema type numx and iec ipnum standards .
num method of measurement the contract unit price for each magnetometer sensor will include the magnetometer sensor communications hub repeater cables bonding agent and all equipment materials testing and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms wireless magnetometer sensor per each .
num solar power unit .
num general install tms solar power units at the locations and as shown in the plans and standard plans .
solar power units are used to power tms that collect vehicular data on a continuous basis .
the solar power unit consists of the following components solar panels and mounting hardware num v storage battery and voltage regulator with wiring and associated mounting hardware .
num materials use solar power unit components listed on the departments apl compatible with the other components installed at the location .
ensure that the solar power unit is marked in accordance with num and the markings are visible after installation .
num solar panel configured for nominal num vdc meet the following requirements num .
peak power range of num to num watts as specified in the contract documents .
num .
voltage at maximum power greater than num v at numf .
num .
current at maximum power greater than num a at numf .
num .
photovoltaic modules constructed of mono or polycrystalline cells .
num .
capable of multiple arrays and series or parallel wiring configurations .
num .
anodized aluminum frame .
num .
anodized galvanized or stainless steel mounting hardware .
ensure that solar panels do not have internal voltage regulators .
when multiple panels are required use panels of the same model and manufacture .
num battery num v meet the following requirements num .
rechargeable for photovoltaic application .
num .
valve regulated leadcalcium gelled electrolyte .
num .
abs plastic or polypropylene case .
num .
minimum current discharge rate of num hours at num amperes .
num .
approximate overall dimensions of num inches by num inches by num inches .
num voltage regulator configured for nominal num vdc meet the following requirements num .
minimum of num vdc for battery charging .
num .
begin charging when battery voltage is num v or less .
num .
discontinue charging when battery voltage is num v. num .
quiescent current of num ma or less .
num return to table of contents num .
operating temperature range of num to numf .
num .
approximate overall dimensions of num inches by num inches by num inch .
num installation requirements install the solar power units in accordance with the manufacturers recommended installation procedure standard plans index num and the contract documents .
num pole placement ensure that the pole is placed to allow for the proper placement of the solar panels .
num solar panel orientation mount and orient the solar panels to the south .
angle the solar panels in accordance with standard plans index num .
install a weather head and route the wires in accordance with standard plans index num .
num method of measurement the contract unit price each for solar power unit includes the solar power unit as specified in the contract documents all equipment materials and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms solar power unit each .
num inductive loop assembly .
num general install tms inductive loop assembly at the locations shown in the plans meeting the requirements of this specification .
ensure that all materials furnished assembled or installed are new products .
num materials furnish and install inductive loop assembly components listed on the departments apl that are compatible with the other components installed at the location .
num loop wire use loop wire in accordance with standard plans index num .
num shielded leadin cable use shielded leadin cable in accordance with standard plans index num .
num splicing no splicing loop wire less than num feet .
num installation requirements install inductive loop assembly components and materials in accordance with the plans and the standard plans .
num saw cuts loop layout will be as shown in standard plans index num num .
perform saw cuts across concrete pavement expansion joints as detailed in standard plans index num .
for pavement less than num inches deep make saw cuts deep enough to allow num to num inch of sealant cover over the installed loop wire .
num loop wire ensure that all loops have four complete turns of wire wound in a clockwise manner .
do not damage the insulation .
ensure that the hold down material is nonmetallic placed in the saw slot using segments num to num inches long spaced num inches apart and the distance from the top of the hold down material to the final roadway surface is not less than num inches .
num loop wire twisted pair lead create a loop wire twisted pair lead by twisting the loop wire pair a minimum of num to num twists per foot from the edge of the loop to the termination point in the cabinet .
provide a minimum of num feet of twisted loop wire pair lead in the pull box located adjacent to the roadway .
num return to table of contents num loop sealant use loop sealant in accordance with section num .
prepare and apply the sealant in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
remove excess sealant from the roadway surface .
ensure that the loop sealant has cured completely before allowing vehicular traffic to travel over the sealant .
num shielded leadin cable install the shielded leadin cable and perform all splices in accordance with standard plans index num .
ensure that the shielded leadin cable is of sufficient length to extend through the conduits to the cabinet without additional splicing .
num testing conduct all testing with the leads disconnected from the backplane .
num loop resistance ensure new loops have a resistance reading of num  or less .
num inductance ensure new loops have a minimum inductance reading of num m num insulation resistance megging ensure new loops have a minimum reading of num m at num v. num method of measurement the contract unit price per each for inductive loop assembly includes loop wire loop sealant and shielded leadin cable all equipment materials and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section except conduit and pull and junction boxes .
conduit will be paid for as specified in section num and pull and junction boxes will be paid for as specified in section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms inductive loop assembly each .
num site cabinet .
num general install type iii iv or v tms cabinets in accordance with section num and standard plans index num .
num materials num general only use tms cabinets and components currently listed on the departments apl .
ensure that the cabinet and components are compatible with the other components installed at the location .
num shelf ensure that the cabinet has an adjustable shelf constructed of num inch thick aluminum that is adjustable to within num inches of the top of the cabinet and to within num inches of the bottom of the cabinet in num inch increments .
num backplane and cabinet cable furnish and install as specified in the standard plans index num .
num installation requirements install the tms cabinet in accordance with the plans standard plans and manufacturers recommended installation procedure .
ensure that all conduit entrance holes or field drilled holes are reamed and free of burrs .
use clear silicone rubber sealant to make all conduit connections to the cabinet watertight .
perform all excavation and backfill in accordance with num and num .
num pole mounted traffic monitoring site cabinets types iii and iv install pole mounted traffic monitoring site cabinets in accordance with standard plans index num and num .
num return to table of contents num base mounted type iv and v and pedestal mounted type iii traffic monitoring site cabinets install base and pedestal mounted traffic monitoring site cabinets in accordance with standard plans index num and num .
ensure that the end of the conduit riser is a minimum of num inches above the finished surface of the concrete base .
num method of measurement the contract unit price each for tms cabinet includes the tms cabinet shelf and backplane components as specified in the contract documents all equipment materials and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
the cost of the base or pedestal as shown in the standard plans is included in the cost of the cabinet .
the cost of the pole for pole mounts will be paid in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms cabinet each .
num site modem .
num general install tms modem and antenna in the cabinet at the tms location shown in the plans .
num materials num general use a tms modem listed on the departments apl compatible with the other components installed at the location .
num modem furnish and install all cables required to connect the modem to the electronics unit including the antenna .
the device shall be field configurable to be powered from num vdc .
num network service the device shall have the ability and be configured to utilize a network service that shall be at a minimum numg evdo with fallback to cdma numxrtt .
num protocols the device shall have the ability to utilize at a minimum the following protocols num .
network tcpip udpip dns num .
routing nat host port routing dhcp pppoe vlan vrrp reliable static route num .
application sms telnetssh reverse telnet smtp snmp sntp num .
serial tcpudp pad mode modbus ascii rtu variable ppp num event reporting the device shall have the capability to record and report at a minimum the following events in plain text num .
network parameters num .
data usage num .
power num .
device temperature num security the device shall have the following security provisions num .
ability to establish vpn tunnels num return to table of contents num .
ipsec ssl and gre vpn client num .
port forwarding and dmz num .
port filtering num .
trusted ip num .
mac address filtering num environmental the device shall operate at temperatures from num to numf .
num antenna use an antenna that meets the following requirements num .
frequencies fnum to num mhz fnum to num mhz num .
vswr of num or less at resonant point num .
num  nominal impedance num .
gain of num db num .
omnidirectional radiation pattern num .
vertical polarization num .
glassfilled polypropylene radome num .
adhesive mounting num .
sma male plug connectors num .
num foot .
minimum coaxial length num commercial software registration ensure that the department is registered as the enduser of software installed on the system communications .
num installation requirements install the tms modem in accordance with the manufacturers recommended installation procedure unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
num method of measurement the contract unit price each for tms modem will include the antenna and all equipment materials and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num tms system communications modem per each num return to table of contents signing pavement marking and lighting section num highway signing num general requirements .
num description furnish and erect roadway signs at the locations and in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
the department designates ground traffic signs as signs erected on the shoulders slopes or medians but not extending over the traveled roadway and may further classify these signs as single post or multicolumn .
the department designates signs erected partially or completely over the traveled roadway or mounted on bridges as overhead traffic signs and may further classify these signs as overhead cantilever or span traffic signs .
meet the requirements of section num .
num materials num general meet the materials requirements shown in the specifications standard plans and any additional requirements identified in the plans .
num concrete use concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
obtain concrete from a plant that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num static sign assembly requirements all sign panels shall be aluminum unless otherwise shown in the plans .
sheets and plates for sign panels shall meet the requirements of astm bnum aluminum association alloy numtnum numhnum or numhnum .
sign panels for single column ground mounted signs shall utilize aluminum plate with a minimum thickness of num inches .
all other sign panels shall utilize aluminum plate with a minimum thickness of num inches .
all panels shall have rounded corners .
num retroreflective sign sheeting use signs that meet the material and process requirements of section num .
use type xi sheeting for all regulatory warning and overhead signs .
the rnum rnum rnum and rnuma signs must use a sheeting system that includes a colorless film overlay .
type xi sheeting shall also be used for all limited access advance exit and exit guide signs .
use type iv yellowgreen fluorescent sheeting for school snum snum snum num snum and supplemental panels used with snum signs .
do not mix signs having fluorescent yellowgreen sheeting with signs having yellow retroreflective sheeting .
rollup signs shall meet the requirements of type vi sheeting .
use type iv sheeting for all other signs .
num sign fabrication requirements obtain multipost and overhead sign structures from a facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num storage handling and labeling if signs are stored prior to installation store them in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
properly package signs to protect them during storage shipment and handling to prevent damage to the sign face and panel .
in addition to the information required in section num all permanent roadway signs must be labeled on the back bottom edge with the date of installation .
make the labels num return to table of contents unobtrusive but legible enough to be easily read by an observer on the ground when the sign is in its final position .
apply the label in a manner that is at least as durable as the sign face .
num acceptance of signs num sign inspection submit certification that the sign assembly meets the material and installation requirements of the contract documents .
the engineer will inspect the signs upon delivery to the storage or project site and again at the final construction inspection .
repair and replace signs deemed unacceptable by the engineer at no expense to the department .
num imperfections and repairs repair or replace signs containing imperfections or damage regardless of the kind type or cause of the imperfections or damage .
for sign panels exceeding num square feet the contractor may make one patch if necessary to each sign panel not to exceed two square inches .
make repairs according to the manufacturers recommendations and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
ensure that completed repairs provide a level of quality necessary to maintain the service life of the sign and are satisfactory in appearance to the engineer .
num static signs .
num ground mounted signs ground mounted signs consist of both single column and multicolumn static signs .
num materials use aluminum tubing materials meeting the general provisions of section num for all single column ground signs .
multicolumn signs must be galvanized steel w or s beams steel columns meeting the general provisions of section num .
all materials must meet the requirements of the appropriate standard plans .
num fabrication of panel messages fabricate standard sign panel messages in accordance with details included in the standard highway signs shs manual published by the u.s. department of transportation .
submit shop drawings to the department for approval as specified in section num .
num foundation construct foundations in accordance with the applicable standard plans .
the contractor may use precast foundations in augured or excavated holes a minimum of num inches larger than each axis dimension of the precast foundation .
obtain precast foundations from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num.the holes must be clean and without loose material .
temporary casing will be required if the soil is unstable .
fill the void around the precast foundation with flowable fill meeting the requirements of section num or use clean sand placed using hydraulic methods .
num breakaway support mechanisms for ground traffic signs num frangible supports provide support posts for all frangible sign assemblies consisting of aluminum tubes up to num num inches outside diameter with num inch wall thickness in accordance with the requirements in the standard plans .
num slip bases slip base assemblies for single column signs will use aluminum sleeves and base plates .
slip base assemblies for multicolumn signs will use galvanized steel bases .
all slip bases must be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of the standard plans .
num installation verify the length of the column supports in the field prior to fabrication to permit the appropriate sign mounting height .
fabricate the supports and wind beams in accordance with the standard plans .
columns must be plumb and panels must be level with the proper orientation .
num return to table of contents num retroreflective strips for signs use only on signs where the retroreflective sign strip is called for in the plans .
use num minimum aluminum panels or another material approved by the sheeting manufacturer for application of retroreflective sheeting type iv or type xi retroreflective sign sheeting meeting the requirements of section num for the fabrication of the retroreflective sign strips and stainless steel attachment hardware for the installation .
the retroreflective sign strips must be fastened in a manner that does not require drilling of holes in the column .
retroreflective sign strips must be num inches in width and a height of num feet for all signs except for when signs are mounted at num feet then retroreflective sign strip will be num feet in height .
the panel for the retroreflective sheeting must be the same dimensions as the retroreflective sheeting .
for the back of rail road crossbuck signs the retroreflective sign strip will be num inches wide for the full length of the blade .
match the color of the retroreflective sheeting to the background color of the sign except for yield signs and do not enter signs where the color must be red .
num overhead signs num materials num general obtain reinforcing steel multipost and overhead sign structures from a fabrication facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
only use structural steel including bolts nuts and washers that have been hot dip galvanized or metalized after fabrication .
perform hot dip galvanizing in accordance with section num and metalizing in accordance with section num .
for galvanized steel members meet the general requirements of section num .
obtain galvanized steel from a fabrication facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
use a galvanizing compound as specified in section num .
use a galvanizing repair compound listed on the apl for large areas as defined in section num .
num reinforcing steel use reinforcing steel in footings meeting the requirements of section num .
num specific uses of aluminum and galvanized steel use aluminum bolts nuts and hardware to connect parts of the cast base .
use galvanized steel anchor bolts for anchoring base plates to concrete bases and for the nuts and washers .
for all other metal parts of the cast base the engineer will allow galvanized steel as an alternative to aluminum .
num foundations meet the requirements of section num .
num installation install nuts on anchor bolts in accordance with section num with the following exception .
for cantilever overhead sign structures after placement of the upright and prior to installation of the truss adjust the leveling nuts beneath the base plate to achieve the back rake shown on the camber diagram .
if the top surface of the base plate has a slope that exceeds num use beveled washers under the top nuts .
for span overhead sign structures install a screen around the base plate in accordance with num .
for cantilever overhead sign structures install a structural grout pad in accordance with num .
install astm fnum grade anum bolt nut and washer assemblies in accordance with num except that num preparation of faying surfaces is not required .
num return to table of contents num erection of signs and sign supports do not erect overhead sign supports until the concrete strength in the support footing is at least num psi .
determine concrete strength from tests on a minimum of two test cylinders sampled and tested in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum and verifying test results have been submitted to the engineer .
erect the signs and sign structures in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
the contractor may fabricate the structural steel sign trusses in sections that will fit into available galvanizing vats .
prior to galvanizing weld the joints as specified in section num and in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
regalvanize damaged parts as specified in section num .
weld aluminum structures in accordance with section num .
attach electronic display signs to the supporting structure in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using the mounting hardware provided by the manufacturer .
num shop drawings submit shop drawings to the department for approval as specified in section num .
prior to the submittal of the shop drawings determine the actual in place dimensions for all sign structures on the basis of existing field conditions and include these on the shop drawings .
num method of measurement for single post and multi post sign assemblies an assembly consists of all the signs mounted on a single structure .
the contract unit price per assembly for ground mounted signs single post and multipost furnished and installed will include furnishing the sign panels support structure foundation hardware and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
the retroreflective sign strip will be paid for separately and the contract unit price per each will include furnishing the retroreflective sign strip hardware and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
for overhead signs sign panels will be paid separately from support structures .
the contract unit price per each for sign panel furnished and installed will include furnishing the sign panels hardware and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
the contract unit price for each overhead static sign structure furnished and installed will include furnishing the support structure foundation hardware and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
relocation of signs will consist of removing the existing sign assembly and installing the sign on a new foundation at the location shown in the plans .
when the plans call for existing groundmounted signs to be relocated or removed after removing the sign panel from the assembly remove supports and footings .
restore the area of the sign removal or relocation to the condition of the adjacent area .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num single post sign per assembly .
item no .
num num multi post sign per assembly .
item no .
num num sign panel per each .
item no .
num num overhead static sign structure per each .
item no .
num num retroreflective sign strip per each .
num return to table of contents num illuminated signs .
num description furnish and install illuminated signs in accordance with the details specified in the contract documents .
num materials use illuminated signs and associated mounting hardware listed on the departments approved product list apl .
signs must be marked with the name or trademark of the manufacturer the part number and the date of manufacturer .
marking must be accomplished by permanently affixing an indelible label identification plate dot peen type stamp casting metalmarking or other approved method .
markings must remain visible after installation .
num internally illuminated signs num general signs must not exceed num feet in length or be larger than num square feet in area and must not weigh more than num pounds .
provide an internally illuminated sign assembly listed to the requirements of ulnum .
light emitting diode led retrofit kits must be listed on the apl .
num housing ensure that the sign housing is constructed of continuous num or numtnum aluminum .
all housing corners and door seams must be continuously welded .
all exterior surfaces of the assembly must be powdercoat painted in accordance with military standard milprfnuma or aamanum .
finish must meet the requirements of astm dnum astm dnum and astm dnum .
sign housings with any interior airspace must consist of a box type enclosure and separate hinged door assembly .
the sign housing must include provisions to prevent water from entering the sign housing .
drain holes in the sign larger than num inch must be covered by a screen .
signs must have removable sign faces .
the sign assembly must have one face unless specified otherwise in the plans .
the sign face must be secured by a method that holds the sign face securely in place .
slidein grooves are allowed to secure the sign face if the sign is edge lit .
the sign face must be a translucent lens constructed of num inch thick high impact strength polycarbonate or acrylic meeting ulnum .
letters must be as detailed in the contract documents .
background must be translucent retroreflective sheeting coated with a transparent pressuresensitive adhesive film .
color must meet the criteria as detailed in sections num .
retroreflective sheeting must meet the requirements of section num and be listed on the apl .
if a door opens upward it shall have a bracket on each side to secure the door in the open position during maintenance .
doors shall be permanently and continuously sealed with a foam gasket listed to ulnum to prevent the entry of water into the sign housing .
each door must be secured from opening by a minimum of two stainless steel rotary action draw latches .
the sign assembly must be designed and constructed to withstand num mph wind loads meeting the requirements of the departments structures manual .
num luminance the sign face must be illuminated evenly across the entire surface .
contrast ratio between the background and legend shall be established by the lowest and the highest color retroreflective measurement and shall be at least num .
measure the retroreflectivity in accordance with astm dnum .
num background luminance minimum luminance for the legend portion of the street sign face shall be no less than num lux .
the luminance shall be determined by averaging a minimum of seven readings .
four of the readings shall be taken near num return to table of contents the midpoint of a line that would span between the outside corners of the background and the outside corners of the legend .
one reading shall be taken near the midpoint of a line that would connect the top corner readings .
one reading shall be taken near the midpoint of a line that would connect the bottom corner readings .
one reading shall be taken near the vertical and horizontal midpoint of the sign .
num border and lettering luminance minimum luminance of the legend and border shall be num lux .
the luminance shall be determined by averaging a minimum of num readings .
there shall be a minimum of one reading from each letter in the legend .
readings within the legend shall alternate between the top middle and bottom portion of each letter .
readings within top and bottom of the border shall be perpendicular to the top and bottom readings in the background .
readings within the sides of the border shall be taken parallel to the readings taken within each letter .
num clampon cantilever arm use only clampon cantilever arms which meet all design and wind loading requirements as specified in the contract documents .
ensure the clamp is adjustable to accommodate various size poles .
num highlighted signs num general ensure highlighted signs meet the design and functional requirements specified in this section and section numa of the mutcd .
use leds to highlight the signs shape color or message .
stop do not enter yield and wrong way signs that are highlighted with leds must use red leds .
all other signs must use leds which resemble the color of the sign background color .
num performance requirements ensure highlighted signs are capable of automatically dimming to reduce brightness of the leds at nighttime .
ensure highlighted signs that rely upon solar power or batteries are capable of at least num days of continuous operation without the need for charging .
num cabinets if the illuminated sign assembly includes a cabinet the cabinet must be currently listed on the apl or meet the applicable cabinet material requirements listed in section num .
num mechanical requirements ensure all assembly hardware including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized .
bolts studs and threaded rod must meet astm anum .
structural bolts must meet astm fnum grade anum .
num electrical requirements electrical wiring must meet nec requirements for the light source provided .
all wiring must be copper wire .
all internal electrical wiring must be tight and secure .
ensure the sign includes an accessible electrical power service entrance compartment internal or external for connection of field wiring .
external compartments must be weathertight .
all power supplies and ballasts must be federal communications commission fcc approved .
ensure electrical connections are protected against corrosion .
all signs must have provisions for an integrated photocell .
num environmental requirements ensure that the illuminated sign assembly operates properly during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema ts num sections num num and num .
num return to table of contents num acceptance of internally illuminated signs certify that signs and clampon cantilever arms provided meet the criteria in this section .
num installation of internally illuminated signs num general secure the brackets to the sign housing in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num single sided sign assembly install as specified in the contract documents .
num double sided sign assembly use a free swinging mounting method .
num two point support assembly use a two point support assembly when the sign assembly is attached to a mast arm that is perpendicular to the street on which the sign is viewed .
use a two point mast arm mounting assembly consisting of the following num .
stainless steel band or cable type clamp num .
clevis num .
span wire adapter num .
tristud hanger body .
ensure one of the hangers has a mechanism for the horizontal adjustment of the sign .
num one point support assembly use a one point support assembly consisting of an articulated horizontal stainless steel band or cable type mast arm clamp sign bracket and mounting hardware when the sign assembly is attached to a mast arm that is diagonal to the street on which the sign is viewed .
do not use a one point support assembly for internally illuminated sign assemblies exceeding four feet in width .
ensure the band or cable clamp is capable of horizontal rotation of num degrees .
num clampon cantilever arm attach the arm perpendicular to the street on which the sign assembly is viewed .
use a clamp and arm that are galvanized in accordance with astm anum unless otherwise shown in the plans .
ensure the arm has a cap secured in place .
num electrical wiring unless otherwise shown in the plans install dedicated num awg conductors to supply power to the sign and connect the conductors to a dedicated num amp circuit breaker located either inside the controller cabinet or inside the electrical service disconnect .
using the same conduit system for both signal cables and internally illuminated sign conductors is permitted unless otherwise shown in the plans .
install conductors in such a manner as to prevent damage to conductors or conductor insulation .
remove and replace all damaged conductors insulation at no additional cost to the department .
ensure drilled holes through which conductors pass through are fitted with a weather tight rubber grommet fitting .
install continuous lengths of conductors between the dedicated circuit breaker and internally illuminated signs .
do not splice conductors unless otherwise shown in the plans .
provide one photoelectric cell for all internally illuminated signs at each intersection .
use an l bracket to mount the photoelectric cell as specified in the contract num return to table of contents documents .
connect the photoelectric cell to a contactor assembly inside the controller cabinet to provide switching of the internally illuminated signs .
num warranty num internally illuminated signs ensure that internally illuminated signs have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for five years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num highlighted signs ensure that highlighted signs have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for three years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num method of measurement the contract unit price per each for internally illuminated signs furnished and installed will include furnishing the sign panels housing hardware electrical connection and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
when the internally illuminated sign is ground mounted the contract price will include the support structure and foundation .
all other mounting will include the hardware necessary to complete the attachment to the support structure the span wire monotube or mast arm structure will be paid separately .
the contract unit price per each for highlighted signs furnished and installed will include furnishing the sign panels support structure foundation hardware solar panel and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num internally illuminated signs per each .
item no .
num num highlighted signs per assembly .
num dynamic message signs .
num general dynamic message signs dms must meet the requirements of nema tsnum .
dms are classified by the type of sign display and the type of mechanical construction .
provide monochrome tricolor or fullcolor signs as shown in the contract documents .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the apl .
dms led retrofit kits must be listed on the apl .
num front access dms ensure that front access signs meet the requirements of nema ts num section num .
num walkin dms ensure that walkin signs meet the requirements of nema ts num section num .
num embedded dms embedded dmss are typically mounted to ground traffic signs overhead traffic signs or overhead cantilever traffic signs .
num sign housing requirements for all dms ensure that the external skin of the sign housing is constructed of aluminum alloy num hnum that is a minimum of num inches thick for a walkin dms and num inch thick a for front or embedded dms .
ensure the interior structure is constructed of aluminum .
ensure that the sign housing design and appearance is approved by the engineer .
ensure that no internal frame connections or external skin attachments rely upon adhesive bonding or rivets .
ensure the sign enclosure meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
ensure that all drain holes and other openings in the sign housing are screened to prevent the entrance of insects and small animals .
num return to table of contents ensure that the sign housing complies with the fatigue resistance requirements of the aashto lrfd specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
design and construct the dms unit for continuous usage of at least num years .
the sign assembly must be designed in accordance with the departments structures manual including a wind load of num miles per hour .
ensure that the top of the housing includes multiple steel lifting eyebolts or equivalent hoisting points .
ensure hoist points are positioned such that the sign remains level when lifted .
ensure that the hoist points and sign frame allow the sign to be shipped handled and installed without damage .
ensure all assembly hardware including nuts bolts screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel and meet the requirements of astm fnum and astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized and meet the requirements of astm anum .
ensure all exterior excluding the sign face and all interior housing surfaces are a natural aluminum mill finish .
ensure signs are fabricated welded and inspected in accordance with the requirements of the current ansiaws structural welding codealuminum .
ensure the sign housing meets the requirements of nema ts num section num for convenience outlets .
num sign housing for walkin dms ensure that exterior seams and joints except the finish coated face pieces are continuously welded using an inert gas welding method .
limit the number of seams on the top of the housing to a maximum of three .
stitch weld the exterior housing panel material to the internal structural members to form a unitized structure .
ensure that exterior mounting assemblies are fabricated from aluminum alloy numtnum extrusions a minimum of num inches thick .
include a minimum of three num tnum structural aluminum z members on the rear of the sign housing in accordance with the standard plans .
ensure structural aluminum z members run parallel to the top and bottom of the sign housing and are each a single piece of material that spans the full length of the sign .
ensure structural aluminum z members are attached to the internal framework of the sign .
ensure hoist points are attached directly to structural frame members by the sign manufacturer .
ensure housing access is provided through an access door that meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
ensure the access door includes a keyed tumbler lock and a door handle with a hasp for a padlock .
ensure the door includes a closedcell neoprene gasket and stainless steel hinges .
ensure the sign housing meets the requirements of nema ts num section num for service lighting .
if incandescent lamps are provided ensure they are fully enclosed in heavyduty shatterproof protective fixtures .
ensure that incandescent fixtures include aluminum housing and base a porcelain socket and clear glass inner cover .
ensure that all removable components are secured with set screws .
if fluorescent lamps are provided ensure they are fitted with shatter proof protective guards .
ensure that the sign housing includes emergency lighting that automatically illuminates the interior in the event of a power outage .
emergency lighting must be capable of operation without power for at least num minutes .
num return to table of contents num walkin dms work area ensure the walkin dms has a work area that meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
finish all edges of the walkway to eliminate sharp edges or protrusions .
num sign housing for front access and embedded dms ensure front access and embedded signs meet the requirements of nema ts num section num and section num .
ensure access does not require specialized tools or excessive force to operate .
num housing face requirements for all dms ensure the sign face meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
ensure that all sign face surfaces are finished with a matte black coating system that meets or exceeds american architectural manufacturers association aama specification no .
num .
submit certification that the sign face parts are coated with the prescribed thickness .
except for embedded dms ensure the sign face includes a contrast border that meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
num housing face for walkin dms no exposed fasteners are allowed on the housing face .
ensure that display modules can be easily and rapidly removed from within the sign without disturbing adjacent display modules .
num housing face for front access and embedded dms any exposed fasteners on the housing face must be the same color and finish as the housing face .
only captive fasteners may be used on the housing face .
num external fascia panels if the sign includes external fascia panels ensure that they are constructed using aluminum .
finish each fascia panel with a matte black coating system that meets or exceeds aama specification no .
num .
num lens panel assembly if the sign includes lens panel assemblies ensure they are modular in design removable and interchangeable without misalignment of the lens panel and the led pixels .
the lens panel assembly must consist of an environmental shielding layer coating to protect and seal the led and internal electronics .
the coating must be a minimum num uv opaque .
lens panels must have a matte black coating that meets or exceeds aama specification no .
num .
lens panels must include a mask constructed of num inch minimum thickness aluminum .
ensure that the mask is perforated to provide an aperture for each pixel on the display module .
ensure that the apertures do not block the led output at the required viewing angle .
num sign housing ventilation system the ventilation systems for walk in frontaccess and embedded dms must meet the requirements of nema ts num section num .
ensure that air drawn into the sign is filtered upon entry .
ensure the ventilation system is automatically tested once each day and that it may be tested on command from remote and local control access locations .
ensure the sign includes a sensor or a sensor assembly to monitor airflow volume to predict the need for a filter change .
ensure the ventilation system fans possess a num hour lnum life rating .
num ventilation system for walkin dms ensure the sign includes a failsafe ventilation subsystem that includes a snap disk thermostat that is independent of the sign controller .
preset the thermostat at numf .
if the sign housings interior reaches numf the thermostat must override the normal ventilation system bypassing the sign controller and turning on all fans .
the fans must remain on until the internal sign housing temperature falls to numf .
num sign housing temperature sensor ensure that the sign controller continuously measures and monitors the temperature sensors .
ensure that the sign blanks when a num return to table of contents critical temperature is exceeded and that the sign reports this event when polled .
ensure that remote and local computers can read all temperature measurements from the sign controller .
num sign housing humidity sensor humidity sensors must detect from num to num relative humidity in num or smaller increments .
sensors must operate and survive in num to num relative humidity and have an accuracy that is better than plus or minus num relative humidity .
use of a humidistat is not acceptable .
num sign housing photosensors ensure the sign meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
ensure that the sensors provide accurate ambient light condition information to the sign controller for automatic light intensity adjustment .
ensure that the automatic adjustment of the led driving waveform duty cycle occurs in small enough increments that the signs brightness changes smoothly with no perceivable brightness change between adjacent levels .
ensure that stray headlights shining on the photoelectric sensor at night do not cause led brightness changes .
ensure that the brightness and color of each pixel is uniform over the signs entire face within a num degree viewing angle in all lighting conditions .
num display modules provide display modules manufactured by one source and fully interchangeable throughout the manufacturers sign system .
ensure that removal or replacement of a complete display module or led board can be accomplished without the use of special tools .
ensure display modules contain solidstate electronics needed to control pixel data and read pixel status .
ensure that the sign has a full matrix display area as defined in nema ts num num section num .
num led and pixel specifications ensure that led lamps have a minimum viewing angle of num degrees .
ensure that all pixels in all signs in a project including operational support supplies have equal color and onaxis intensity .
ensure that the sign display meets the luminance requirements of nema ts num section num for light emitting signs connected at full power .
ensure that amber displays produce an overall luminous intensity of at least num candelas per square meter when operating at num intensity .
provide the led brightness and color bins that are used in each pixel to the engineer for approval .
ensure that the led manufacturer demonstrates testing and binning according to the international commission on illumination cie num standard .
ensure that all leds operate within the led manufacturers recommendations for typical forward voltage peak pulsed forward current and other ratings .
component ratings must not be exceeded under any operating condition .
ensure that the operational status of each pixel in the sign can be automatically tested once a day .
ensure that the pixel status test determines the functional status of the pixel as defined by the pixel failure status object in national transportation communications for its protocol ntcip num vnum and does not affect the displayed message for more than half a second .
ensure that leds are individually mounted directly on a printed circuit board pcb .
num optical electrical and mechanical specifications for display modules ensure the display modules are rectangular and have an identical vertical and horizontal pitch between adjacent pixels .
ensure that the separation between the last column of num return to table of contents one display module and the first column of the next module is equal to the horizontal distance between the columns of a single display module .
fullcolor signs must have a pitch equal to or less than num mm .
ensure that the led circuit board is a nema frnumrated single num inch black pcb .
ensure that no pcb has more than two pcb jumper wires present .
finish all pcbs with a solder mask and a componentidentifying silk screen .
provide pcbs with conformal coating meeting the material requirements of milinumc military standard united states department of defense usdod .
ensure that any devices used to secure leds do not block air flow to the led leads or block the led light output at the required viewing angle .
ensure that all components on the led side of a pcb are black .
ensure that there are a minimum of two power supplies that are wired in a parallel configuration for redundancy .
ensure that if one or num of the supplies in a group whichever is greater completely fails the sign shall still be supplied with enough power to run num of all pixels at a num duty cycle with an ambient operating temperature of numf .
ensure that the sign controller continuously measures and monitors all led module power supply voltages and provides the voltage readings to the tmc or a laptop computer on command .
ensure that leds are protected from external environmental conditions including moisture snow ice wind dust dirt and uv rays .
do not use epoxy to encapsulate the leds .
num display area for walkin dms ensure that the display area is capable of displaying three lines with a minimum of num characters per line using an num inch font that meets the height to width ratio and character spacing in the mutcd section numl.num paragraphs num num and num .
num characters fonts and color ensure that the signs are capable of displaying american standard code for information interchange ascii characters num through num including all uppercase and lowercase letters and digits num through num at any location in the message line .
submit a list of the character fonts to the engineer for approval .
all signs must be loaded as a factory default with a font in accordance with or that resembles the standard font set described in nema ts num section num .
for signs with a pixel pitch of num mm or less ensure the sign is loaded as a factory default with a font set that resembles the fhwa series enum standard font .
ensure dms fonts have character dimensions that meet the mutcd section numl.num paragraph num .
ensure that fullcolor signs can display the colors prescribed in the mutcd section numa.num .
num main power supply and energy distribution specifications provide a nominal singlephase power line voltage of num vac .
ensure the dms meets the requirements of nema ts num section num .
ensure all num vac wiring has an overall nonmetallic jacket or is placed in metal conduit pull boxes raceways or control cabinets and installed as required by the nec .
do not use the sign housing as a wiring raceway or control cabinet .
provide type xhhw power cables sized as required by the nec for acceptable voltage drops while supplying alternating current to the sign .
num return to table of contents ensure surge protective devices spd are installed or incorporated in the sign system by the manufacturer to guard against lightning transient voltage surges and induced current .
ensure that spds meet or exceed the requirements of section num .
ensure spds protect all electric power and data communication connections .
num uninterruptible power supply ups if a ups is required in the contract documents for walkin dms ensure the ups is installed within the sign housing or as shown in the plans .
if a ups is required in the contract documents for front access and embedded signs ensure the ups is installed within the control cabinet or as shown in the plans .
the ups system must be capable of displaying the current messages on a sign when a power outage occurs .
signs with an ups must be able to operate on battery power and display text messages for a minimum of two hours .
ensure the system uses sealed absorbed glass mat agm batteries .
num operational support supplies furnish the operational support supplies listed in table num .
promptly replace any of the supplies used to perform a warranty repair .
for every group of num or fewer dmss provided or required provide one set of supplies as follows table num operational support supplies num each sign controller and io boards num per dms led display modules num each display power supply num each uninterruptible power supply num each surge suppression sets num each fan assembly num components all components must meet the requirements of nema ts num num section num .
num mechanical components ensure that all fasteners including bolts nuts and washers less than num inch in diameter are passivated stainless steel type num or num and meet the requirements of astm fnum and astm fnum for corrosion resistance .
ensure that all bolts and nuts num inch and over in diameter are galvanized and meet the requirements of astm anum .
do not use selftapping screws .
ensure that all parts are fabricated from corrosion resistant materials such as plastic stainless steel aluminum or brass .
ensure that construction materials are resistant to fungus growth and moisture deterioration .
ensure that all dissimilar metals are separated with an inert dielectric material .
num sign controller ensure that the sign controller monitors the sign in accordance with nema ts num section num .
ensure the sign monitors the status of any photocells led power supplies humidity and airflow sensors .
ensure sign controllers use fiber optic cables for data connections between the sign housing and groundlevel cabinet .
ensure that the sign controller meets the requirements of nema ts num num sections num and num .
ensure that the sign controller is capable of displaying a self updating time and date message on the sign .
ensure that sign controllers within ground cabinets are rackmountable designed for a standard electronic industries alliance eia eianum num inch rack and includes a keypad and display .
num display system hardware ensure the sign utilizes a system data interface circuit for communications between the sign controller and display modules .
except for num return to table of contents embedded dms ensure that the following components reside inside the sign housing sign controller master or slave display system interface circuits display modules power supplies local and remote control switches led indicators eianum null modem cables minimum of four feet long for connecting laptop computer to sign controller and surge protective devices .
num control cabinet provide a control cabinet that meets the requirements of section num .
ensure that the minimum height of the cabinet is num inches .
provide a ground control cabinet that includes the following assemblies and components power indicator surge suppression on both sides of all electronics communication interface devices connection for a laptop computer for local control and programming a four foot long cable to connect laptop computers a workspace for a laptop computer and duplex outlets .
provide for all telephone data control power and confirmation connections between the sign and ground control box and for any required wiring harnesses and connectors .
num sign controller communication interfaces ensure the sign controller has communication interfaces in accordance with nema ts num section num .
ensure that eianum serial interfaces support the following table num communication interface requirements data bits num or num bits parity even odd or none number stop bits num or num bit ensure the sign controller has a num base tx numpnumc port or a num base fx port ethernet interface .
for dialup operations acquire and bear the charges of installing and connecting the dialup telephone line .
provide modems to be retained by the department at each location .
provide a userselectable data transmission rate of up to num kbps for dialup operations .
ensure that switching between dialup ethernet and multidrop operation does not require sign controller software or hardware modifications .
ensure that the tmc or a laptop computer can be used to remotely reset the sign controller .
num message and status monitoring ensure the dms provides two modes of operation num remote operation where the tmc commands and controls the sign and determines the appropriate message or test pattern and num local operation where the sign controller or a laptop computer commands and controls the sign and determines the appropriate message or test pattern .
ensure that the sign can perform the following functions num .
control selection ensure that local or remote sign control can be selected .
ensure that there is a visual indicator on the controller that identifies whether the sign is under local or remote control .
num .
message selection ensure that the sign controller can select a blank message or any one of the messages stored in the sign controllers nonvolatile memory when the control mode is set to local .
num return to table of contents num .
message implementation ensure that the sign controller can activate the selected message .
ensure that the sign can be programmed to display a userdefined message including a blank page in the event of power loss .
ensure that message additions deletions and sign controller changes may be made from either the remote tmc or a local laptop computer .
ensure that each font may be customized and modifications to a font may be downloaded to the sign controller from the tmc or a laptop computer at any time without any software or hardware modifications .
ensure that there is no perceivable flicker or ghosting of the pixels during sign erasure and writing periods .
num tmc communication specification for all dms ensure that the sign controller is addressable by the tmc through the ethernet communications network using software that complies with the ntcip num base standard formerly the nema ts num standard including all amendments as published at the time of contract letting the ntcip simple transportation management framework and conforms to compliance level num .
ensure that the software implements all mandatory objects in the supplemental requirement srnum num dynamic message sign ntcip requirements as published on the departments state traffic engineering and operations office web site at the following url httpwww.fdot.govtraffictraf_sysproductspecifications.shtm .
ensure that the sign complies with the ntcip numvnum numvnum numvnum numvnum numvnum and numvnum standards .
ensure that the sign complies with ntcip numvnum section num .
ensure that the controllers internal time clock can be configured to synchronize to a time server using the network time protocol ntp .
ntp synchronization frequency must be userconfigurable and permit polling intervals from once per minute to once per week in one minute increments .
the controller must allow the user to define the ntp server by internet protocol ip address .
provide communications line circuits that are pointtopoint or multipoint and that provide full duplex asynchronous data transmissions at the rate shown in the contract documents or directed by the engineer .
assign each sign controller a unique address .
num sign control software ensure that the sign is provided with computer software from its manufacturer that allows an operator to program operate exercise diagnose and read current status of all sign features and functions using a laptop computer .
ensure that sign control software provides a graphical representation that visibly depicts the sign face and the current onoff state of all pixels as well as allows messages to be created and displayed on the sign .
ensure that the laptop computer and sign can communicate when connected directly by an eianum cable and via ethernet .
ensure that the software allows communication between multiple users and multiple signs across the same communication network .
num sign support structure meet the requirements of num .
num installation requirements provide a walkin dms for locations over interstate travel lanes .
do not install the sign prior to the availability of electric power .
verify that any ventilation system incorporated within the sign is operational within num hours after sign installation .
ensure that the location of the lifting eyebolts left in place or removed is sealed to prevent water entry after installation .
num return to table of contents load the initial message libraries on both the sign control software and the sign controller .
the engineer will furnish the messages to be placed in these libraries .
num documentation submit documentation for electronic equipment in accordance with num .
num licensing ensure that the manufacturer grants the department a license that allows the department to use and internally distribute any and all sign communications protocols operating systems drivers and documentation .
num technical assistance ensure that a manufacturers representative is available to assist the contractors technical personnel during preinstallation testing and installation .
do not provide initial power to the signs without the permission of the manufacturers representative .
num environmental requirements the dms must meet the requirements of nema ts num section num .
num preinstallation field testing conduct preinstallation tests on all units at a contractorprovided facility within the appropriate district .
perform the tests on each unit supplied to verify that no damage was done to any sign during the shipment and delivery process .
notify the engineer a minimum of num calendar days before the start of any tests .
conduct all tests according to the approved test procedures detailed in this section .
each dms must pass the individual tests detailed below prior to installation .
num material inspection examine each dms carefully to verify that the materials design construction markings and workmanship comply with all applicable standards specifications and requirements .
num operational test operate each dms long enough to permit equipment temperature stabilization and to check and record an adequate number of performance characteristics to ensure compliance with applicable standards specifications and requirements .
num preinstallation test failure consequence if any unit fails the unit shall be corrected or another unit substituted in its place and the test repeated .
if a unit has been modified as a result of a failure a report shall be prepared and submitted to the engineer .
the report shall describe the nature of the failure and the corrective action taken .
if a failure pattern develops the engineer may direct that design and construction modifications be made to all units without additional cost to the department or an extension of the contract time .
num installed site tests conduct an approved standalone equipment installation test at the field site .
test all standalone i.e .
nonnetwork functions of the field equipment using equipment installed as detailed in the plans and as approved by the engineer .
complete approved data forms and turn them over to the engineer for review and as a basis for rejection or acceptance .
provide a minimum notice of num calendar days prior to all tests to permit the engineer or their representative to observe each test .
if any unit fails to pass its standalone test correct the unit or substitute another unit in its place then repeat the test .
if a unit has been modified as a result of a standalone test failure prepare a report describing the nature of the failure and the corrective action taken and submit it to the engineer prior to retesting the unit .
if a failure pattern develops the engineer may direct that design and num return to table of contents construction modifications be made to all units without additional cost to the department or an extension of the contract time .
num system testing conduct approved dms system tests on the field equipment with the master equipment including at a minimum all remote control functions .
display the return status codes from the sign controller for a minimum of num hours .
complete approved data forms and turn them over to the engineer for review and as a basis for rejection or acceptance .
demonstrate the signs ability to display the proper predefined message or remain blank when power is restored following an ac power interruption .
if the system test fails because of any subsystem component repair that component or substitute another in its place then repeat the test .
if a component has been modified as a result of a system test failure prepare a report and submit it to the engineer prior to retesting .
num operational testing after the system testing is successfully completed conduct one continuous num hour fulloperating test prior to conducting the num day acceptance test .
the engineer will approve the type of tests to be conducted .
include in the tests all control monitoring and communications functions of the field equipment by the master equipment .
num acceptance testing conduct a num day acceptance test after the successful completion of the approved num hour operational test .
during the num day test period limit downtime due to mechanical electrical or other malfunctions to a maximum total of five calendar days .
if the equipment fails to operate for a total of five or more calendar days testing will be restarted .
the engineer may select to pause and extend the num day test period by the number of days lost by failure and repair time in lieu of restarting the full num day test .
the engineer will submit to the contractor a letter of approval and completion stating the first and last day of the num day test period .
num warranty ensure that the dms system and equipment has a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of five years from the date of final acceptance by the engineer in accordance with num and section num .
num method of measurement for each dms the quantity to be paid will be each sign furnished installed complete in accordance with the details shown in the plans warranted made fully operational and tested in accordance with the specifications in this section .
for each dms support structure the quantity to be paid will be each structure furnished installed complete in accordance with the details shown in the plans including posts and supports catwalks handrails footings excavation site grounding painting and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials and completing all work as specified in this section or as shown in the plans .
payment will be made under item no .
num num embedded dynamic message sign each .
item no .
num num front access dynamic message sign each .
item no .
num num walkin dynamic message sign each .
item no .
num num dynamic message sign support structure each .
num electronic display sign .
num description all electronic display signs eds must meet the physical display and operational requirements for warning guide or regulatory signs described in the mutcd and the shs .
num return to table of contents eds are specialized electronic signs that include dynamic display components .
the term eds refers to a general category of electronically enhanced signs that includes electronic warning signs ews electronic guide signs egs electronic regulatory signs ers electronic speed feedback signs esfs and blankout signs bos .
num material ews egs ers and esfs must allow attachment to vertical and horizontal support structures as part of a single or double sign post configuration .
bolts must be used for load bearing attachments .
num requirements common to all eds all eds must be designed to withstand the loads defined in the departments structures manual without deformation or damage .
eds other than bos must provide an option to include flashing beacons .
printed circuit boards shall be protected with conformal coating .
housings that contain electronics shall be constructed of aluminum alloy sheet a minimum of .num inches thick .
welding used during the construction of eds must be accordance with section num .
num general eds other than bos shall include a static sign panel with an integrated dynamic display .
signs included on the apl will be designated with a size and type category and may be listed with restrictions such as requires district traffic operations engineer approval school zones only or low speed only .
num electronic display sign with static sign panel eds that include both a static sign and dynamic display may be a modular system comprised of a static sign with an attached electronic display .
static sign panels shall meet the departments requirements for highway signing found in this section .
num electronic display electronic displays shall appear completely blank dark when not energized .
no phantom characters or graphics will be allowed under any ambient light conditions .
num housing the housing must protect and seal the dynamic display and other internal electronics .
any polycarbonate material used on the sign face must be a minimum num uv opaque and resistant to fading and yellowing .
the housing shall be nema numr rated and prevent unauthorized access .
the housing shall include weather tight cable entry or connection points for any required power or data connections .
num cabinet any equipment cabinets provided with the eds must be listed on the apl .
num optical electrical and mechanical specifications for display modules ensure that all leds operate within the led manufacturers recommendations for typical forward voltage peak pulsed forward current and other ratings .
component ratings shall not be exceeded under any operating conditions .
num led and pixel specifications ensure that all leds used in the display have a wavelength output that varies no more than plus or minus two nanometers from the specified peak wavelength .
ensure that the display and led pixel cone of vision is a minimum of num degrees centered around the optical axis or zero point of the pixel .
the cone perimeter is defined by the point where light output intensity is num of the intensity measured at the zero point of the pixel .
for all colors other than white ensure that the sign display produces an overall luminous intensity of at least num candelas per square meter when operating at num intensity .
for white or full color matrix displays ensure that the sign display produces white with an overall luminous intensity of at least num candelas per square meter when operating at num intensity .
submit documentation that indicates the led brightness and color bins that are used in each pixel .
ensure that leds are individually mounted on a pcb and are able to be num return to table of contents removed and replaced using conventional electronic repair methods .
encapsulated leds within a pixel are not allowed .
ers leds must be arranged and powered in a manner that maintains a discernible message in the event of a single led or pixel failure .
num character size fonts and graphics the minimum numeral and letter size of the electronic display must meet or exceed the numeral and letter sizes prescribed in the mutcd and the shs .
fonts and graphics must mimic the characteristics of fonts and graphics defined in the mutcd and shs .
num electronic display controller any electronic display controller required for the operation of the eds shall be housed within the sign and be equipped with a security lockout feature to prevent unauthorized use .
the controller shall have the capability to provide a stipulated default message upon loss of controller function .
a blank message is acceptable .
num communication the electronic display controller shall possess a minimum of one serial interface with the ability to connect to a laptop computer .
the serial data interface shall support multiple data rates from num bps to num bps .
num configuration and management ensure that the sign is provided with computer software from its manufacturer that allows a user to program operate exercise diagnose and read current status of all sign features and functions using a laptop .
num operation and performance ensure that the eds is visible from a distance of at least num mile and legible from a distance of num feet for applications on roads with a speed limit less than num mph and visible from a distance of at least num mile and legible from a distance of at least num feet for roads with speed limits num mph or higher .
in both cases the requirements must be met under both day and night conditions .
the electronic display shall automatically adjust brightness for day and night operation .
the eds must be equipped with a light sensor that accurately measures ambient light level conditions at the sign location .
the eds must automatically adjust led intensity based on the ambient light conditions in small enough increments that the signs brightness changes smoothly with no perceivable brightness change between adjacent levels .
stray headlights shining on the photoelectric sensor at night must not cause led brightness changes .
flashing messages must not exceed num flashes per minute .
num mechanical specifications eds mounting provisions and mounting hardware must accommodate sign weight and wind loading requirements of the departments structures manual .
bos must be designed to accommodate overhead attachment using a tristud signal hanger .
multiple tristud attachment points may be used to meet weight and wind loading requirements .
tristud attachment points must be weathertight and structurally reinforced .
num fasteners and attachment hardware ensure that all assembly hardware including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
stainless steel bolts screws and studs must meet astm fnum .
nuts must meet astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized .
bolts studs and threaded rod must meet astm anum .
structural bolts must meet astm fnum grade anum .
num electrical specifications all power inputs must be fuse and reverse polarity protected .
all eds must be able to recover from power loss and return to their operational state without user intervention .
num solar power solar powered signs must be capable of fully autonomous operation num hours per day num days per year .
batteries must be a standard num volt num return to table of contents deep cycle battery suitable for the application and operating environment .
flooded leadacid batteries are prohibited .
batteries must be capable of providing num days of continuous operation without sunlight .
charging system must use a solar charge controller with temperature compensation .
the system must provide for automatic battery charging overcharge protection and have indications that display current status and faults .
num ac power fluctuations in line voltage must have no visible effect on the appearance of the display .
num electronic warning signs ews the ews must be designed to alert road users to conditions that might call for a reduction of speed or an action in the interest of safety and efficient traffic operations .
ews must include a secure wireless connection to communicate with a nearby laptop .
num ews foregroundbackground colors if a black background is used on the changeable electronic display the color used for the legend must match the background color that would be used on a standard sign for that type of legend in accordance with the mutcd .
black ews display backgrounds must be flat black fedstd num with a reflectance value not exceeding num .
ews must utilize yellow leds with a peak wavelength of either num or num nanometers .
ews must have a minimum one inch contrasting margin around illuminated characters or graphics .
num speed detector ews that detect or display the speed of approaching vehicles must be programmable for the posted speed limit and the maximum speed to display .
when the detected speed exceeds the maximum programmed speed high speed cut off threshold the display must automatically blank .
alternately the display may show an alert message such as slow down when speeds above the maximum programmed speed threshold are detected .
the ews must detect when the posted speed is exceeded by one mph and then activate the alert .
when the alert is activated the display shall be able to flash .
when no advancing traffic is detected the display must be blank .
the speed detector must not activate alerts for vehicles outside the display cone of vision .
the speed detector must meet the requirements of fcc title num part num and not require an fcc operating license .
the speed detector must operate on num to num vdc and draw less than three amperes .
the ews must monitor and display the speed of approaching traffic only .
the ews detector must be able to accurately detect and determine the speed of approaching vehicles .
the ews must be capable of measuring and displaying speeds of approaching traffic only between num and num mph with an accuracy of plus or minus one mph num feet in advance of the sign .
num electronic guide signs egs meet the requirements of electronic warning sign ews with the following exceptions use a white legend and green background in accordance with the mutcd .
egss must utilize white leds .
num electronic regulatory signs ers the ers must be designed to give notice of traffic laws or regulations such as the posted speed limit .
ers used for variable speed limit vsl applications must be able to display speed limits from num mph in five mph increments and mimic the physical appearance of a static regulatory speed limit sign as shown in the mutcd and shs .
ers for vsl applications shall use black characters on a white background .
ers for vsl applications must log the time and date of any speed limit change to num return to table of contents internal nonvolatile memory .
the log must be able to record a minimum of num events in a firstin firstout fashion .
num foregroundbackground colors and display types display modules for all ers must have a minimum two inch contrasting margin around digits text or graphics .
type num ers must utilize led technology for the dynamic display .
type num ers must utilize scrollingfilm technology for the dynamic display .
num led and pixel specifications for type num ers type num ers must meet the led and pixel specifications defined in num .
num scrolling film mechanism for type num ers the dynamic display for type num ers must utilize a scrolling film module comprised of a transparent film with black characters meeting the size and shape requirements shown in the mutcd and shs .
the transparent film and characters must move in front of a background panel covered with reflective sheeting identical to that used on the static sign panel .
the transparent film must be constructed of material that will not yellow fade deform or otherwise deteriorate over the lifetime of the sign .
num ers character size and font fonts and graphics for type num ers must mimic the characteristics of fonts and graphics defined in the mutcd and shs .
fonts and graphics for type num ers must exactly match the characteristics of fonts and graphics defined in the mutcd and shs .
num variable speed limit vsl ers controller communications ers for variable speed applications must be equipped with a sign controller that includes a minimum of one ethernet num base tx numpnumc port .
num configuration and management requirements for vsl ers ensure that ers for vsl applications can be managed remotely from a tmc or managed locally using a laptop computer .
ensure that the tmc or a laptop computer can be used to remotely reset vsl sign controllers .
ensure that ers for vsl applications log and report status errors and failures including data transmission errors receipt of invalid data communication failure recoveries alternating current power failures power recoveries display errors fan and airflow status temperature status power supply status and information on the operational status of the temperature photocell airflow humidity and led power supply sensors .
ensure that the sign controller is addressable through an ethernet communication network using software that complies with the ntcip requirements published online by the departments transportation traffic engineering research laboratory terl at httpwww.fdot.govtraffic .
ensure that the sign implements any ntcip standards required to achieve interoperability and interchangeability .
ensure that any additional objects implemented by the software do not interfere with the standard operation of any mandatory objects .
ers must be compatible with the departments sunguide software .
num ers battery backup system ac powered signs must include a battery backup system that maintains full operation of the sign for a minimum of two hours in the event of utility power loss .
operation on battery backup can have no visible effect on the appearance of the display .
num blankout signs bos edss designed for bos applications must have a black exterior finish fedstdnum with a reflectance value not exceeding num .
overhead bos must include a visor .
num electronic speed feedback signs esfs the esfs must be designed to alert road users of their speed as they approach the sign .
num return to table of contents num esfs backgroundforeground colors the esfs display background must be flat black fedstdnum with a reflectance value not exceeding num .
esfs must utilize amber leds with a peak wavelength of num nanometers .
esfs shall have a minimum one inch contrasting margin around illuminated characters or graphics .
num speed detector the esfs must be programmable for the posted speed limit and the maximum speed to display .
when the detected speed exceeds the maximum programmed speed high speed cutoff threshold the display must automatically blank .
alternately the display may show an alert message such as slow down when speeds above the maximum programmed speed threshold are detected .
the esfs must detect when the posted speed is exceeded by one mph and then activate the alert .
when the alert is activated the display must flash at a rate of num to num cycles per minute .
when no advancing traffic is detected the display must be blank .
the speed detector must not activate alerts or display speeds for vehicles outside the displays cone of vision .
the esfs must meet the requirements of fcc part num and not require an fcc operating license .
the speed detector must operate on num to num vdc .
the esfs must be capable of measuring speeds of approaching traffic between num and num mph with an accuracy of plus or minus one mph num feet in advance of the sign .
num environmental requirements the eds assembly must operate properly during and after being subjected to the environmental testing procedures described in nema ts num sections num num and num .
fog frost or condensation must not form within the dynamic portion of the sign .
electronics must meet fcc title num subpart b section num .
num warranty ensure that the eds systems and equipment furnished have a manufacturers warranty covering defects in assembly fabrication and materials for a minimum of three years .
num installation install equipment in accordance with the standard plans index num and the manufacturers instructions .
num method of measurement the contract unit price per assembly for electronic display sign furnished and installed will include the static sign panels electronic display support structure foundation housing cabinet controller speed detector hardware electrical connection and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
when the electronic display sign is ground mounted the contract price will include the support structure and foundation .
all other mounting will include the hardware necessary to complete the attachment to the support structure the span wire monotube or mast arm structure will be paid separately .
when a solar panel is specified in the contract documents the contract unit price will include the solar panel and batteries .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num electronic display sign per assembly .
num sign beacon .
num description furnish and install flashing beacon assemblies as shown in the plans .
num materials use flashing beacon assemblies and components listed on the apl .
ensure equipment is permanently marked with manufacturer name or trademark part number date of manufacture or serial number .
flashing beacon assemblies incorporating a circular traffic signal must meet the design and functional requirements set forth in mutcd chapter numl .
all num return to table of contents circular beacons must have a minimum nominal diameter of num inches and meet the requirements of section num .
all beacons must use a led light source .
beacons designed for use with school zone signing must include a means of calendar scheduling to program days and times of operation .
num vehicle activated beacon vehicle activated beacons must utilize a vehicle detection system listed on the apl .
num pedestrian activated beacon pedestrian activated beacons must utilize a pedestrian detector listed on the apl .
num cabinets housings and hardware flashing beacon cabinets must be currently listed on the apl or meet the applicable criteria of section num .
all housings other than polemounted cabinets must be powder coated dull black fedstdnum with a reflectance value not exceeding num as measured by astm enum .
cabinets and housings must prevent unauthorized access .
flashing beacon assemblies must allow installation on num inch outer diameter posts .
ensure all exposed assembly hardware including nuts bolts screws and locking washers less than num inch in diameter is type num or num passivated stainless steel and meets the requirements of astm fnum and astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter must be galvanized and meet the requirements of astm anum .
num electrical specifications provide equipment that operates on solar power or a nominal voltage of num vac .
if the device requires operating voltages of less than num vac supply the appropriate voltage converter .
solar powered beacon systems must be designed to provide num days of continuous operation without sunlight and must automatically charge batteries and prevent overcharging and overdischarging .
solar powered systems must include a charge indicator and acdc battery charger .
num environmental specifications all electronic assemblies must operate as specified during and after being subjected to the transients temperature voltage humidity vibration and shock tests described in nema ts num num num and num .
all electronic equipment must comply with fcc title num subpart b section num .
num installation install equipment in accordance with the standard plans index num and the manufacturers instructions .
num warranty ensure all flashing beacons have a manufacturers warranty covering defects for a minimum of five years from the date of final acceptance in accordance with num and section num .
ensure the manufacturer will furnish replacements for any part or equipment found to be defective during the warranty period at no cost to the department or maintaining agency within num calendar days of notification .
num method of measurement the contract unit price for sign beacon furnished and installed will consist of the flashing beacons cabinet housing controller hardware and labor necessary for a complete and accepted installation .
signal cable from the cabinet to the signs will be paid separately under the applicable item for signal cable .
when solar power is specified in the contract documents the contract unit price will include the solar panel batteries and electronics .
num basis of payment price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num num sign beacon per assembly .
num return to table of contents section num profiled thermoplastic pavement markings num description .
profiled thermoplastic pavement markings consist of thermoplastic material with raised thermoplastic bumps creating a raised profile marking .
apply profiled thermoplastic pavement markings in accordance with the contract documents .
num materials .
use only materials listed on the departments approved product list apl as an approved system and meeting the following requirements profiled thermoplastic num and num retroreflective elements num glass spheres num and num use retroreflective elements or glass spheres recommended by the manufacturer .
the engineer will take random samples of the materials in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule .
num equipment .
use equipment capable of providing continuous uniform heating of the pavement marking material to temperatures exceeding numf mixing and agitating the material in the reservoir to provide a homogenous mixture without segregation .
use equipment that will maintain the pavement marking material in a plastic state in all mixing and conveying parts including the line dispensing device until applied .
use equipment which is capable of producing a consistent pattern of bumps with a longitudinal distance between bumps of approximately num inches centertocenter intervals .
use equipment which meets the following requirements num .
capable of traveling at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill to produce a uniform application of pavement marking material and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in a true arc .
num .
capable of applying retroreflective elements or glass spheres to the surface of the completed pavement marking by automatic dispensers attached to the pavement marking machine such that the retroreflective elements or glass spheres are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
use retroreflective element or glass sphere dispensers equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material and applies the retroreflective elements or glass spheres uniformly on the entire pavement marking surface with num to num embedment .
num .
equipped with a special kettle for uniformly heating and melting the pavement marking material .
the kettle must be equipped with an automatic temperature control device and material thermometer for positive temperature control and to prevent overheating or scorching of the thermoplastic material .
num .
meets the requirements of the national fire protection association nfpa state and local authorities .
num application .
num general remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the num return to table of contents engineer .
cost for removing conflicting pavement markings during maintenance of traffic operations to be included in maintenance of traffic lump sum .
before applying pavement markings remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
before applying pavement markings to any portland cement concrete surface apply a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer .
offset longitudinal lines at least num inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
apply pavement markings to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least numf and rising .
apply pavement markings to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in num .
when applying pavement marking over existing markings ensure that no more than num inches on either end and not more than num inch on either side of the existing line is visible .
conduct field tests in accordance with fm num .
take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this section at no additional cost to the department .
num thickness apply flat base lines having a thickness of num inches or num mils to num inches or num mils exclusive of the bumps when measured above the pavement surface .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
the engineer will verify the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with fm num within num days of receipt of the contractors certification .
num dimensions of raised bumps apply the raised bumps with a profile such that the leading and trailing edges are sloped at a sufficient angle to create an audible and vibratory warning .
bumps on edge line and centerline markings shall be at least num inches at the highest point of the bump above the pavement surface including the base line .
the height shall be measured after application of dropon retroreflective elements or glass spheres .
bumps shall have a minimum baseline coverage dimension of num inches in both transverse and longitudinal directions .
the bumps may have a drainage channel the width of each drainage channel will not exceed num inch at the bottom of the channel .
the longitudinal distance between bumps shall be approximately num inches .
num retroreflectivity apply white and yellow profiled thermoplastic markings that will attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num color use pavement marking materials that meet the requirements of num .
num retroreflective elements or glass spheres apply retroreflective elements or glass spheres to all markings at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations as identified for the apl system .
num loss if more than num of the bumps or more than three consecutive bumps are missing or broken less than half a bump remaining within the first num days under traffic replace all failed bumps at no expense to the department .
if more than num of the bumps fail num return to table of contents within the first num days under traffic the replacement period will extend an additional num days from the date all replacement bumps were installed .
if at the end of the additional num days more the num of all bumps initial and replacement fail replace all failed bumps at no expense to the department .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the loss of bumps .
num contractors responsibility for notification .
notify the engineer prior to the placement of the materials .
at the time of notification submit a certification to the engineer with the apl number and the batch or lot numbers of the thermoplastic materials and retroreflective elements or glass spheres to be used .
num protection of newly applied profiled thermoplastic markings .
do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the department .
num observation period .
longitudinal pavement markings with the exception of bumps are subject to a num day observation period under normal traffic .
the observation period will begin with the satisfactory completion and acceptance of the work .
the observation period for bumps will be in accordance with the requirements of num .
the longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
the retroreflectivity shall meet the initial requirements of num .
the department reserves the right to check the retroreflectivity anytime prior to the end of the observation period .
replace at no expense to the department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the num day observation period .
num corrections for deficiencies .
correct all deficiencies by removal and reapplication of a one mile section centered around the deficiency at no cost to the department .
num submittals .
num submittal instructions prepare a certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for each project in the contract .
submit the certification of quantities and daily worksheets to the engineer .
the department will not pay for any disputed items until the engineer approves the certification of quantities .
num contractors certification of quantities request payment by submitting a certification of quantities no later than twelve oclock noon monday after the estimate cutoff date or as directed by the engineer based on the amount of work done or completed .
ensure the certification of quantities consists of the following num .
contract number fpid number certification number certification date and the period that the certification represents .
num .
the basis for arriving at the amount of the progress certification less payments previously made and less any amount previously retained or withheld .
the basis will include a detailed breakdown shown on the certification of items of payment .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
the quantities authorized and acceptably applied under this section will be paid as follows num .
the length in gross miles of num inch solid and num skip lines .
num .
the area in square feet for removal of existing markings acceptably removed .
payment for removal of conflicting markings will be in accordance with num .
payment for removal of nonconflicting markings will be paid separately .
the gross mile measurement will be taken as the distance from the beginning of the profiled thermoplastic line to the end of the profiled thermoplastic line and will include the unmarked gaps for skip lines .
the gross mile will not include designated unmarked lengths at intersections turn lanes etc .
final measurement will be determined by plan dimensions or stations subject to num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
payment will be made under item no .
num profiled thermoplastic pavement markings .
solid per gross mile skip per gross mile remove per square foot num return to table of contents section num object markers and delineators num description .
furnish and install object markers to mark obstructions within or adjacent to the roadway of the types and at the locations called for in the standard plans or in the plans .
furnish and install delineators along the side of the roadway to indicate the alignment of the roadway as indicated in the standard plans or in the plans .
num materials .
num general meet the following requirements object markers and delineators section num retroreflective and nonreflective sign sheeting section num num product acceptance on the project ensure that delineators and delineator posts are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num installation requirements .
install delineators and object markers in accordance with the mutcd standard plans and plans .
place barrier delineators at a spacing of num feet for the first num feet of barrier and at num feet spacing thereafter .
orient barrier delineators as detailed in the standard plans or apl drawings .
num method of measurement .
the quantity to be paid will be the number of delineators or object markers furnished installed and accepted with the exception of barrier delineators which are included in the cost of the barrier .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for work specified in this section including the cost of labor materials and incidental items required to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num num object marker each .
item no .
num num delineator each .
num return to table of contents section num raised pavement markers and bituminous adhesive num description .
place raised pavement markers rpms and adhesive which upon installation produces a positive guidance system to supplement other reflective pavement markings .
num materials .
use only class b markers unless otherwise shown in the plans .
meet the requirements of section num .
num product acceptance on the project .
use only rpms and bituminous adhesive that are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num equipment .
use equipment having either thermostatically controlled double boiler type units utilizing heat transfer oil or thermostatically controlled electric heating pots to install hot applied bituminous adhesive .
do not use direct flame melting units with flexible adhesives however this type of unit may be used with standard adhesive in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
use a melterapplicator unit suited for both melting and pumping the adhesive through heated applicator hoses .
heat the adhesive to between numf and numf and apply directly to the bonding surface from the melterapplicator by either pumping or pouring .
maintain the application temperature between numf and numf .
the adhesive may be reheated .
however do not exceed the manufacturers recommendations for pot life at application temperatures .
num application .
install rpms in accordance with standard plans indexes num and num .
apply rpms to the bonding surface using bituminous adhesives only .
the engineer will conduct field testing in accordance with fm num .
correct rpms not applied in accordance with these requirements at no cost to the department .
prior to application of adhesive clean the portion of the bonding surface of any material which would adversely affect the adhesive .
apply the adhesive to the bonding surface not the rpm so that num of the bonding area of the rpm will be covered in accordance with adhesive manufacturers recommendations .
apply sufficient adhesive to ensure that when the marker is pressed downward into the adhesive adhesive will be forced out around the entire perimeter of the rpm .
immediately remove excess adhesive from the bonding surface and exposed surfaces of the rpms .
soft rags moistened with mineral spirits meeting federal specifications tttnum or kerosene may be used to remove adhesive from exposed faces of the rpms .
do not use any other solvent .
if any adhesive pavement marking materials or other foreign matter adheres to the reflective face of the rpm replace the rpm at no cost to the department .
ensure that all final rpms are in place prior to opening the road to traffic .
if more than num of the rpms fail in adhesion or alignment within the first num days under traffic replace all failed rpms at no expense to the department .
if more than num of the rpms num return to table of contents fail in adhesion and or alignment during the initial num day period the engineer will extend the replacement period an additional num days from the date that all replacement rpms have been installed .
if at the end of the additional num day period more than num of all rpms initial installation and num day replacements combined fail in adhesion or alignment replace all failed rpms at no expense to the department .
num contractors responsibility for notification .
notify the engineer prior to the placement of rpms .
at the time of notification submit the apl number and the batch or lot numbers of rpms and bituminous adhesive to be used .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be the number of rpms furnished and installed completed and accepted .
num basis of payment .
num general price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section .
num lump sum payment price and payment for rpms will not be measured or paid for separately when the item for painted pavement markings final surface is included in the proposal .
price and payment will be made in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents section num two reactive components pavement markings num description .
apply two reactive components pavement markings in accordance with the contract documents .
num materials .
use only materials listed on the departments approved product list apl as an approved system and meeting the following requirements two reactive components num and num retroreflective elements num glass spheres num and num use only retroreflective elements or glass spheres recommended by the manufacturer .
the engineer will take random samples of the materials in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule .
num equipment .
use equipment that will produce continuous uniform dimensions of pavement markings of varying widths and meets the following requirements num .
capable of traveling at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill to produce a uniform application of the two reactive components material and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in true arcs .
num .
capable of applying retroreflective elements or glass spheres to the surface of the completed line by an automatic retroreflective element dispenser attached to the pavement marking machine such that the retroreflective elements or glass spheres are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
use a retroreflective element or glass sphere dispenser equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the material and applies the retroreflective elements or glass spheres in a manner such that the retroreflective elements or glass spheres appear uniform on the entire pavement markings surface .
num .
capable of providing the manufacturers recommended mixing ratio between the components in a thorough and consistent manner .
num application .
num general remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
before applying pavement markings remove any material by a method approved by the engineer that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings .
offset longitudinal lines at least num inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
apply pavement markings to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least numf and rising .
do not apply two reactive components pavement markings when winds are sufficient to cause spray dust .
num return to table of contents apply two reactive components pavement markings to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in num .
when applying two reactive components pavement marking over existing markings ensure that not more than num inches on either end and not more than num inch on either side of the existing line is visible .
apply the two reactive components pavement markings to the pavement in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or as directed by the engineer .
conduct field tests in accordance with fm num .
take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
remove and replace two reactive components pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this section at no additional cost to the department .
apply all final pavement markings prior to opening the road to traffic .
num thickness apply two reactive components pavement markings to attain a minimum wet film thickness in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as identified on the apl .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num retroreflectivity apply white and yellow two reactive components pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively for all longitudinal lines .
measure record and certify on the department approved form and submit to the engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow two reactive components pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num color use materials that meet the requirements of num .
num retroreflective elements or glass spheres apply retroreflective elements or glass spheres to all white and yellow two reactive components pavement markings at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations as identified on the apl .
num contractors responsibility for notification .
notify the engineer prior to the placement of the materials .
at the time of notification submit a certification to the engineer with the apl number and the batch or lot numbers of the materials and retroreflective elements or glass spheres to be used .
num protection of newly applied pavement markings .
do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the department .
num observation period .
longitudinal pavement markings are subject to a num day observation period under normal traffic .
the observation period shall begin with the satisfactory completion and acceptance of the work .
the longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
the retroreflectivity shall meet the initial requirements of num .
the department reserves the right to check the retroreflectivity any time prior to the end of the observation period .
num return to table of contents replace at no additional expense to the department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the num day observation period .
num corrections for deficiencies .
correct all deficiencies by removal and reapplication of a one mile section centered around the deficiency as determined by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num submittals .
num submittal instructions prepare a certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for each project in the contract .
submit the certification of quantities and daily worksheets to the engineer .
the department will not pay for any disputed items until the engineer approves the certification of quantities .
num contractors certification of quantities request payment by submitting a certification of quantities no later than twelve o clock noon monday after the estimate cutoff date or as directed by the engineer based on the amount of work done or completed .
ensure the certification of quantities consists of the following num .
contract number fpid number certification number certification date and the period that the certification represents .
num .
the basis for arriving at the amount of the progress certification less payments previously made and less any amount previously retained or withheld .
the basis will include a detailed breakdown provided on the certification of items of payment .
num method of measurement .
the quantities authorized and acceptably applied under this section will be paid as follows num .
the length in gross miles of solid num skip and num dotted num dotted num dotted and num dotted lines .
num .
the area in square feet for removal of existing markings acceptably removed .
payment for removal of conflicting markings will be in accordance with num .
payment for removal of nonconflicting markings will be paid separately .
the gross mile measurement will be taken as the distance from the beginning of the two reactive component line to the end of the two reactive component line and will include the unmarked gaps for skip and dotted lines .
the gross mile measurement will not include designated unmarked lengths at intersections turn lanes etc .
final measurement will be determined by plan dimensions or stations subject to num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
payment will be made under item no .
num two reactive components solid per gross mile .
skip per gross mile .
remove per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num painted pavement markings num description .
apply painted pavement markings in accordance with the contract documents .
num materials .
use only materials listed on the departments approved product list apl meeting the following requirements materials for raised pavement markers rpms and bituminous adhesive section num standard paint num and num durable paint num and num glass spheres num and num the engineer will take random samples of all material in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule .
num equipment .
use equipment that will produce continuous uniform dimensions of pavement markings of varying widths and meet the following requirements num .
capable of traveling at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill in order to produce a uniform application of paint and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in a true arc .
num .
capable of applying glass spheres to the surface of the completed line by an automatic sphere dispenser attached to the pavement marking machine such that the glass spheres are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
use a glass spheres dispenser equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the paint and applies the glass spheres in a manner such that the spheres appear uniform on the entire pavement markings surface .
num .
capable of spraying the paint to the required thickness and width without thinning of the paint .
equip the paint tank with nozzles equipped with cutoff valves which will apply broken or skip lines automatically .
num application .
num general remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
before applying pavement markings remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
apply standard paint to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least numf and rising .
apply durable paint to dry surfaces only .
do not apply durable paint when the ambient air and surface temperature is below numf relative humidity is above num or when the dew point is within numf of the ambient air temperature .
do not apply painted pavement markings when winds are sufficient to cause spray dust .
num return to table of contents apply painted pavement markings having well defined edges over existing pavement markings such that not more than num inches on either end and not more than num inch on either side is visible .
when stencils are used to apply symbols and messages the areas covered by the stencil reinforcing will not be required to be painted .
mix the paint thoroughly prior to pouring into the painting machine .
apply paint to the pavement by spray or other means approved by the engineer .
conduct field testing in accordance with fm num .
remove and replace painted pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this section at no additional cost to the department .
apply all pavement markings prior to opening the road to traffic .
num painted pavement markings final surface on concrete surfaces or newly constructed asphalt the painted pavement markings final surface will include one application of standard paint and one application of class b rpms applied to the final surface .
for center line and edge line rumble strip installations where the pavement marking is placed within the grinding apply a second application of standard paint within num hours of each days grinding operation .
for center line rumble strip installations where rpms are in conflict with the grinding install class d rpms with the first application of standard paint .
remove class d rpms prior to grinding then install class b rpms in an unground area after grinding .
do not apply final surface paint for bicycle arrows or bicycle messages num inch longitudinal bars in special emphasis crosswalks or route shields where preformed thermoplastic will be applied .
install all rpms in accordance with standard plans indexes num and num prior to opening the road to traffic .
temporary rpms must meet the requirements of section num .
permanent rpms must meet the requirements of section num .
num thickness apply standard paint to attain a minimum wet film thickness in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply durable paint to attain a minimum wet film thickness of num inches or num mils .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of white and yellow durable paint pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num retroreflectivity apply white and yellow standard paint that will attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively .
apply white and yellow durable paint that will attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num num .
the department reserves the right to test the markings within three days of receipt of the contractors certification .
failure to afford the department opportunity to test the markings will result in nonpayment .
the test readings should be representative of the contractors pavement marking performance .
if the retroreflectivity values measure below values shown above reapply the pavement marking at no additional cost to the department .
for standard paint ensure that the minimum retroreflectance of white and yellow pavement markings are not less than num mcdlx mnum .
if the retroreflectivity values for standard paint fall below the num mcdlx mnum value within num days of initial application the pavement num return to table of contents marking will be reapplied at the contractors expense .
if the retroreflectivity values for durable paint fall below the initial values of num mcdlx mnum value for white and num mcdlx mnum for yellow within num days of initial application the pavement marking will be reapplied at the contractors expense .
num color use paint material that meets the requirements of num .
num glass spheres apply glass spheres on all pavement markings immediately and uniformly following the paint application .
the rate of application shall be based on the manufacturers recommendation .
for longitudinal durable paint markings apply a double drop of type num and type num glass spheres .
for transverse durable paint markings apply a single drop of type num glass spheres .
the rate of application shall be based on the manufacturers recommendation .
num tolerances in dimensions and in alignment .
establish tack points at appropriate intervals for use in aligning pavement markings and set a stringline from such points to achieve accuracy .
num dimensions num longitudinal lines apply painted skip line segments with no more than plus or minus num inches variance so that overtolerance and undertolerance lengths between skip line and the gap will approximately balance .
apply longitudinal lines at least num inches from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
num transverse markings gore markings arrows and messages apply paint in multiple passes when the marking can not be completed in one pass with an overall line width allowable tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
num contrast lines use black paint to provide contrast on concrete or light asphalt pavement when specified by the engineer .
apply black paint in num foot segments following each longitudinal skip line .
num alignment apply painted pavement markings that will not deviate more than num inch from the stringline on tangents and curves one degree or less .
apply painted pavement markings that will not deviate more than num inches from the stringline on curves greater than one degree .
apply painted edge markings uniformly not less than num inches or more than num inches from the edge of pavement without noticeable breaks or deviations in alignment or width .
remove and replace at no additional cost to the department pavement markings that deviate more than the above stated requirements .
num correction rates make corrections of variations in width at a maximum rate of num feet for each num inch of correction .
make corrections of variations in alignment at a maximum rate of num feet for each num inch of correction to return to the stringline .
num contractors responsibility for notification .
notify the engineer prior to the placement of the materials .
at the time of notification submit a certification to the engineer with the apl number and the batch or lot numbers of the paint and glass spheres to be used .
num protection of newly applied pavement markings .
do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the department .
num return to table of contents num corrections for deficiencies to applied painted pavement markings .
reapply a num mile section centered around any deficiency at no additional cost to the department .
num submittals .
num submittal instructions prepare a certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for each project in the contract .
submit the certification of quantities and daily worksheets to the engineer .
for lump sum pay item num document the quantity as an estimated percentage in decimal form of the total lump sum amount on the daily worksheet .
the department will not pay for any disputed items until the engineer approves the certification of quantities .
num contractors certification of quantities request payment by submitting a certification of quantities no later than twelve oclock noon monday after the estimate cutoff date or as directed by the engineer based on the amount of work done or completed .
ensure the certification of quantities consists of the following num .
contract number fpid number certification number certification date and the period that the certification represents .
num .
the basis for arriving at the amount of the progress certification less payments previously made and less any amount previously retained or withheld .
the basis will include a detailed breakdown provided on the certification of items of payment .
num method of measurement .
the quantities authorized and acceptably applied under this section will be paid as follows num .
the length in gross miles of solid num skip num dotted num dotted num num dotted and num dotted lines .
num .
the length in linear feet of transverse lines diagonal lines chevrons and parking spaces .
num .
the number of pavement messages symbols and arrows .
each arrow is paid as a complete marking regardless of the number of points or directions .
num .
lump sum as specified in num final surface and num .
num .
the area in square feet for removal of existing markings acceptably removed .
payment for removal of conflicting markings will be in accordance with num .
payment for removal of nonconflicting markings will be paid separately .
the gross mile measurement will be taken as the distance from the beginning of the painted line to the end of the painted line and will include the unmarked gaps for skip and dotted lines .
the gross mile measurement will not include designated unmarked lengths at intersections turn lanes etc .
final measurement will be determined by plan dimensions or stations subject to num .
num basis of payment .
num general price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
num return to table of contents num painted pavement markings final surface price and payment for painted pavement markings final surface will be full compensation for all applications of painted pavement markings and all applications and removal of rpms in accordance with num and num .
num payment items payment will be made under item no .
num painted pavement markings .
solid per gross mile .
solid per linear foot .
skip per gross mile .
dotted per gross mile .
message or symbol each .
arrows each .
yield line per linear foot .
island nose per square foot item no .
num num painted pavement markings final surface lump sum .
num return to table of contents section num thermoplastic pavement markings num description .
apply new thermoplastic pavement markings or refurbish existing thermoplastic pavement markings in accordance with the contract documents .
num materials .
use only materials listed on the departments approved product list apl meeting the following requirements .
standard and refurbishment thermoplastic num and num preformed thermoplastic num and num high friction thermoplastic num and num glass spheres num and num use sand materials meeting the requirements of num .
the engineer will take random samples of all material in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule .
num equipment .
use equipment capable of providing continuous uniform heating of the pavement marking material to temperatures exceeding numf mixing and agitation of the material in the reservoir to provide a homogeneous mixture without segregation .
use equipment that will maintain the pavement marking material in a plastic state in all mixing and conveying parts including the line dispensing device until applied .
use equipment which can produce varying width lines and which meets the following requirements num .
capable of traveling at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill to produce a uniform application of pavement marking material and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in a true arc .
num .
capable of applying glass spheres to the surface of the completed pavement marking by a double drop application for standard thermoplastic pavement markings and a single drop application for recapping and refurbishment thermoplastic pavement markings .
the bead dispenser for the first bead drop shall be attached to the pavement marking machine in such a manner that the beads are dispensed closely behind the installed line .
the second bead dispenser bead shall be attached to the pavement marking machine in such a manner that the beads are dispensed immediately after the first bead drop application .
use glass spheres dispensers equipped with an automatic cutoff control that is synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material and applies the glass spheres uniformly on the entire pavement markings surface with num to num embedment .
num .
equipped with a special kettle for uniformly heating and melting the pavement marking material .
the kettle must be equipped with an automatic temperature control device and material thermometer for positive temperature control and to prevent overheating or scorching of the thermoplastic material .
num .
meet the requirements of the national fire protection association state and local authorities .
num return to table of contents num application .
num general remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
cost for removing conflicting pavement markings during maintenance of traffic operations to be included in maintenance of traffic lump sum .
before applying pavement markings remove any material that would adversely affect the bond of the pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
before applying pavement markings to any portland cement concrete surface apply a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer .
offset longitudinal lines at least num inches from any longitudinal joints of portland cement concrete pavement .
apply pavement markings to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least numf and rising for asphalt surfaces and numf and rising for concrete surfaces .
apply pavement markings to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in num .
when applying pavement markings over existing markings ensure that no more than num inches on either end and not more than num inch on either side of the existing line is visible .
apply thermoplastic material to the pavement by extrusion or other means approved by the engineer .
conduct field tests in accordance with fm num.take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the requirements of this section at no additional cost to the department .
wait at least num days after constructing the final asphalt surface course to place thermoplastic pavement markings .
installation of thermoplastic on concrete requires a clean dry surface .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for surface preparation for thermoplastic on concrete .
provide temporary pavement markings during the interim period prior to opening the road to traffic .
num preformed thermoplastic apply markings to dry surfaces only and when ambient air temperature is at least numf .
prior to installation follow the manufacturers recommendations for preheating .
num high friction thermoplastic high friction thermoplastic may be used as an alternative to preformed thermoplastic for special emphasis crosswalk markings .
apply markings only by gravity or air pressure thermoplastic hand liners setup with double drop bead attachments .
install markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num thickness num standard thermoplastic markings apply or recap standard thermoplastic pavement markings for longitudinal lines to attain a minimum thickness of num inch or num mils and a maximum thickness num inch or num mils when measured above the pavement surface .
all chevrons diagonal and transverse lines messages symbols and arrows wherever located will have a thickness of num inch or num mils to num inch or num mils when measured above the pavement surface .
measure record and certify on department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num num .
num return to table of contents the engineer will verify the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with fm num within num days of receipt of the contractors certification .
num refurbishment thermoplastic markings apply a minimum of num inch or num mils of thermoplastic material .
ensure that the combination of the existing marking and the overlay after application of glass spheres does not exceed the maximum thickness of num inch or num mils for all lines .
measure record and certify on department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num num .
the engineer will verify the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with fm num within num days of receipt of the contractors certification .
num preformed thermoplastic apply num inch or num mils of preformed thermoplastic material .
measure record and certify on department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num high friction thermoplastic apply lines to attain a minimum thickness of num inch or num mils and a maximum thickness of num inch or num mils when measured above the pavement surface .
measure record and certify on department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of the pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num retroreflectivity apply white and yellow pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively for all longitudinal lines .
all chevrons diagonal lines stop lines messages symbols and arrows will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum and num mcdlxmnum for white and yellow respectively .
all crosswalks and bicycle markings shall attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum .
black pavement markings must have a retroreflectance of less than num mcdlx mnum .
measure record and certify on department approved form and submit to the engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num num .
num glass spheres num longitudinal lines for standard thermoplastic markings apply the first drop of type num or larger glass spheres immediately followed by the second drop of type num glass spheres .
for refurbishment thermoplastic markings apply a single drop of type num glass spheres .
apply reflective glass spheres to all markings at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations .
num chevrons diagonal and transverse lines messages symbols and arrows for standard or refurbishment thermoplastic markings apply a single drop of type num glass spheres .
apply retroreflective glass spheres to all markings at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations .
apply a mixture consisting of num glass spheres and num sharp silica sand to all standard thermoplastic crosswalk lines at the rates determined by the manufacturers recommendations .
num preformed markings these markings are factory supplied with glass spheres and skid resistant material .
no additional glass spheres or skid resistant material should be applied during installation .
num return to table of contents num contractors responsibility for notification .
notify the engineer prior to the placement of the materials .
at the time of notification submit a certification to the engineer with the apl number and the batch or lot numbers of the thermoplastic and glass spheres to be used .
num protection of newly applied thermoplastic pavement markings .
do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the department .
num observation period .
longitudinal pavement markings are subject to a num day observation period under normal traffic .
the observation period shall begin with the satisfactory completion and acceptance of the work .
the longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
the retroreflectivity shall meet the initial requirements of num .
the department reserves the right to check the retroreflectivity any time prior to the end of the observation period .
replace at no additional expense to the department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the num day observation period .
num corrections for deficiencies .
recapping applies to conditions where additional pavement marking material is applied to new or refurbished pavement markings to correct a thickness deficiency .
correct deficiencies by recapping or removal and reapplication of a num mile section centered around the deficiency as determined by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num submittals .
num submittal instructions prepare a certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for each project in the contract .
submit the certification of quantities and daily worksheets to the engineer .
the department will not pay for any disputed items until the engineer approves the certification of quantities .
num contractors certification of quantities request payment by submitting a certification of quantities no later than twelve o clock noon monday after the estimate cutoff date or as directed by the engineer based on the amount of work done or completed .
ensure the certification of quantities consists of the following num .
contract number fpid number certification number certification date and the period that the certification represents .
num .
the basis for arriving at the amount of the progress certification less payments previously made and less any amount previously retained or withheld .
the basis will include a detailed breakdown provided on the certification of items of payment .
num method of measurement .
the quantities authorized and acceptably applied under this section will be paid as follows num return to table of contents num .
the length in gross miles of solid num skip num dotted num dotted num num dotted and num dotted lines .
num .
the length in linear feet of transverse lines diagonal lines chevrons and parking spaces .
num .
the number of pavement messages symbols and arrows .
each arrow is paid as a complete marking regardless of the number of points or directions .
num .
the area in square feet for removal of existing markings acceptably removed .
payment for removal of conflicting markings will be in accordance with num .
payment for removal of nonconflicting markings will be paid separately .
the gross mile measurement will be taken as the distance from the beginning of the thermoplastic line to the end of the thermoplastic line and will include the unmarked gaps for skip and dotted lines .
the gross mile measurement will not include designated unmarked lengths at intersections turn lanes etc .
final measurement will be determined by plan dimensions or stations subject to num .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
payment will be made under item no .
num thermoplastic pavement markings solid per gross mile .
solid per linear foot .
skip per gross mile .
dotted per gross mile .
message or symbol each .
arrows each .
yield line per linear foot .
remove per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num permanent tape pavement markings num description .
apply permanent tape pavement markings in accordance with the contract documents .
num materials .
use only materials listed on the departments approved product list apl meeting the following requirements permanent tape num and num the engineer will take random samples of all material in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule .
num equipment .
use equipment that is mobile and maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
ensure the mechanical applicator is equipped with film cutoff device and a measuring device that automatically and accumulatively measures the length of each line placed with an accuracy tolerance of plus or minus num percent .
tape may be placed by hand on short sections num feet or less if the tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in num are met .
num application .
num general remove existing pavement markings such that scars or traces of removed markings will not conflict with new pavement markings by a method approved by the engineer .
before applying permanent tape remove any material by a method approved by the engineer that would adversely affect the bond of the tape .
apply a primer sealer or surface preparation adhesive of the type recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure the permanent tape adheres to the pavement surface .
offset longitudinal lines at least num inches from construction joints on portland cement concrete pavement .
apply permanent tape to dry surfaces only and when the ambient air and surface temperature is at least numf and rising .
apply permanent tape to the same tolerances in dimensions and in alignment specified in num .
apply permanent tape to the pavement by means approved by the engineer .
conduct field testing in accordance with fm num.take test readings representative of the pavement marking performance .
remove and replace permanent tape not meeting the requirements of this section at no additional cost to the department .
apply all pavement markings prior to opening the road to traffic .
num thickness apply permanent tape pavement markings that have a thickness as designated on the apl for the particular product used .
measure record and certify on a department approved form and submit to the engineer the thickness of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num .
num retroreflectivity apply white and yellow pavement markings that will attain an initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum for white markings and not less than num return to table of contents num mcdlxmnum for yellow markings .
black pavement markings must have a retroreflectance of less than num mcdlx mnum .
measure record and certify on department approved form and submit to the engineer the retroreflectivity of white and yellow pavement markings in accordance with fm num num .
num color use material meeting the requirements of num .
num contractors responsibility for notification .
notify the engineer prior to the placement of the material .
at the time of notification submit the apl number and the batch or lot numbers of tape to be used .
num protection of newly applied pavement markings .
do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently bonded .
remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the department .
num observation period .
longitudinal pavement markings are subject to a num day observation period under normal traffic .
the observation period shall begin with the satisfactory completion and acceptance of the work .
the longitudinal pavement markings shall show no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping discoloration poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity or vehicular damage .
the retroreflectivity shall meet the initial requirements of num .
the department reserves the right to check the retroreflectivity any time prior to the end of the observation period .
replace at no additional expense to the department any longitudinal pavement markings that do not perform satisfactorily under traffic during the num day observation period .
num corrections for deficiencies .
correct all deficiencies by removal and reapplication of a one mile section centered around the deficiency as determined by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num submittals .
num submittal instructions prepare a certification of quantities using the departments current approved form for each project in the contract .
submit the certification of quantities and daily worksheets to the engineer .
the department will not pay for any disputed items until the engineer approves the certification of quantities .
num contractors certification of quantities request payment by submitting a certification of quantities no later than twelve o clock noon monday after the estimate cutoff date or as directed by the engineer based on the amount of work done or completed .
ensure the certification of quantities consists of the following num .
contract number fpid number certification number certification date and the period that the certification represents .
num .
the basis for arriving at the amount of the progress certification less payments previously made and less any amount previously retained or withheld .
the basis will include a detailed breakdown provided on the certification of items of payment .
num return to table of contents num method of measurement .
the quantities authorized and acceptably applied under this section will be paid as follows num .
the length in gross miles of num inch solid num skip and num dotted lines .
num .
the area in square feet for removal of existing markings acceptably removed .
payment for removal of conflicting markings will be in accordance with num .
payment for removal of nonconflicting markings will be paid separately .
the gross mile measurement will be taken as the distance from the beginning of the permanent tape line to the end of the permanent tape line and will include the unmarked gaps for skip and dotted lines .
the gross mile measurement will not include designated unmarked lengths at intersections turn lanes etc .
final measurement will be determined by plan dimensions or stations subject to num .
num basis of payment .
price and payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all cleaning and preparing of surfaces furnishing of all materials application curing and protection of all items protection of traffic furnishing of all tools machines and equipment and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
final payment will be withheld until all deficiencies are corrected .
payment will be made under item no .
num num permanent tape .
solid per gross mile .
skip per gross mile .
dotted per gross mile .
remove per square foot .
num return to table of contents section num highway lighting system num description .
install a highway lighting system in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
use pole assemblies as shown in the standard plans when standard aluminum pole assemblies or standard high mast light assemblies are required by the contract documents .
include in the system the light poles bases luminaires ballasts cable conduit protective devices and control devices all as specified or required for the complete facility .
obtain conventional light pole and high mast light pole assemblies from a fabrication facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
provide metal lighting poles excluding high mast lighting with internal vibration damping devices in accordance with standard plans index num in all installations on bridges walls and median concrete barriers .
num shop drawings and working drawings .
submit shop drawings and working drawings with descriptive specifications and engineering data for the service main control panel enclosure control panel main disconnect lighting contactor electrical panel transformer inline fuse holders surge protective devices nonstandard light poles including brackets luminaires ballast photoelectric cell conduit and cable or any other item requested by the engineer as specified in section num .
num materials and equipment to be installed .
num general meet the materials and equipment requirements of section num .
num luminaires use only luminaries listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num criterion designation of materials and equipment where a criterion specification is designated for any material or equipment to be installed by the name or catalog number of a specific manufacturer understand that such designation is intended only for the purpose of establishing the style quality performance characteristics etc .
and is not intended to limit the acceptability of competitive products .
the engineer will consider products of other manufacturers which are approved as similar and equal as equally acceptable .
num furnishing of electrical service .
provide service point in accordance with section num num excavation and backfilling .
num general for excavation and backfilling meet the requirements of section num except that when rock is encountered carry the excavation num inches below the required level and refill with sand or with selected earth material num of which passes the num inch sieve .
num trenches for cable construct trenches for cable or conduit no less than num inches in width and deep enough to provide a minimum cover in accordance with the standard plans .
num placing backfill for cable for installation of the cable place an initial layer of num inches thick loose measurement sand or selected earth material num of which passes a num inch sieve .
place and compact the remaining material in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents num foundations for light poles .
num concrete foundations provide foundations for light poles of the sizes and shapes shown in the plans .
construct precast or castinplace concrete foundations in accordance with the standard plans .
obtain precast foundations from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num setting anchor bolts set anchor bolts according to manufacturers templates and adjust to a plumb line check for elevation and location and hold rigidly in position to prevent displacement while pouring concrete .
num installation do not erect roadway light poles or high mast light poles until the concrete strength in the castinplace foundation is at least num psi .
determine concrete strength from tests on a minimum of two test cylinders sampled and tested in accordance with astm cnum and astm cnum and verifying test results have been submitted to the engineer .
fill the voids around precast concrete foundations under roadway light poles with flowable fill meeting the requirements of section num or clean sands placed using hydraulic methods to a level num inches below grade .
num pulling conductors .
leave at least num feet of conductor where the cable enters and leaves conduit .
protect conductors pulled into conduit or ducts against abrasion kinking and twisting .
locate pull boxes so that the conductors are not subjected to excessive pulling stresses .
num splicing .
make all conductor splices in the bases of the light poles or in pull boxes designed for the purpose .
do not make underground splices unless specifically authorized by the engineer and then only as directed by him .
unless otherwise shown in the standard plans or authorized by the engineer splices shall be made with split bolt connectors .
the connector shall be sealed in silicone gel that easily peels away leaving a clean connection .
the gel will be contained in a closure that when snapped around the split bolt will provide a waterproof connection without the use of tools or taping .
this closure will be uv resistant impact resistant and abrasion resistant .
num conduit .
install conduit at the locations shown in the plans and in accordance with section num .
num erecting light poles .
num general install the light poles at the locations and in accordance with the details shown in the plans .
unless otherwise specifically approved by the engineer fasten bracket truss arms to the pole prior to erection .
erect light poles with the orientation of the access door on the opposite side of approaching traffic .
do not field weld on any part of the pole assembly .
plumb the poles after erection and use metal shims or leveling nuts if necessary to obtain precise alignment .
use a thin cement grout where necessary to eliminate unevenness or irregularities in the top of the base .
num adjusting anchor bolts and installing nuts on anchor bolts where poles are to be placed on existing foundations or bases with anchor bolts in place furnish poles with a base which fits the anchor bolt spacing .
include the cost of any necessary extension of existing num return to table of contents anchor bolts in the price bid for the lighting system .
for high mast light pole bases install nuts on anchor bolts in accordance with num .
num installation of luminaire install the luminaire on the truss arm in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and place it so that the light pattern is evenly distributed along the roadway .
num electrical connections make primary ballast connections in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
install sufficient cable to allow all connections to be made outside the light pole base .
connect the ground conductor to the ground stud provided .
num pole identification plates furnish and install a num inch by num inch aluminum identification plate on each light pole .
attach plates to the pole as approved by the engineer .
attachment methods requiring screws bolts or rivets must be approved by the pole manufacturer .
install plates five feet above grade on the exterior traffic lane side of the pole .
use num inch black text on white background .
orient the text vertically on the plate with the following information load center designation circuit number and the pole number .
number the poles as shown in the plans .
num screen installation for high mast light pole bases install a screen in accordance with num .
num grounding .
ground in accordance with the nec and local codes which exceed these specifications .
ground each metal light pole not on a bridge structure with an approved rod num feet in length and at least num inch in diameter .
for poles on bridge structures bring the grounding conductors out to a pull box at each end of the structure and connect them to driven ground rods num feet in length and at least num inch in diameter .
the num feet length of rod may be either two rods num feet in length connected by a threaded coupling and driven as a single rod or two rods num feet in length separated by at least num feet .
make all bonds between ground wires and grounding electrode assemblies or arrays with an exothermic bond with the following exception do not exothermically bond grounding electrode to grounding electrode connections .
the work specified in this section will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental work .
ground all high mast poles in accordance with the details for grounding in the standard plans index num .
num labeling .
stencil labels on the cases of transformer and panel board with white oil paint as designated by the engineer .
also mark the correct circuit designations in accordance with the wiring diagram on the terminal marking strips of each terminal block and on the card holder in the panel board .
num markers .
construct duct cable and splice markers as shown in the plans and place them over the ends of underground ducts and at each change in direction of cable or conduit run .
place markers flat on the ground with num inch projecting above finished grade .
num return to table of contents num tests of installation .
upon completion of the work test the installation to ensure that the installation is entirely free of ground faults short circuits and open circuits and that it is in satisfactory working condition .
furnish all labor materials and apparatus necessary for making the required tests .
remove and replace any defective material or workmanship discovered as a result of these tests at no expense to the department and make subsequent retests to the satisfaction of the engineer .
make all arrangements with the power supplier for power .
pay all costs excluding energy charges required for the test period .
not less than num hours prior to the beginning of the test period give the power supplier the schedule for such test .
test the installation under normal operating conditions during the seven day test period specified in num rather than as a continuous burn test period .
if the work is not open to traffic at the end of the seven day test period deenergize the lighting system until the work is opened .
num acceptance of highway lighting .
num partial acceptance the engineer may make partial acceptance of the highway lighting based on satisfactory performance of all highway lighting for seven consecutive days .
the seven day evaluation period may commence upon written authorization by the engineer that highway lighting is considered ready for acceptance evaluation .
contract time will be charged during the entire highway lighting evaluation period .
correct any defects in materials or workmanship which might appear during the evaluation period at no expense to the department .
num final acceptance upon acceptance of asbuilt drawings transfer manufacturers warranties to the department upon final acceptance in accordance with num .
submit all warranties and warranty transfers to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
the quantities to be paid for will be as follows completed and accepted num .
conduit payment will be made in accordance with section num .
num .
luminaire and truss arm the contract unit price will include the truss arm luminaire with lamp and all necessary mounting hardware as indicated in the plans and standard plans .
num .
service point payment will be made in accordance with section num .
num .
load center the contract unit price will include the enclosure panel boards breakers lightning arrestor contactors photo electric switch grounding and the concrete pad as shown in the plans and standard plans .
num .
luminaire the contract unit price will include the luminaire with lamp and necessary mounting hardware as indicated in the plans and standard plans .
num .
pull box payment will be made in accordance with section num .
num .
high mast lighting pole complete the contract unit price will include the pole luminaires with lamps lowering system breakers and anchor bolts with lock nuts and washers and foundation as indicated in the plans and standard plans .
num .
conductor the quantity to be paid for will be the plan quantity in feet completed and accepted .
measurement will be based on the horizontal distance between pull boxes or between pull boxes and luminaire poles plus num feet for each conductor entering and num return to table of contents num feet for each conductor leaving the pull box and num feet for each conductor entering the luminaire pole .
num .
lighting pole complete the contract unit price will include the pole internal vibration damping device truss arm luminaire with lamp anchor bolts with lock nuts and washers frangible base and foundation .
num .
pole cable distribution system the contract unit price will include the surge protector fuse holders with fuses waterproof connectors and the waterproof wiring connection to the luminaires .
num basis of payment .
prices and payments will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including all materials equipment and tests .
num return to table of contents division iii materials aggregates section num coarse aggregate num general .
num composition coarse aggregate shall consist of naturally occurring materials such as gravel or resulting from the crushing of parent rock to include natural rock slags expanded clays and shales lightweight aggregates and other approved inert materials with similar characteristics having hard strong durable particles conforming to the specific requirements of this section .
materials substantially retained on the no .
num sieve shall be classified as coarse aggregate .
approval of mineral aggregate sources shall be in accordance with num .
num deleterious substances all coarse aggregates shall be reasonably free of clay lumps soft and friable particles salt alkali organic matter adherent coatings and other substances not defined which may possess undesirable characteristics .
the weight of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following percentages coal and lignite aashto tnum num soft and friable particles aashto tnum num clay lumps aashto tnum num plant root matter visual inspection in aashto tnum num wood and wood matter visual inspection in aashto tnum num cinders and clinkers num free shell num total material passing the no .
num sieve fm numtnum at source with los angeles abrasion less than or equal to num num at source with los angeles abrasion greater than num at point of usenum finegrained organic matter aashto num num chert less than num specific gravity ssd aashto tnum num the maximum percent by weight of soft and friable particles and clay lumps together shall not exceed num .
aggregates to be used in asphalt concrete may contain up to num free shell .
free shell is defined as that portion of the coarse aggregate retained on the no .
num sieve consisting of loose whole or broken shell or the external skeletal remains of other marine life having a ratio of the maximum length of the particle to the shell wall thickness exceeding five to one .
coral num return to table of contents molds or casts of other shells and crushed clam and oyster shell indigenous to the formation will not be considered as free shell .
this limitation applies only to coarse aggregates in which chert appears as an impurity .
it is not applicable to aggregates which are predominantly chert .
plant root matter and wood and wood matter shall be considered deleterious when any piece exceeds two inches in length or num inch in width .
the weights of deleterious substances for reclaimed portland cement concrete aggregate shall not exceed the following percentages bituminous concrete num bricks num wood and other organic substances by weight num reinforcing steel and welded wire reinforcement num plaster and gypsum board num joint fillers num supersedes requirement for other coarse aggregate num physical properties coarse aggregates shall meet the following physical property requirements except as noted herein los angeles abrasion fm numtnum maximum loss num soundness sodium sulfate aashto tnum maximum loss num flat or elongated pieces maximum num for source approval aggregates exceeding soundness loss limitations will be rejected unless performance history shows that the material will not be detrimental for portland cement concrete or other intended usages .
a flat or elongated particle is defined as one having a ratio between the maximum and the minimum dimensions of a circumscribing prism exceeding five to one .
num gradation coarse aggregates shall conform to the gradation requirements of table num when the stone size is specified .
however table num is waived for those aggregates intended for usage in bituminous mixtures provided the material is graded on sieves specified in production requirements contained in num and meets uniformity and bituminous design requirements .
table num standard sizes of coarse aggregate amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings weight percent size no .
nominal size square openings num inches num num inches num inches num num inches num inches num num inches num inch num num num to num num inches num num to num num to num num to num num num num inches to num num inches num num to num num to num num to num num num num inches to num inch num num to num num to num num num inches to num inch num num to num num to num num to num num return to table of contents table num standard sizes of coarse aggregate amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings weight percent size no .
nominal size square openings num inches num num inches num inches num num inches num inches num num inches num inch num num inches to no .
num num num to num num to num num num num inches to num inch num num to num num to num num num num inches to no .
num num num to num num num inch to num inch num num to num num num inch to num inch num num to num num num inch to no .
num num num to num num num inch to num inch num num num inch to no .
num num num num inch to no .
num num num inch to no .
num num num inch to no .
num num num inch to no .
num num num inch to no .
num num no .
num to no .
num num no .
num to num table num continued standard sizes of coarse aggregate amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings weight percent size no .
nominal size square openings num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num inches to num num inches num to num num num num inches to num num inches num to num num num num inches to num inch num to num num to num num num inches to num inch num to num num num inches to no .
num num to num num to num num num num inches to num to num num to num num return to table of contents table num continued standard sizes of coarse aggregate amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings weight percent size no .
nominal size square openings num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num inch num num num inches to no .
num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to num inch num to num num to num num to num num num inch to num inch num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to num inch num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num inch to no .
num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num to num num no .
num to no .
num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num no .
num to num num num to num the gradations in table num represent the extreme limits for the various sizes indicated which will be used in determining the suitability for use of coarse aggregate from all sources of supply .
for any grade from any one source the gradation shall be held reasonably uniform and not subject to the extreme percentages of gradation specified above .
num natural stones .
coarse aggregate may be processed from gravels granites limestones dolomite sandstones or other naturally occurring hard sound durable materials meeting the requirements of this section .
num gravels gravel shall be composed of naturally occurring quartz free from deleterious coatings of any kind .
the minimum dryrodded weight aashto tnum shall be num pounds per cubic foot .
crushed gravel shall consist of a minimum of num by weight of the material retained on the no .
num sieve having at least three fractured faces .
num return to table of contents num granites coarse aggregate produced from the crushing of granites shall be sound and durable .
for granites to be used in bituminous mixtures and surface treatments the los angeles abrasion requirement of num is modified to permit a maximum loss up to num fm numtnum .
maximum amount of mica schist permitted is num fm num .
num limestones dolomite and sandstone coarse aggregates may be produced from limestone dolomite sandstones and other naturally occurring hard durable materials meeting the requirements of this section .
when used as a friction course crushed limestone shall have a minimum acid insoluble content of num fm num .
other materials must meet the approval requirements for friction course determined by rule num florida administrative code fac .
precenozoic limestones and dolomite shall not be used as crushed stone aggregates either coarse or fine for asphalt concrete friction courses or any other asphalt concrete mixture or surface treatment serving as the final wearing course .
this specifically includes materials from the ketone dolomite cambrian newala limestone mississippian geologic formations in northern alabama and georgia .
as an exception to the above up to num fine aggregate from these materials may be used in asphalt concrete mixtures other than friction courses which serve as the final wearing course .
num cemented coquina rock for cemented coquina rock to be used in bituminous mixtures the los angeles abrasion requirement of num is modified to permit a maximum loss up to num fm numt num provided that the amount of material finer than no .
num generated during the los angeles abrasion test is less than num .
num manufactured stones .
num slags coarse aggregate may be produced from molten nonmetallic byproducts consisting essentially of silicates and aluminosilicates of calcium and other bases such as air cooled blastfurnace slag or phosphate slag provided it is reasonably uniform in density and quality and reasonably free from deleterious substances as specified in num .
in addition it must meet the following specific requirements sulphur content not more than num dry rodded weight aashto tnum minimum num lbftnum glassy particles not more than num slag shall not be used as an aggregate for portland cement concrete .
for aircooled blast furnace slag the los angeles abrasion requirement of num num is modified to permit a maximum loss up to num fm numtnum provided that the amount of material finer than no .
num sieve generated during the los angeles abrasion test is less than num .
num lightweight aggregates .
num lightweight coarse aggregate for bituminous construction lightweight coarse aggregate may be produced from naturally occurring materials such as pumice scoria and tuff or from expanded clay shale or slate fired in a rotary kiln .
it shall be reasonably uniform in quality and density and free of deleterious substances as specified in num except that the term cinders and clinkers shall apply to those particles clearly foreign to the extended aggregate in question .
num return to table of contents in addition it must meet the following specific requirements material passing the no .
num sieve maximum num fm numtnum dry loose weight aashto tnum num lbftnum los angeles abrasion fm numtnum .
maximum num ferric oxide astm cnum maximum num mg source shall maintain dryloose unit weight within plus or minus num of quality control average .
point of use dryloose unit weight shall be within plus or minus num of source quality control average .
num lightweight coarse aggregate for structural concrete the requirements of num are modified as follows aggregates shall not be produced from pumice and scoria .
los angeles abrasion fm numtnum section num shall be num maximum .
gradation shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum for num inch num inch and num inch .
num recycled concrete aggregate rca .
rca shall be crushed and processed to provide a clean hard durable aggregate having a uniform gradation free from adherent coatings .
rca can be used as coarse aggregate in pipe backfill under wet conditions underdrain aggregate or concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
rca can only be used in bituminous mixtures if the rca originated from a concrete mix which was produced and placed in accordance with section num .
rca shall be asbestos free .
the contractors producers crushing operation shall produce an aggregate meeting the applicable gradation requirements .
the physical property requirements of num for soundness shall not apply and the maximum loss as determined by the los angeles abrasion fm numtnum is changed to num .
the sources of reclaimed portland cement concrete will be treated as a mine and subject to the requirements of section num and section num .
num exceptions additions and restrictions .
pertinent specification modifications based on material usage will be found in other sections of the specifications .
num return to table of contents section num fine aggregate num general .
num composition fine aggregate shall consist of natural silica sand screenings local materials or subject to approval other inert materials with similar characteristics or combination thereof having hard strong durable particles conforming to the specific requirements of this section .
approval of construction aggregate sources shall be in accordance with num .
num deleterious substances all fine aggregate shall be reasonably free of lumps of clay soft or flaky particles salt alkali organic matter loam or other extraneous substances .
the weight of deleterious substances shall not exceed the following percentages shale num coal and lignite num cinders and clinkers num clay lumps num num silica sand .
num composition silica sand shall be composed only of naturally occurring hard strong durable uncoated grains of quartz reasonably graded from coarse to fine meeting the following requirements in percent total weight .
sieve opening size percent retained percent passing no .
num num to num num to num no .
num num to num num to num no .
num num to num num to num no .
num num to num num to num no .
num num to num num to num no .
num num to num num to num no .
num minimum num maximum num silica sand from any one source having a variation in fineness modulus greater than num either way from the fineness modulus of target gradations established by the producer may be rejected .
num organic impurities silica sand shall be subject to the colorimetric test for organic impurities .
if the color produced is darker than the standard solution the aggregate shall be rejected unless it can be shown by appropriate tests that the impurities causing the color are not of a type that would be detrimental to portland cement concrete .
such tests shall be in accordance with aashto tnum and aashto tnum .
when tested for the effect of organic impurities on strength of mortar the strength ratio at seven and num days calculated in accordance with section num of aashto tnum shall not be less than num .
num sands for miscellaneous uses .
num anchor bolts and pipe joints sand for setting anchor bolts pipe joints or other similar uses shall meet the quality requirements of num except that gradation requirements are waived .
num return to table of contents num brick masonry sand for brick masonry shall meet the quality requirements of num except for gradation requirements .
all the materials shall pass the no .
num sieve and be well graded from coarse to fine .
num sandcement riprap sand for sandcement riprap shall meet the quality requirements of num except for gradation requirements .
the material shall meet the following gradation limits sieve size percent passing no .
num minimum num no .
num maximum num no .
num maximum num num filter material for underdrains .
silica sand for use as filter material for types i through iv underdrains shall meet the requirements of num except that the requirements of num and num shall not apply .
the aggregate shall be reasonably free of organic matter and other deleterious materials .
the gradation requirements of num shall apply except no more than num shall pass the no .
num sieve .
filter material for type v underdrain shall meet the above requirements except that there shall be no more than num of silt clay and organic matter that the aggregate shall have a uniformity coefficient of num or greater and that num diameter shall be no .
num to num sieve .
the uniformity coefficient shall be determined by the ratio dnum divided by dnum where dnum and dnum refer to the particle diameter corresponding to num and num of the material which is finer by dry weight .
num screenings .
num composition screenings shall be composed of hard durable particles either naturally occurring such as gravel screenings or resulting from the crushing or processing of the parent rock to include natural rock slags expanded clays or shales lightweight aggregates or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics .
aggregates classified as screening shall conform to the following gradation requirements sieve size percent passing num in .
num no.num num to num num specific requirements num screenings from department approved sources of coarse aggregate processed screenings from fully approved sources of coarse aggregate are subject to gradation .
should coarse aggregate source approval status change or unsatisfactory inservice history develop additional control requirements may be implemented .
screenings for use in hot bituminous mixture may consist of screenings from the processing of reclaimed portland cement concrete pavement to produce coarse aggregate .
num return to table of contents num screenings from other sources screenings from sources other than department approved sources of coarse aggregate must meet the following additional general requirements modified los angeles abrasion num statistical probability of meeting maximum loss of num .
specific gravity absorption soundness sulfur phosphate extraneous substances specific specification requirements based on material usage found in appropriate bituminous or portland cement sections .
based on specific material characteristics processing techniques and in service history on department projects specific source requirements may be assigned .
num screenings for use in portland cement concrete screenings produced from either the miami oolite miami ft. thompson or loxahatchee ft. thompson formations may be substituted for silica sand for use in concretes except for concrete pavements approach slabs bridge decks and precast superstructure segments .
however screenings will be permitted in the concrete when the bridge deck or approach slab is to be covered with an asphalt concrete surface course .
these screenings must meet the gradation requirements of aashto mnum section num as well as the maximum percent passing the no .
num sieve fineness modulus and organic requirements of num silica sand .
in addition the saturated surface dry specific gravity shall be at least num .
num local materials .
local materials shall be composed of hard strong durable particles either naturally occurring such as natural sands or resulting from the crushing or processing of parent rock to include natural sand and rock slags expanded clays or shales lightweight aggregate or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics .
aggregates classified as local material shall conform to the following gradation requirements sieve size percent passing num in .
num no .
num num to num no .
num maximum num in addition to meeting the requirements of num the material shall not contain excessive quantities of other deleterious substances such as roots cans debris etc .
if clay size material is present it shall not exceed num as determined by aashto tnum and it shall be of a type which will not produce clay balls when used .
the aggregate must be suitable for designated use as determined by laboratory tests .
if the deposit consists of stratified layers of varying characteristics and gradation the producer shall employ such means as necessary to secure a uniform material .
num return to table of contents local materials will not be required to be produced under the requirements of num provided they can meet the above requirements .
num exceptions additions and restrictions .
other specification modifications based on material usage may be found in the appropriate sections of the specifications .
num return to table of contents flexiblepavement materials including materials for stabilizing section num base and stabilized base materials num description .
this section governs materials to be used in the construction of base and subgrade stabilization including limerock shell shellrock cemented coquina shell and recycled concrete aggregate rca .
num materials .
num general num approval of material approval of mineral aggregate sources shall be in accordance with num .
num deleterious substances materials shall not contain deleterious substances that would result in prevention of the bituminous prime coat from adhering to the base course a detriment to the finishing strength or performance of the base or a surface which is susceptible to distortion under construction traffic .
such substances include but are not limited to cherty or other extremely hard pieces lumps balls or pockets of sand or clay size material organic matter loose sand loose free shells corals or skeletal remain of other marine invertebrates retained on the no .
num sieve or water sensitive clay minerals .
num limerock composition limerock material shall consist of unconsolidated or partly consolidated limestone of marine origin .
num shell material composition shell materials shall consist of naturally occurring deposits formed essentially of broken mollusk shell corals and the skeletal remains of other marine invertebrates .
live or steamed shell or manmade deposits as a byproduct of the shellfish industry will not be permitted .
num bank run shell shell materials meeting the requirements of this section which are presently found as dry land deposits .
num dredged shell shell materials meeting the requirements of this section which are dredged from ocean bay or lake deposits .
num shellrock material composition shellrock materials shall consist of naturally occurring heterogeneous deposits of limestone with interbedded layers or lenses of loose and cemented shell to include cemented sands calcitic sandstone .
this material shall be mined and processed in a manner that will result in a reasonably homogenous finished product .
num cemented coquina shell material composition cemented coquina shell materials to be used as cemented coquina base or stabilized base shall be defined as naturally occurring deposits formed essentially of broken mollusk shell corals and the skeletal remains of other marine invertebrates which are presently found as dry land deposits and which have been cemented together by carbonates or other natural cementing agents .
num recycled concrete aggregate rca composition rca shall consist of concrete material derived from the crushing of hard portland cement concrete .
in addition to the deleterious materials noted in num rca shall be asbestos free .
the following limits shall not be exceeded num return to table of contents bituminous concrete num by weight bricks num by weight glass and ceramics num by weight wood and other organic substances num by weight reinforcing steel and welded wire fabric num by weight plaster and gypsum board num by weight num material requirements .
num limerock bearing ratio lbr materials shall meet the requirements in table num in accordance with fm num table num limerock bearing ratio lbr material requirement limerock average results per lot num minimum individual results num minimum shell shellrock cemented coquina shell rca individual results num minimum num liquid limit and plasticity materials shall meet the requirements in table num in accordance with aashto tnum and aashto tnum table num liquid limit and plastic properties material liquid limit plastic properties limerock base not to exceed num nonplastic np stabilized base plasticity not to exceed num shell np shellrock cemented coquina shell np rca np num carbonates materials shall meet the carbonate requirements in table num in accordance with fm num table num percentage of carbonates calcium and magnesium material requirement limerock minimum num shell minimum num shellrock minimum num cemented coquina shell minimum num rca not applicable num return to table of contents num gradation and size requirements materials shall meet the gradation and size requirements in table num in accordance with fm numtnum and fm numtnum table num gradation requirements material requirement limerock base at least num shall pass a num inch sievenum stabilized base at least num shall pass a num inch sievenum shell dredged shell passing num inch sieve num passing no .
num sieve num maximum passing no .
num sieve maximum num washed bankrun shell passing num inch sieve num passing no .
num sieve num maximum passing no .
num sieve num maximum washed shellrock passing num inch sieve num minimum passing no .
num sieve num maximum passing no .
num sieve num maximum washed cemented coquina shell rca sieve size percent by weight passing num inch num num inch num to num num inch num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num no .
num num to num num the maximum dimension shall not exceed six inches .
num the material shall be well graded down to dust .
the fine material shall consist entirely of dust of fracture .
num exceptions additions and restrictions .
approved materials shall not be mixed with other approved or nonapproved materials .
num return to table of contents section num stabilization materials num general .
this section governs materials to be used in subgrade stabilization .
meet the following requirements plasticity index aashto tnum maximum num liquid limit aashto tnum maximum num passing a num inch screen aashto tnum minimum num lbr no requirement num materials for stabilizing limerock bearing ratiolbr .
num commercial materials materials may be either limerock shell rock cemented coquina or shell base sources approved in accordance with num .
num local materials local materials used for stabilizing may be soils or recyclable materials such as crushed concrete roof tiles and asphalt coated base reclaimed asphalt pavement rap or fossil fuel combustion products ffcps provided the following limits for organic content are met .
average organic content fm numtnum maximum num individual organic content sample fm numtnum maximum num note a minimum of three samples per source .
ffcps may be used provided they meet the requirements of num f.s .
are not used outside the paved area and are not less than num feet above the design high groundwater table .
all materials for stabilizing must meet all applicable air or water quality standards or criteria in florida department of environmental protection fdep rules .
num return to table of contents section num bituminous materials num general .
all products supplied under this specification shall be one of the products included on the approved product list apl .
producers seeking evaluation of a product for inclusion on the apl shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
for liquid antistrip agents in addition to the above producers shall include a report of test results from an independent laboratory confirming the material meets the requirements of this section .
in lieu of submitting test results from an independent laboratory the department will evaluate the material .
for each liquid antistrip agent the producer will submit one pint of a representative sample of liquid antistrip agent to the state materials office when submitting the apl application to the departments product evaluation section .
any marked variation from the original test values for a material below the established limits or evidence of inadequate quality control or field performance of a material will be considered sufficient evidence that the properties of the material have changed and the material will be removed from the apl .
num superpave pg asphalt binder num requirements superpave performance graded pg asphalt binders identified as pg num pg num pg num polymer modified asphalt pma binders pg num pma and high polymer and asphalt rubber binders arb pg num arb shall meet the requirements of num and aashto m num .
when the contract documents specify either a pg num pma pg num arb or pg num binder either binder can be used interchangeably at no additional cost to the department .
all pg asphalt binders shall meet the following additional requirements num .
the intermediate test temperature at num radsec .
for the dynamic shear rheometer dsr test aashto t num shall be numc for pg grades pg num and higher .
num .
an additional high temperature grade of pg num is added for which the high test temperature at num radsec for the dsr test aashto t num shall be numc .
num .
all pg asphalt binders having a high temperature designation of pg num or lower shall be prepared without modification .
num .
all pma binders having a high temperature designation higher than pg num shall only be produced with a styrenebutadienestyrene sbs or styrenebutadiene sb elastomeric polymer modifier and the resultant binder shall meet all requirements of this section .
num .
polyphosphoric acid may be used as a modifier not exceeding num by weight of asphalt binder for pg num pma and pg num arb binders .
polyphosphoric acid may not be used in high polymer binder .
num .
pg num arb shall meet the additional requirements of num .
num .
all pg asphalt binders having a high temperature designation of pg num or lower shall not have a high temperature true grade more than numc higher than the specified pg grade for example if a pg num is specified do not supply a pg num or higher .
num .
the use of waste oil is prohibited in the modification of any pg binder grade .
waste oil shall be defined as recycled oil products that have not been processed through a vacuum tower and have an initial boiling point of numc numf or lower when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
num return to table of contents for all pg binder used in all hot mix asphalt silicone may be added to the pg binder at the rate of num cubic centimeters of silicone mixed to each num gallons of pg binder .
if a disbursing fluid is used in conjunction with the silicone the resultant mixture containing the full num cubic centimeters of silicone shall be added in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
the blending of the silicone with the pg binder shall be done by the supplier prior to the shipment .
when the asphalt binder will be used with a foaming warm mix technology refer to the technology suppliers guidance on the addition of silicone .
where an antistrip additive is required the antistrip additive shall meet the requirements of num .
the antistrip additive shall be introduced into the pg binder by the supplier during loading .
num additional requirements for pg num arb the following additional requirements apply only to pg num arb num .
the asphalt binder shall contain a minimum of num ground tire rubber gtr by weight of asphalt binder .
num .
the gtr shall meet the requirements of section num .
num .
polymer modification is optional for pg num arb .
num compliance with materials manual producers of superpave pg binders shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments material manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
num reporting specification compliance testing results shall be reported for the tests in the table below unless noted otherwise .
quality control qc testing results shall be reported for original binder dsr gsin  and phase angle as applicable .
superpave pg asphalt binder test and method conditions specification minimummaximum value superpave pg asphalt binder grade report apl number report modifier name and type polymer ground tire rubber with approved product list apl number sulfur ppa reob and any rejuvenating agents report original binder solubility aashto t num in trichloroethylene minimum num not applicable for pg num arb flash point aashto t num num cleveland open cup minimum numf rotational viscosity aashto t num numf maximum num pasa num return to table of contents dynamic shear rheometer b aashto t num gsin  minimum num kpa phase angle c pg num pma and pg num arbd maximum num degrees separation test astm d num and softening point aashto t num num numc num hours maximum numf pg num arb only rolling thin film oven test residue aashto t num rolling thin film oven aashto t num mass change maximum num multiple stress creep recovery jnr num aashto m num grade temperature unmodified binders only s num kpanum max multiple stress creep recovery jnr numd e f aashto m num numc modified binders only numc high polymer binder only v num kpanum max maximum jnrdiff num num kpanum max multiple stress creep recovery recoveryd e aashto m num numc modified binders only numc high polymer binder only rnum num jnr num num rnum num pressure aging vessel residue aashto r num dynamic shear rheometer aashto t num gsin  num radsec .
maximum num kpaf g creep stiffness aashto t num s stiffness num sec .
mvalue num sec .
maximum num mpa minimum num a binders with values higher than num pas should be used with caution and only after consulting with the supplier as to any special handling procedures including pumping capabilities .
b dynamic shear rheometer aashto t num shall be performed on original binders for the purposes of qc testing only .
c the original binder phase angle aashto t num shall be performed at grade temperature .
d aashto t num and aashto t num will be performed at a num mm gap for pg num arb e all binders with a high temperature designation num will be tested at numc .
pg num pma and pg num arb shall pass a v grade per aashto m num. f a maximum jnr diff num does not apply for any jnr value num kpanum .
g for all pg grades of a pg num or higher perform the pav residue testing at numc with a maximum of num kpa .
num asphalt emulsions .
num compliance with materials manual producers of asphalt emulsions shall meet the requirements of section num volume ii of the departments material manual which may be viewed at the following url httpwww.fdot.govprogrammanagementimplementedurlinspecssectionnumvnum.shtm .
num requirements use a prime coat meeting the requirements of aashto m num num for anionic emulsions aashto m num num or aashto m num for cationic num return to table of contents emulsions or as specified in the producers qc plan .
for anionic emulsions the cement mixing test will be waived .
for tack products the minimum testing requirements shall include percent residue naphtha content as needed oneday storage stability sieve test saybolt furol viscosity original dsr and solubility on an annual basis .
residue testing shall be performed on residue obtained from distillation aashto t num or low temperature evaporation aashto pp num method b .
num liquid antistrip agents .
num requirements liquid antistrip agents shall be tested in accordance with fm num t num .
a minimum tensile strength ratio of num must be obtained when testing the liquid anti strip with various aggregate sources and two nominal maximum aggregate size mixtures for approval to be placed on the apl .
num mix design verification particular aggregate sources may require moisture susceptibility testing per fm numt num for each mix design .
results from this testing may meet the departments requirement of minimum tensile strength ratio of num or may indicate the need for a larger dosage rate of antistrip agent up to num maximum or may require a different antistrip agent to meet the specification requirements .
num return to table of contents section num mineral filler num composition .
mineral filler shall consist in general of limerock dust portland cement slag dust hydrated lime or any other inert mineral matter from sources approved by the engineer .
the mineral filler shall be thoroughly dry and free from lumps consisting of aggregations of fine particles .
ground phosphate will not be allowed as a mineral filler .
stone or slag screenings may also be used as filler material for asphalt concrete mixtures under the provisions specified in num below .
num gradation .
the mineral filler shall meet the following gradation requirements total passing no .
num sieve num total passing no .
num sieve num minimum total passing no .
num sieve num minimum num provision for use of coarser filler material .
process screenings from stone or slag having a coarser gradation than as specified above may also be used as filler material provided the particular product and the source thereof are approved by the engineer and that the material meets the following requirements .
num .
all of the material shall pass the no .
num sieve and not more than num shall pass the no .
num sieve .
num .
the material passing the no .
num sieve shall be free from organic impurities and not more than num of such shall consist of clay minerals .
the plasticity index of the material passing the no .
num sieve shall not exceed num .
num .
for the stone or slag material from which the screenings are produced the loss when subjected to the los angeles abrasion test shall not exceed num .
num return to table of contents section num ground tire rubber num description .
this section specifies the requirements for ground tire rubber gtr .
num general requirements .
num general the gtr shall be produced from tires and shall be substantially free from contaminants including fabric metal mineral and other nonrubber substances .
up to num by weight of rubber of talc or other inert dusting agent may be added to prevent sticking and caking of the particles .
num ground tire rubber gtr for use in asphalt rubber binder gtr shall be sufficiently dry so as to be free flowing and to prevent foaming when mixed with asphalt cement .
the use of pelletized asphalt rubber is permitted provided the components of the pelletized rubber particles meet the requirements of this section .
additionally the pelletized particles must disassociate once blended with asphalt cement .
num ground tire rubber gtr for use in flowable fill gtr may replace up to num of the fine aggregate .
num approved product list apl gtr and pelletized rubber used shall be one of the products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
num physical requirements .
the physical properties of the ground tire rubber shall be determined in accordance with fm num and shall meet the following requirements specific gravity num to num moisture content maximum num metal contaminants maximum num gradation minimum num passing the no .
num sieve num chemical requirements .
the chemical composition of the ground tire rubber shall be determined in accordance with astm dnum and shall meet the following requirements acetone extract maximum num rubber hydrocarbon content num to num ash content maximum num carbon black content num to num natural rubber num to num num packaging and identification requirements .
the ground tire rubber shall be supplied in moisture resistant packaging such as either disposable bags or other appropriate bulk containers .
each container or bag of ground tire rubber shall be labeled with the manufacturers designation for the rubber and the specific type maximum nominal size weight and manufacturers batch or lot designation .
num return to table of contents num certification requirements .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certification conforming to the requirements of section num from the manufacturer confirming that the ground tire rubber meets the requirements of this section .
num return to table of contents materials for portland cement concrete structural pavement and miscellaneous section num portland cement and blended cement num general .
cement shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum or aashto mnum as applicable except as defined below or as specifically restricted in section num .
num type of cement cement may be types i ii ii mh iii iv v aashto mnum or il ip is aashto mnum .
different brands of cement cement of the same brand from different facilities or different types of cement shall be stored separately and shall not be mixed .
num alkali content portland cement containing a maximum of num alkali or less calculated as nanumo nanumo plus num knumo may be used with no further testing .
high alkali cement containing a maximum of num alkali or less calculated as nanumo nanumo plus num knumo may be used with the following .
when high alkali cement is used in concrete the test results shall verify improved or comparable strength sulfate resistance corrosion protective properties and other durability requirements of concrete as compared to aashto mnum low alkali cement .
the strength and durability tests of concrete shall be performed in accordance with aashto tnum astm cnum astm cnum fm numcnum and fm num .
num heat of hydration the cement heat of hydration for type ii mh or type il shall be tested in accordance with astm cnum and reported at three days .
num terminology .
the following definitions are applicable to the production and quality control of cement approved laboratory indicates a laboratory acceptable to the state materials office that is currently inspected by the cement and concrete reference laboratory ccrl is actively participating in their proficiency program and which has all deficiencies noted at the time of inspection corrected .
the laboratory must also authorize ccrl to submit final inspection reports to the state materials office .
approved source indicates a cement supplier including but not limited to a plant a terminal or a transfer facility that has been qualified by the state materials office .
a list of approved cement sources will be maintained by the state materials office .
mill test report indicates a certification from the cement supplier identifying that the cement meets section num the type the production period the sample represents and the chemical and physical analyses of the cement and the silo numbers where the cement is stored .
the mill test report must identify that there is limestone in the cement if limestone is included .
an acceptable mill test report is found in the appendix of aashto mnum .
purchaser the term purchaser in the aashto specifications shall be taken as the department .
quality control qc plan status indicates quality control approval status for each cement supplier and will be maintained by the state materials office in conjunction with the approved source list .
num return to table of contents source of supply indicates a cement supplier responsible for supplying the final product .
where the supplier has more than one manufacturing facility the source of supply may be designated as the manufacturerfacility .
num packing handling and storing .
cement may be delivered in bags or in bulk .
the storage building bin or silo shall be weatherproof and shall be located convenient to the work .
on small jobs storage in the open may be permitted by the engineer in which case raised platforms and adequate waterproof coverings shall be provided .
num rejection .
the entire contents of the sack or bulk container which contains cement that does not meet the requirements of this specification or has been damaged is partially set lumpy or caked shall be rejected .
bagged cement which varies more than num from the designated weight or if the average weight of num sacks taken at random is less than the designated weight the cement shall be rejected .
num quality control plan .
num general the quality control program of a cement supplier shall conform to section num .
cement suppliers shall submit a proposed qc plan to the state materials office for plan approval .
in addition to the qc plan the supplier must submit test reports from an approved laboratory which certifies that the cement in current production or supply conforms to these specifications .
upon initial qc plan approval and receipt of the cement mill test report the suppliers will be placed in an approved source status with an approved quality control plan .
an approved laboratory shall perform one quality control test per day .
submit the monthly mill test report to the state materials office .
the mill test report shall indicate that the cement meets the requirements of this specification .
also the corresponding samples along with mill test reports shall be submitted to the department upon request .
producers intending to use limestone as a component material in the production of cement shall describe the type and source of the limestone .
in addition the producer shall supply the department with a sample of the limestone a sample of the cement prior to the limestone being added and a sample of the cement after the limestone has been added .
the analysis of these materials will be used as a baseline for information .
in the event that the source of limestone used by the cement producer changes additional samples of both the limestone and the cement with the limestone added shall be provided to the state materials office for evaluation .
representatives from the department may take samples from the cement production facility at a minimum of once per year to verify compliance with the producers qc plan .
the suppliers qc plan shall be sufficient to insure that more than num of all cement delivered for department work shall meet all specification requirements .
upon request of the department the supplier shall provide split samples of the cement collected for quality control testing .
split samples shall be delivered to the state materials office and shall be identified as representing a designated lot of cement .
num acceptance of portland cement portland cement from an approved source with a current qc plan approval may be accepted on the basis of mill test reports meeting the num return to table of contents requirements of the applicable aashto and fdot specifications and a delivery ticket on the producers letterhead and traceable to the mill test report .
mill test reports shall be submitted upon request to the state materials office and corresponding samples for verification testing .
quality control testing shall be performed by an approved laboratory .
num cement ownership and responsibility for purposes of qc plan approval status the cement supplier shall be responsible for cement quality until the cement is accepted by the concrete producer .
where the cement has been accepted by a concrete producer and is subsequently found deficient the concrete plant qc plan approval may be withdrawn with respect to further use of that cement and reinstated only when the deficiency is adequately resolved .
reinstatement is made by the state materials office .
num quality control plan approval control the state materials office may withdraw qc plan approval and may require cement shipments to be individually tested prior to incorporation into department work .
qc plan approvals may be rescinded when the performance of cement is in question including problems with concrete quality inconsistent quality control data or failure of quality control or verification test results .
discontinuance of approval may be based on testing at the point of use testing by the manufacturer or proven poor performance of the cement in concrete .
in the specific instance of a failing cement sample taken by the department at the cement source the failure shall initiate the department to retest the sample .
failure of the retest will be considered adequate evidence to withdraw the qc plan of the cement supplier .
notification of failing test results will be distributed to the cement supplier and concrete producers if applicable as designated in the approved qc plan .
split samples of the initial sample may be provided to the cement supplier and concrete producer upon request .
reinstatement of the qc plan will occur when the cement producer identifies and corrects the specific cause of the failures or that a statistical analysis indicates that the current cement production meets or exceeds the requirements of this specification .
num sampling of cement the verification samples may be taken at the manufacturers plant distribution facility or at the concrete production facility .
samples shall be obtained by one of the methods in fm num .
samples sizes shall be a minimum of one quart .
at the concrete production facility cement samples shall be jointly obtained by the department inspector and the concrete producers representative .
num return to table of contents section num water for concrete num general requirements .
water for use with cement shall be clear and free from oil and injurious amounts of acid alkali chlorides organic matter and other deleterious substances .
it shall not be salty or brackish .
if it contains quantities of substances which discolor it or make it smell or taste unusual or objectionable or cause suspicion it shall not be used unless approved by the department .
water sources permitted include potable water supplies that are approved by a public health department open bodies of water well water reclaimed water and recycled water .
reclaimed water shall be as defined in chapter num f.a.c .
open bodies of water are defined as naturally occurring rivers lakes and ponds .
recycled water includes wash water from mixer washout operations stored in a lined settling pond .
all other sources of water not listed above shall be considered recycled and reclaimed water .
num evaluation of water for concrete .
num general water from potable water supplies approved by a public health department may be used without additional testing .
the concrete producer shall submit test data of water samples from other sources .
to determine chemical properties use a laboratory accredited by the national environmental laboratory or construction materials engineering council accreditation program .
to determine physical properties use a laboratory accredited by the construction materials engineering council accreditation program or cement and concrete reference laboratory .
num initial sampling and testing frequency open bodies of water and well water shall be initially sampled once prior to use .
recycled and reclaimed water shall be tested once per week for four weeks initially and thereafter once per month for four months prior to its use provided that the results of the test samples comply with all the applicable limits .
failing test results will result in restarting initial sampling and testing .
num production sampling and testing frequency open bodies of water and recycled water shall be tested monthly .
well water and reclaimed water shall be tested once every three months .
if the last eight consecutive well water and reclaimed water samples meet the requirements then the sample frequency may be reduced to one sample every six months as approved by the department .
if a well water or reclaimed water sample fails once the frequency has been reduced then the sampling frequency shall revert back to once every three months .
num chemical requirements .
num testing all chemical analysis or tests shall be performed in accordance with the test methods listed in tables num and num or standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater sm .
num recycled and reclaimed water recycled and reclaimed water shall be tested before use and shall not exceed the limits in table num table num chemical test test method maximum total solids sm num b num total chlorides as cl astm d num num num return to table of contents table num chemical test test method maximum total sulfates as sonum astm d num num num open bodies of water and well water open bodies of water and well water shall be tested before use and shall not exceed the limits of table num table num chemical test test method maximum alkalinity calculated in terms of calcium carbonate sm num b num total organic solids sm num e num total inorganic solids sm num e num total chlorides as cl astm d num num num physical requirements for mortar .
mortar shall be tested in accordance with astm c num with the following exception the mortar shall not be tested for flow .
the mortar composed of the sampled water shall have a compressive strength of not less than num when compared to a mortar prepared using distilled water and tested at seven days .
water of a questionable quality as determined by the department shall be subject to the acceptance criteria for time of set as required by astm c num table num .
num return to table of contents section num admixtures for concrete num general .
this section covers materials for use as admixtures for concrete .
the use of admixtures is restricted to those admixtures as may be allowed or required elsewhere in the specifications for specific concrete applications .
admixtures shall comply with applicable aashto and astm specifications as modified in num through num .
admixtures that have been previously qualified for department use are listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num acceptance of admixtures .
num approved product list apl the department maintains a list of qualified admixtures for airentraining waterreducing type a accelerating type c waterreducing and retarding type d waterreducer and accelerating type e high range water reducing type f and high range waterreducing and retarding type g high range waterreducing type i plasticizing and type ii plasticizing and retarding in producing flowing concrete specific performance type s and corrosion inhibitor which have been determined as meeting requirements for use on department projects .
admixtures included on this list will be permitted without further testing .
the inclusion of any specific product on the apl as specified in num indicates that the product has been given contingent approval as evidenced by previous tests and apparent effectiveness under field conditions .
except as specified in sections num and num no further testing will be required for any product on the apl unless there is indication in actual field use of inadequate or unreliable results .
num certification manufacturers of admixtures shall submit certified test results from an independent laboratory inspected by the cement and concrete reference laboratory ccrl on a regular basis for applicable tests with all deficiencies corrected for apl approval and upon request of the engineer .
num for airentraining airentraining admixtures shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum except for the flexural strengths relative durability factor and length change requirements are waived .
num for type a waterreducing and type d waterreducing and retarding waterreducing and waterreducing and retarding admixtures shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum for type a and d respectively except for the compressive strength at six months and one year flexural strengths and relative durability factor requirements are waived .
num for type c accelerating and type e water reducing and accelerating accelerating and water reducing and accelerating admixtures shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum for type c and type e respectively except for the compressive strength at six months and one year flexural strengths and relative durability factor requirements are waived .
num for high range waterreducing high range water reducing admixtures shall meet the requirements of the applicable aashto or astm specifications as modified in num num and num .
num return to table of contents num for type f or type g high range water reducing type f and high range water reducing and retarding type g shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum except for the compressive strengths at one year and relative durability factor requirements are waived .
num for type i and type ii high range water reducing type i and high range water reducing and retarding type ii for use in producing flowing concrete shall meet the requirements of astm cnum except for the compressive strength at one year and relative durability factor requirements are waived .
num for corrosion inhibitors corrosion inhibitors shall meet the requirements of astm gnum and all requirements in this section .
calcium nitrite is a chemically reactive admixture used in concrete to inhibit the corrosion of embedded reinforcing steel and other metallic components .
the calcium nitrite supplier shall submit to the engineer test certificates from an independent laboratory indicating compliance with this specification .
the test certificate shall include corrosion inhibiting properties per astm gnum and results of physical tests included in this section .
calcium nitrite shall be supplied by the same manufacturing source throughout the project .
if a single primary source of calcium nitrite can not be maintained throughout the project new test certificates shall be submitted .
the engineer will determine specification compliance of a new suppliers product and evaluate the effectiveness of the new calcium nitrite product before approving the source .
the active ingredient shall be calcium nitrite canonum .
the calcium nitrite shall be furnished in solution containing not less than num calcium nitrite solids .
the concentration of the calcium nitrite solution shall be verified by spectrophotometric analysis or other comparable methods .
the nitrite concentration shall be measured in accordance with standard methods for the examination of water and waste water numth edition .
a volume of one gallon of calcium nitrite solution shall weigh within the range of num to num lb .
the calcium nitrite solution shall be added to the concrete mixture at a rate of num to num galydnum of concrete .
the addition of calcium nitrite to the concrete mix shall not adversely affect the properties of fresh and hardened concrete .
calcium nitrite concrete shall meet the following physical requirements when mixed and tested in accordance with aashto mnum water content of control num to num time of setting allowable deviation from control hmin initial at least not more than num earlier nor num later final at least not more than num earlier nor num later compressive strength min .
of control shall be num for all ages flexural strength min of control shall be num for all ages length change max shrinkage alternative requirements of control num increase over control num relative durability factor min num num return to table of contents the following table lists the corrosion inhibiting test result limits for calcium nitrite concrete tested in accordance with astm gnum maximum allowable test results of calcium nitrite concrete measured average macrocell current any time during the test num a average macrocell current at test completion num a average visible corrosion measured as percent corroded area of control num num type s specific performance specific performance admixtures shall meet the requirements of astm cnum for type s admixtures except the compressive strength at one year flexural strength and relative durability factor requirements are waived .
the following type s admixtures may be added to plastic concrete .
num workability retention workability retention admixtures are used to extend workability and slump life without retarding the setting time .
the dosage rate used shall be based on the manufacturers recommendation in order to maintain num of the initial measured slump after num minutes .
num shrinkage reducing shrinkage reducing admixtures are used to minimize the shrinkage of plastic and hardened concrete .
the dosage rate used shall be based on the manufacturers recommendation and may vary for a specific application .
num rheology modifying rheology modifying admixtures are used to maximize the rheology of plastic concrete .
the dosage rate used shall be based on the manufactures recommendation and may vary for a specific application .
num performance test on airentraining admixtures for effect on strength of concrete .
num conditions under which test is required for any airentraining admixture selected for use the engineer may call for a performance test either prior to or at any time during construction for determining its effect on the strength of the concrete .
in general this checktest will be required only when there is indication that such admixture is giving erratic results or is unduly reducing the strength of the concrete .
testing shall be in accordance with num and num .
num permissible reduction in strength of the concrete for concrete composed of the same cement and aggregates and in the same proportions to be used in the work and containing the admixture under test in an amount sufficient to produce between num and num entrained air in the plastic concrete the compressive strength at seven days shall be at least num of the strength of the same concrete without the admixture .
num method of test for strength reduction the percentage reduction in strength shall be calculated from the average strength of at least three standard num inch by num inch or num inch by num inch cylinders of each class of concrete .
specimens shall be made and cured in the laboratory in accordance with astm cnum and shall be tested in accordance with astm cnum .
the percentage of entrained air shall be determined in accordance with astm cnum or astm cnum .
num retesting .
the approved admixtures are required to be tested for their uniformity and equivalence whenever there is an indication of erratic results .
the tests shall be performed in accordance with num return to table of contents the following procedure .
the admixture shall be checked for comparison between infrared spectrophotometry ph value specific gravity and solids content .
any marked variation from the original curve ph value specific gravity or solids content will be considered sufficient evidence that the chemistry of the original material has been changed and therefore the use of this material will be rejected and the material will be removed from the apl .
num return to table of contents section num curing materials for concrete num burlap .
burlap for curing concrete shall consist either of two layers each weighing num to num ouncesnum square feet or of four layers each weighing num to num ouncesnum square feet .
burlap which has been used as a container for sugar shall not be used .
burlap that is being used for the first time shall be thoroughly washed in order to remove starches used in sizing the material .
burlap shall be furnished in strips of at least num feet wide and shall be at least num feet longer than the width of surface to be covered .
num membraneforming curing compound .
num general membraneforming curing compound shall conform to requirements of astm cnum and the following requirements requirement test method test value water lossnum hours astm cnum num kgmnum deleterious reaction with concrete astm cnum none reflectance astm enum num minimum drying time astm cnum num hours maximum nonvolatile content astm dnum method a informational density lbsgal astm dnum informational type num white compounds only .
the membraneforming curing compound shall be of a consistency suitable for spraying at temperatures prevalent at the time of application and which forms a continuous uniform film .
it shall be free from precipitated matter caused by conditions of storage or temperature .
thoroughly agitate the curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations prior to shipment from manufacturers plant and prior to use at job site .
curing compound delivered to the jobsite shall be in the manufacturers original container and clearly labeled with the following information num. manufacturers name num. product name trade name num. type num. batch or lot number num. date of manufacture num product acceptance acceptance of membraneforming curing compound shall be based on the product being listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num approved product list manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product must submit an application in accordance with section num and include product data sheets material safety data sheets sds and certified test reports from an independent laboratory showing the product meets the requirements of this section .
testing in accordance with the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep project work plan for the laboratory num return to table of contents testing of liquid membraneforming compounds for curing concrete shall be acceptable as independent laboratory data .
include an infrared spectrophotometry ir scan and a certification stating the nominal minimum percentage of nonvolatile material for the product formulation .
deviation of the nonvolatile material below this certified value shall be considered a change in formulation and shall be grounds for removal from the apl .
num certification prior to use the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certification from the manufacturer conforming to the requirements of section num that the requirements of this section are met .
num product life store the curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
curing compounds not used within one year of the date of manufacture shall not be incorporated into the work .
num sheet materials .
num general waterproof paper polyethylene film and white burlappolyethylene sheet for curing concrete shall meet the requirements of astm cnum with the additional requirements for waterproof paper and for polyethylene film as shown below .
num additional requirements for waterproof paper the paper as prepared for use shall be in such dimensions that each unit as laid will extend at least num inches beyond the edges of the slab .
if laid longitudinally paper not manufactured in sizes which will provide this width shall be securely sewed or cemented together the joints being sealed in such manner that they do not open up or separate during the curing period .
at the option of the contractor instead of the single longitudinal strip specified above the blanket may be furnished in three strips one strip being the neat width of the pavement with two side strips .
num additional requirements for polyethylene sheeting the sheets as prepared for use shall be of such dimensions that each unit as laid will extend beyond the edges of the slab by at least twice the thickness dimension of the pavement edge and the sheets shall overlap by at least num inches .
no sheet may be reused except after individual inspection and approval by the engineer .
any sheets determined by the engineer to be so damaged as to not afford the protection to the concrete in preventing moisture loss during the curing period will be rejected .
num certification .
for burlap or white burlappolyethylene the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certification conforming to the requirements of section num from the manufacturer confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
each certification shall cover only one type of burlap or white burlappolyethylene sheeting .
num return to table of contents section num epoxy compounds num types of compounds .
epoxy resin based compounds for application to portland cement concrete bituminous cement concrete metals and other type surfaces shall be applicable for the following types as designated .
type description ab an epoxy resin for bonding fresh or hardened concrete to hardened concrete and constructing doweled splices in precast prestressed concrete piles .
e a fluid epoxy for crack injection in the repair of old structures .
f fnum fnum an epoxy for repairing spalled areas on concrete bridge structures with these subtypes a non sagging gel type for vertical surfaces .
a pourable type for repairs where forms are to be used .
h an epoxy for structural bonding where asphalt overlays are to be in contact with the hardened compound .
k an epoxy for underwater sealing of the bottom of the jacket of an integral pile jacket system .
m a coal tar epoxy coating for steel sheet piles and h piles water immersion and hot applied coal tar epoxy tape .
pse a two part epoxy system to match the cast faces of joints between precast segmental concrete superstructure andor substructure segments .
q an epoxy for use in post tensioning anchorage protection systems .
accepted by apl accepted by certified test report accepted by certification num epoxy design requirements .
num general all types of compounds except m shall contain no volatile solvent .
all types of compounds except f m and n shall be basically pure reactive material with a maximum ash content of num .
when product materials are required to be mixed all types shall have simple mix ratios of one to one or two to one or shall be supplied in premeasured containers in which all of the contents of all packages are to be mixed .
certain terms used in this specification shall have these meanings low modulus the stressstrain property for which ultimate tensile strength is attained at over num elongation .
high modulus the stressstrain property for which ultimate tensile strength is attained at under num elongation .
nonsagging gel grades of mixed compounds which will not perceptibly flow under their own weight on a vertical surface in the unhardened state .
pourable grades of mixed compound sufficiently fluid that they either neat or filled can be cast into and will take the shape of a mold .
num approved product list apl all epoxy materials shall be one of the products listed on the departments approved product list apl unless an alternative acceptance is num return to table of contents identified in this specification .
all manufacturers shall submit a product data sheet .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of products for inclusion on the apl shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
information on the apl application must identify the epoxy type .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of type ab and type pse epoxies shall submit performance test reports from the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep showing that the product meets the requirements of this section .
manufacturers of all other types shall submit test data from an independent laboratory showing that the product meets the requirements of this section and an infrared identification curve num to num m .
products may only be used for applications recommended by the manufacturer .
num certification the contractor shall submit to the engineer certification from the manufacturer of the epoxy confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certification shall conform to the requirements of section num .
each certification shall cover only one batch of epoxy materials .
num specific requirements for type ab epoxy compounds .
num mixing and application type ab epoxy compounds for bonding fresh concrete to hardened concrete or bonding precast concrete parts shall be listed on the apl and be mixed applied and cured in accordance with the manufacturers directions or as directed otherwise by the engineer .
epoxy compounds shall be used only under conditions which are compatible with the material being applied in accordance with the specific directions of the manufacturer .
num performance tests meet the requirements of astm cnum type iv grade num .
num specific requirements for type e compounds .
epoxies for crack injection shall meet the specification for type ab compound with these additional requirements viscosity five minutes after mixing num to num cps at numf by astm d num wet bond strength to concrete minimum num psi at seven days by fm num num specific requirements for type f compounds .
num repairing spalled areas epoxies for repairing spalled areas shall meet the requirements in this section .
num subtype fnum subtype fnum is used for repairing vertical and other surfaces and shall be a trowelable low modulus nonsagging gel epoxy compound capable of bonding to wet surfaces with these properties num return to table of contents color shall match gray color no .
num of fedstdnum viscosity gel maximum sand loading num parts sand to one part mixed epoxy by volume elongation in tension minimum num by astm d num seven day cure wet bond to steel and concrete minimum num psi by florida test method fm num subtype fnum shall be listed on the apl .
num subtype fnum subtype fnum is used for filling larger spalls where a form is required to build back to the original surface .
materials shall be a pourable low modulus type compound capable of bonding to wet surfaces with these properties color shall match gray color no .
num of fedstdnum maximum sand loading num parts sand to one part mixed epoxy by volume elongation in tension minimum num by astm d num seven day cure exotherm numf by astm d num num pint sample wet bond strength num psi at seven days by fm num type fnum products will be accepted on the job .
submit to the engineer testing from the manufacturer of the product for each lot of material to be incorporated in the project .
the test results will indicate that the material is in conformance with the specifications and will include actual values from the required tests .
obtain approval from the engineer before incorporating material into the project .
num specific requirements for type h compounds .
epoxies for structural bonding where bituminous pavement overlays will come in contact with the hardened compound shall meet the requirements for types a and b compounds above .
submit from the manufacturer test data showing that cutback and emulsified asphalts asphalt cement and bituminous mixes shall bond to but not soften or otherwise damage the epoxy after a curing period of four days .
type h products will be accepted on the job .
submit to the engineer testing from the manufacturer of the product for each lot of material to be incorporated in the project .
the test results will indicate that the material is in conformance with the specifications and will include actual values from the required tests .
obtain approval from the engineer before incorporating material into the project .
num specific requirements for type k compounds .
epoxies for sealing the bottom of integral pile jackets in the repair of concrete piles shall be listed on the apl .
these epoxies will be extended with the aggregate supplied by the manufacturer .
the epoxy shall be factory preproportioned including factory supplied aggregate and meet the following requirements num return to table of contents compressive strength at seven days minimum by the method described in numb num psi bond strength by fm num to wet concrete minimum num psi to wet pile jacket minimum num psi viscosity of mixed epoxy component at numf five minutes by astm d num num cps the epoxy shall be capable of flowing through water in the void area of the jacket and hardening under water so as to provide a water tight seal of the depth indicated in the plans or approved shop drawings and to maintain this seal during subsequent construction steps .
num specific requirements for type m compounds .
coal tar epoxy coatings for steel sheet and h piles used in bridges fender systems and other structures subject to immersion in water shall comply with the requirements of sspc paint num with type num pitch .
application of the epoxy coating shall meet the requirements of section num for a coal tar epoxy coating .
hot applied coal tar epoxy tape used to protect tie back rods on sheet pile walls and bulkheads shall comply with the requirements of american water works association standard cnum .
application shall be according to the manufacturers published recommendations .
submit to the engineer a manufacturer certification confirming that the penetrant sealer meets the requirements of this section .
the certification shall conform to the requirements of section num .
do not incorporate these materials into the project until the engineer has accepted and approved the certification for the material .
submit such certification for each lot of material delivered to the project .
in each certification identify the serial or lot numbers of the containers certified .
num specific requirements for type pse epoxy compounds .
precast segmental epoxies pse shall be listed on the apl .
the epoxy shall be factory preproportioned in two parts and labeled with the manufacturers name brand name component type resin or hardener the range of substrate surface of concrete temperature over which the application is suitable material classification the date of formulation the shelf life of the material and the manufacturers lot number .
normal set pse shall remain workable for a short open time about one hour and meet the requirements of astm cnum type vi grade num .
slow set pse shall remain workable over an extended open time about eight hours meet the requirements of astm cnum type vii grade num and have a compressive yield strength of num psi at num days .
epoxy bonding agents for matchcast joints between precast segments must be thermosetting num solid compositions and shall not contain solvent or any nonreactive organic ingredient except for colorant .
epoxy bonding agents shall be formulated to provide application temperature ranges which are suitable for the erection of match cast segments with substrate temperatures between numf and numf with a minimum of at least two but preferably three formulations dividing the range into approximately equal subranges which overlap by at least numf .
num return to table of contents num specific requirements for type q compounds .
these epoxy materials shall be listed on the apl and are to be used to protect the anchorages of posttensioning tendons or bars and other uses indicated in the plans .
the material shall produce a low exothermic reaction and have flow and fill characteristics suitable for machine base plate applications .
the material will be extended with the aggregate supplied by the manufacturer .
mix with the full aggregate loading unless the use of less aggregate is approved by the engineer .
the material shall be factory preproportioned including factory supplied aggregate .
deliver products in original containers with manufacturers name date of manufacture product identification label and batch numbers .
materials must be within the manufacturers recommended shelf life .
store and condition the product in full compliance with manufacturers recommendations .
the epoxy grout plus aggregate mix shall meet or exceed the specified physical properties stated herein as determined by the following standard astm test methods .
property test value test method compressive strength cubes num day cure at numf num psi astm c numb tensile strength at num days num psi astm c num flexural strength at numday cure at numf num psi astm c num modulus of elasticity num day cure at numf num psi astm c num coefficient of thermal expansion at num to numf num x num num ininf astm c num peak exotherm specimen num x num x num in .
numf astm d num slant shear at num days bond strength to concrete num psi fm num thermal compatibility num cycles passed astm c num linear shrinkage at num days num astm c num flowability and bearing area num contact area astm c num gel time specimen num x num x num in .
num hr .
astm d num num packaging labeling and safety .
all containers shall show the type mixing directions batch numbers manufacturers name date of packaging shelf life expiration date and quantity in pounds or gallons .
containers with components shall clearly be identified with component aepoxy resin or component b hardener .
mix ratios shall be prominently shown on labels .
potential hazards shall be stated on each package in accordance with the federal hazardous products labeling act .
num return to table of contents num storage .
epoxy materials which have been in storage for more than twelve months will not be accepted for use .
num fillers .
fillers for mixing mortars and grouts may be as recommended by the manufacturer of the particular epoxy compound and may be supplied as packages accompanying the epoxy or premixed in accordance with approved properties .
if a manufacturer recommends only the gradation of filler it must be a silica sand commercially available in florida and shall be a gradation listed in table i or a specified blend of these gradations .
the silica sands specified in table num shall be clean kiln dried packaged in strong moisture proof bags contain no more than num organic trash and be chloride free .
fillers shall not be used with these compounds types e and m. when the fillers specified in table num are used the maximum amount shall be num volumes to one volume of mixed compound .
table num gradation requirements for fillers for use with epoxy compounds grade a b c d sieve opening size required passing no .
num num num no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num for use only in sections num num inches or greater in thickness .
same as quartz sand fine aggregate for cement concrete num .
num return to table of contents section num pozzolans and slag num basis for source approval .
num general the cementitious materials supplier shall submit the proposed quality control qc plan certified test reports from an approved independent laboratory acceptable to the state materials office and a sample of the material for department verification .
the quality control program of a cementitious materials supplier shall conform to section num .
continuance of department qualifications is subject to satisfactory results from periodic verification evaluations .
a verification sample may be taken at the manufacturers plant distribution facility or at the concrete producers plant .
upon review of the qc plan and satisfactory verification of the test results the plant will be placed on the departments production facility listing .
the cementitious materials supplier shall utilize a qc plan accepted by the state materials office .
the department reserves the right to withdraw qc plan acceptance and to require cementitious material shipments to be individually tested prior to incorporation into department work .
qc plans may be suspended when the performance of cementitious material is in question including problems with concrete quality inconsistent qc data or failure of qc or verification test results .
repulpable bags may be accepted by the engineer provided a successful demonstration by the producer has indicated complete degradation of the repulpable bags during the mixing operation and before the mix is discharged .
num approved laboratory a laboratory that is currently inspected by the cement and concrete reference laboratory ccrl is actively participating in the ccrl proficiency program and has corrected all deficiencies noted at the time of inspection .
the laboratory must authorize the ccrl to send a copy of the final inspection report and proficiency sample results to the state materials office .
num fly ash .
num general sampling and testing of fly ash shall follow the requirements of astm cnum .
fly ash shall not include the residue resulting from the burning of municipal garbage or any other refuse with coal or the burning of industrial or municipal garbage in incinerators .
num fly ash class f fly ash derived from the combustion of ground or powdered coal shall meet the requirements of astm cnum class f fly ash .
num petroleum coke class f fly ash resulting from the combustion of coal and petroleum coke shall meet the physical and chemical requirements of astm cnum class f fly ash .
when petroleum coke class f fly ash is used in concrete the test results shall verify improved or comparable strength sulfate resistance corrosion protective properties and other durability requirements of concrete as compared to astm cnum class f fly ash concrete .
the strength and durability tests of concrete shall be performed in accordance with astm cnum astm cnum fm numcnum fm num and aashto tnum .
num bark ash class f fly ash resulting from the combustion of timber bark ash and coal shall meet the physical and chemical requirements of astm cnum class f fly ash .
when bark ash is used in concrete test results shall verify improved or comparable strength sulfate resistance corrosion protective properties and other durability requirements of concrete num return to table of contents as compared to astm cnum class f fly ash concrete .
the strength and durability tests of concrete shall be performed in accordance with astm cnum astm cnum aashto tnum fm numcnum and fm num .
num fly ash class c fly ash derived from the combustion of ground or powdered coal shall meet the requirements of astm cnum class c fly ash .
when class c fly ash is used in concrete the test results shall verify improved or comparable strength sulfate resistance corrosion protective properties and other durability requirements of concrete as compared to astm cnum class f fly ash concrete .
the strength and durability tests of concrete shall be performed in accordance with astm cnum astm cnum aashto tnum fm numcnum and fm num .
num exceptions fly ash shall not be used in conjunction with type ip or type is cements .
num acceptance testing of fly ash acceptance of fly ash from sources operating under an approved qc plan shall be based on the monthly certified test report meeting the chemical and physical requirements of astm cnum .
when the loss on ignition exceeds num the supplementary optional physical requirements shall be mandatory except that the effectiveness in controlling alkalisilica reaction will not be required .
an approved laboratory shall perform the monthly qc tests and a copy of their certified test reports shall be sent to the state materials office when the material is in use on department projects .
the certification shall indicate that the fly ash meets the requirements of this specification .
also the corresponding samples along with certified test reports shall be submitted to the department upon request .
num silica fume .
num general silica fume shall meet the requirements of astm cnum using the referenced test methods and frequencies .
num acceptance testing of silica fume acceptance of silica fume from sources operating under an approved qc plan shall be based on certification that the material meets the requirements of astm cnum and this specification .
num metakaolin .
numgeneral metakaolin shall meet the requirements of astm cnum class n with the following modifications num .
the sum of sionum alnumonum fenumonum shall be at least num .
num .
the loss on ignition shall be less than num .
num .
the available alkalis as equivalent nanumo shall not exceed num .
num .
the strength activity index at num days shall be at least num .
num .
when metakaolin is used in concrete the test results shall verify improved or comparable strength sulfate resistance corrosion protective properties and other durability performance properties of concrete as compared to the performance of silica fume concrete .
the comparison strength and durability tests shall be performed in accordance with astm cnum astm cnum fm numcnum fm num and aashto tnum by an independently approved testing laboratory .
sampling and testing of metakaolin shall follow the requirements of astm cnum .
num acceptance testing of metakaolin acceptance of metakaolin from sources operating under an approved qc plan shall be based on the monthly certified test report meeting num return to table of contents the chemical and physical requirements of astm cnum class n as modified herein .
an approved laboratory shall perform the monthly qc tests and a copy of their certified test reports shall be sent to the state materials office when the material is in use on department projects .
also the corresponding samples along with certified test reports shall be submitted to the department upon request .
the certification shall indicate that the metakaolin meets the requirements of this specification .
num slag .
num general slag shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
sampling and testing procedures shall follow the requirements of astm cnum .
num special requirements only ground granulated blastfurnace slag grade num and num will be permitted .
num exceptions slag shall not be used in conjunction with type ip or type is cements .
num acceptance testing acceptance of slag from sources operating under an approved qc plan shall be based on the monthly certified qc tests meeting the chemical and physical requirements of astm cnum .
an approved laboratory shall perform the monthly qc tests and a copy of their mill certificates shall be sent to the state materials office when the material is in use on department projects .
reference cement used for determination of slag activity shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
the certification shall indicate that the slag meets the requirements of this specification .
also the corresponding samples along with mill certificates shall be submitted to the department upon request .
num ultra fine fly ash .
num general sampling and testing of the ultra fine fly ash shall follow the requirements of astm cnum .
ultra fine fly ash derived from the combustion of ground or powdered coal shall meet the requirements of astm cnum as a class f fly ash with the following modifications num .
the pozzolanic activity index at num days shall be at least num of the control and the pozzolanic activity index at num days shall be at least num of the control .
num .
particles less than num microns shall be at least num of the particle size distribution as measured by laser particle size analyzer .
particles less than num microns shall be at least num of the particle size distribution as measured by laser particle size analyzer .
num .
the amount of material retained when wetsieved on a numm sieve shall be less than num .
num .
the moisture content shall be less than num .
num .
the loss on ignition shall be less than num .
num exceptions ultra fine fly ash shall not be used in conjunction with type ip or type is cements .
num acceptance testing of ultra fine fly ash acceptance of fly ash from sources operating under an approved qc plan shall be based on the monthly certified test report meeting the chemical and physical requirements of astm cnum .
when the loss on ignition exceeds num the uniformity requirements in the supplementary optional physical requirements shall be mandatory .
an approved laboratory shall perform the monthly qc tests and a copy of their certified test reports shall be sent to the state materials office when the material is in use on num return to table of contents department projects .
the certification shall indicate that the fly ash meets the requirements of this specification .
also the corresponding samples along with certified test reports shall be submitted to the department upon request .
num return to table of contents section num materials for concrete repair num description .
this section covers cementitious materials used to repair concrete including defects or purposely placed openings in concrete elements .
materials containing organic compounds such as bitumens and epoxy resin as the principal binder are not included .
the requirements for epoxy resin materials are covered in section num .
any depth larger than the manufacturers recommendation for the specific material shall be repaired with portland cement concrete meeting the requirements of section num .
num product acceptance on the project .
num product acceptance use only products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of products must submit an application in accordance with section num and include independently certified test reports that the material meets the requirements of this section .
the application package must describe detailed quality control requirements for installation including but not limited to maximum water to cementitious material ratio formulation for two or more component systems special materials andor equipment recommendations for all surface preparation and curing requirements .
provide the engineer certification conforming to the requirements of section num from the manufacturer confirming that the materials used meets the requirements of this section and is the appropriate product for the intended use .
when specified in the contract documents submit a report of test results from an independent laboratory on samples taken from material shipped .
ensure the test was performed within num days prior to the shipping date of the material .
num material supply storage and marking the material shall be pre proportioned including aggregate .
deliver products in original unopened containers with manufacturers name date of manufacture and clearly marked with all information described below .
store the material in an elevated dry and weather protected enclosure in full compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
material must be used within manufacturers recommended shelf life .
the material from which the containers are made shall have water vapor transmission not greater than num gmnum in num hours as determined in accordance with procedure b of astm enum .
all containers shall be marked with the following information num .
lot identification number and material expiration date num .
directions for use shall include but are not limited to the following a .
the type and kind of adhesive recommended if any to bond fresh repair material to the concrete or mortar being repaired .
b .
the recommended amount of resin other liquid component or both to be mixed with the package contents .
c. the recommended length of mixing time or sequence of mixing and resting times in minutes .
num .
date the material was packaged .
num .
the yield in cubic feet or yield in ftnumin thickness when mixed with the recommended amount of liquid .
num .
the net weight in each container .
the contents of any container shall not vary by more than num from the weight stated in the declarations .
the average weight of filled containers in a lot shall be not less than the individual weight stated in the declarations .
num return to table of contents num .
instructions for the maximum and minimum water or solutions to cementitious material ratio .
num .
state the approximate working time .
num sampling mixing and additional testing a lot is the packaged repair material normally placed on a pallet .
a unit sample is a single container or package of material randomly selected from the lot .
mix and install the materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
manufacturers will be required to provide field representation upon request by the engineer .
the department reserves the right to conduct further field testing on any approved material .
num rejection all broken containers will be rejected .
material that fails to meet any of the requirements of this specification will be rejected .
report all materials failing to meet this specification and state the reasons for rejection in writing to the engineer and the producer or supplier .
material in local storage in the hands of a vendor for more than six months after testing will be retested before use except for the scaling resistance test and length change immersed in sulfate solution test for magnesium ammonium phosphate concrete .
retested material will be rejected if it fails to conform to any of the requirements of this specification .
num laboratory specimen preparation num mixing and fabrication mechanically mix the dry packaged materials with liquid components in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num length change make and cure the test specimens in accordance with astm cnum except omit the curing period in section num however both num and num shall apply for num day curing period .
num manifestly faulty specimens visually examine each group of specimens representing a given test or a given age of test including tests of freshly mixed concrete before or during the test or both whichever is appropriate .
discard any specimen found to be manifestly faulty by such examination without testing .
visually examine all specimens representing a given test at a given age after testing and should any specimen be found to be manifestly faulty the test results thereof shall be disregarded .
should more than one specimen representing a given test at a given age be found manifestly faulty either before or after testing the entire test shall be disregarded and repeated .
the test result reported shall be the average of the individual test results of the specimens tested or in the event that one specimen or one result has been discarded it shall be the average of the test results of the remaining specimens .
num materials for repair of predominately horizontal surfaces .
num general this material is intended to be used to repair concrete where the area to be treated will be on a horizontal surface .
examples of the type of locations for these materials are bridge decks portland cement concrete pavements and other locations required by the contract documents .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for preparing the surfaces mixing placing and curing the repair material unless otherwise directed in the contract documents .
num classification the materials to be considered under this classification shall meet the following requirements num rapid hardening moderate compressive strength for repairing concrete with an inplace compressive strength less than or equal to num psi .
num very rapid hardening high compressive strength for repairing concrete with an inplace compressive strength greater than num psi .
this material may be used in lieu of rapid hardening materials .
num return to table of contents num physical properties the repair material shall meet or exceed the physical properties stated in table num as determined by the specified test methods .
table num physical properties of repair materials for horizontal surfaces requirement test method rapid hardening very rapid hardening minimum compressive strength psi num hours astm cnum or astm cnum na num num hours num num num days num num num days greater than or equal to strength at num days .
maximum length change allowable expansion at num days when water cured compared to length at one day astm cnum num num allowable shrinkage at num days when air cured compared to length at one day num num allowable difference between increase in water and decrease in air num num minimum slump concrete inches astm cnum num num minimum flow mortar astm cnum num num time of setting initial minutes astm cnum or astm cnum minimum num num to num coefficient of thermal expansion ininf astm cnum or aashto tnum num x num to num x num num x num to num x num minimum bond strength by slant shear psi num hours fm num num num num days greater than or equal to strength at num hours .
maximum allowable total chlorides lbsydnum fm num num as applicable make and cure the test specimens in accordance with astm cnum except omit the curing period in section num however both num and num shall apply for num day curing period .
testing for flowslump will be completed in num plus or minus num minute after the start of mixing liquid with the rapid hardening materials or num plus or minus num minute after mixing the liquid with the very rapid hardening materials .
num specimen preparation num flowslump testing for flowslump will be completed in num minutes plus or minus num minute after the start of mixing liquid with the rapid hardening materials or num minutes plus or minus num minute after mixing the liquid with the very rapid hardening materials .
num return to table of contents num materials for repair of predominately vertical surfaces .
num general this material is intended to be used to repair concrete where the area exposed in the field to be treated will be on a vertical surface .
if an element has both horizontal and vertical surfaces then the repair used will be for vertical surfaces .
if it is not apparent which material is to be used the vertical application will prevail .
examples of the type of locations for these materials are columns caps beams piles incidental concrete products drainage structures and other locations required by the contract documents .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for preparing the surfaces and for mixing placing and curing the repair material .
num classification the materials to be considered under this classification shall meet the following requirements num high performance moderate compressive strength for repairing concrete with a designed compressive strength greater than or equal to num psi .
num ultrahigh performance high compressive strength for repairing concrete with a designed compressive strength greater than num psi .
these materials may be used in lieu of high performance vertical materials .
num physical properties the repair material shall meet or exceed the physical properties stated in table num as determined by the specified test methods .
table num physical properties of repair materials for vertical surfaces requirement test method high performance ultrahigh performance minimum compressive strength psi num hours astm cnum or astm cnum num num num days na num num days num greater than or equal to strength at num days maximum length change allowable expansion at num days when water cured compared to length at one day astm cnum num num allowable shrinkage at num days when air cured compared to length at one day num num maximum slump concrete inches astm cnum num num maximum flow mortar astm cnum num num time of setting initial minutes astm cnum or astm cnum num to num num to num coefficient of thermal expansion ininf astm cnum or aashto tnum num x num to num x num minimum bond strength by slant shear psi num hours fm num num num num days num .
num minimum flexural strength at num days psi astm cnum num num num return to table of contents table num physical properties of repair materials for vertical surfaces requirement test method high performance ultrahigh performance maximum absorption mortar at num days astm cnum num num minimum surface resistivity concrete at num days kohmcm aashto tnum na num maximum allowable total chlorides lbsydnum fm num num use cement based materials modified with polymers and silica fume for extremely aggressive environments make and cure the test specimens in accordance with astm cnum except omit the curing period in section num however both num and num shall apply for num day curing period .
as applicable for pump and pour applications the maximum flow slump and time of setting can be adjusted according to the manufacturers recommendation .
num material for repair of concrete in high stress concentration areas .
num general this material is intended to be used to repair blockouts and voids in posttensioned elements load bearing area of a beam and other locations required by the contract documents .
this material may be used for the repair of horizontal or vertical surfaces .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for preparing the surfaces and for mixing placing and curing the concrete .
this material shall be a magnesium ammonium phosphate based concrete mapc or a magnesium potassium phosphate based concrete mppc .
num physical properties the mapc and mppc materials shall meet or exceed physical properties stated in table num as determined by the specified standard test methods .
table num physical properties of repair material in high stress areas requirement test method test value minimum compressive strength at num days psi astm cnum num minimum flexural strength at num days psi astm cnum num minimum slant shear bond at num days psi fm num num time of setting initial minutes astm cnum num to num maximum scaling resistance astm cnum no scaling maximum length change allowable expansion at num days when water cured compared to length at one day astm cnum num allowable shrinkage at num days when air cured compared to length at one day num maximum allowable total chlorides lbsydnum fm num num the test methods for compressive strength astm cnum flexural strength astm cnum and slant shear bond fm num shall be modified so that the specimens are air cured instead of moist cured .
all of these samples shall be air cured until the time of testing .
initial time of set for mapc or mppc will be tested in accordance with astm cnum with the following modification .
the initial time of set shall be tested at num plus or minus numf .
make and cure the test specimens in accordance with astm cnum except omit the curing period in section num however both num and num shall apply for num day curing period .
num return to table of contents num curing of compressive strength flexural strength and slant shear bond specimens the test methods for compressive strength astm cnum flexural strength astm cnum and slant shear bond fm num shall be modified so that the specimens are air cured instead of moist cured .
all of these samples shall be air cured until the time of testing .
num special fillers .
num general this material is intended to be used as filler material and for rapid repairs to pile jacket structures and other locations specified in the plans when no design mix concrete is available or a special filler is specified in the contract documents .
meet the requirements of section num for preparing the surfaces placing testing and curing the concrete .
mix the material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num classification the materials to be considered under this classification shall meet the following requirements num cathodic protection cp filler provide cementitious based materials with a minimum cement content of num pounds of cement per cubic yard of mix .
material formulation must not contain fly ash slag silica fume or other mineral admixtures which may produce increased electrical resistance .
the material shall not contain any substances corrosive to metals .
num noncathodic protection noncp filler provide cementitious based materials with a minimum cement content of num pounds of cement per cubic yard of mix .
the material shall not contain any substances corrosive to metals .
num extended materials where concrete filler materials are specified approved mortar materials may be extended using size number num gradation aggregates from a certified fdot approved source .
num physical properties the repair material shall meet or exceed the physical properties stated in table num as determined by the specified standard test methods .
if extended materials shall meet the minimum requirements of table num .
table num physical properties of special fillers requirement test method cathodic protection non cathodic protection minimum compressive strength psi num hours astm cnum or astm cnum num num num days num num maximum length change allowable expansion at num days when water cured compared to length at one day astm cnum num num allowable shrinkage at num days when air cured compared to length at one day num num allowable difference between increase in water and decrease in air num num slump concrete inches astm cnum num num num return to table of contents table num physical properties of special fillers requirement test method cathodic protection non cathodic protection minimum flow mortar astm cnum num num time of setting initial minutes astm cnum or astm cnum num to num num to num minimum bond strength by slant shear at num days psi fm num num num minimum flexural strength at num days psi astm cnum num num minimum tensile strength at num days psi astm cnum num num surface resistivity at num days kohmcm aashto tnum num or less num or greater maximum allowable total chlorides lbsydnum fm num num as applicable make and cure the test specimens in accordance with astm cnum except omit the curing period in section num however both num and num shall apply for num day curing period .
num constructability submit to the engineer for approval shop drawing as may be required to complete repairs in compliance with the design shown in the plans and the manufacturers recommended repair system .
num return to table of contents accessory materials for concrete pavement and concrete structures section num metal accessory materials for concrete pavement and concrete structures num reinforcement steel for pavement and structures .
num steel bars num carbon steel bars carbon steel bars for concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grades num or num except that the process of manufacture will not be restricted .
for processes not included in astm anum the phosphorus content will be limited to num .
num stainless steel bars stainless steel bars for concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grades num or num or astm anum uns snum or snum .
num lowcarbon chromium steel bars lowcarbon chromium steel bars for concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade num .
num special requirements the following special requirements shall apply num .
unless otherwise specified or shown in the plans all reinforcing bars no .
num and larger shall be deformed bars .
num .
twisted bars shall not be used .
num .
wherever in the specifications the word purchaser appears it shall be taken to mean the department .
num acceptance of steel bars acceptance of reinforcing steel shall be based on the manufacturer being on the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep list of compliant producers samples taken by the department and manufacturers certified mill analysis .
the test results shall meet the specification limits of the astm or aashto designation for the particular size grade and any additional requirements .
the manufacturers certified mill analysis for each heat size and grade per shipment of reinforcing steel shall be provided to the engineer prior to use .
the engineer will select samples representing each lot of reinforcing steel .
a sample is defined as the reinforcing steel and the certified mill analysis corresponding to the sample .
a lot is defined as the weight of all bars regardless of size grade or pay item in consecutive shipments of num tons or less .
samples shall be cut from bundled steel that is shipped to the jobsite .
projects with less than two tons of bars do not require department sampling .
num wire reinforcement num carbon steel wire reinforcement plain and deformed carbon steel wire reinforcement shall meet the requirements of astm anum .
deformed carbon steel wire shall be grade num .
num stainless steel wire reinforcement plain and deformed stainless steel wire reinforcement shall meet the requirements of astm anum uns snum .
num return to table of contents num acceptance of wire reinforcement acceptance of wire reinforcement shall be based on the manufacturers certified mill analysis certifying that the test results meet the specification limits of the astm designation for the particular sizes and any additional requirements .
prior to use submit to the engineer the manufacturers certified mill analysis for each heat and size per shipment .
num carbon steel welded wire reinforcement num carbon steel welded wire reinforcement welded wire reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of astm anum .
num acceptance of carbon steel welded wire reinforcement acceptance of welded wire reinforcement shall be based on the manufacturers certified mill analysis certifying that the test results meet the specification limits of the astm designation for the particular sizes and any additional requirements .
prior to use submit to the engineer the manufacturers certified mill analysis for each heat and size per shipment .
num couplers for steel bars num approved product list apl the couplers used shall be a product included on the departments apl .
manufacturers seeking approval of their product shall demonstrate the performance of their product in accordance with the requirements in num through num as applicable and num .
num couplers for carbon steel bars couplers for use with carbon steel bars shall be fabricated from an alloy that is electrochemically compatible with bars that meet the requirements of num .
num couplers for stainless steel bars couplers for use with stainless steel bars shall be fabricated from an alloy that is electrochemically compatible with bars that meet the requirements of num .
num couplers for lowcarbon chromium steel bars couplers for use with lowcarbon chromium steel bars shall be fabricated from an alloy that is electrochemically compatible with bars that meet the requirements of num .
num special requirements couplers shall develop at least num of the specified yield strength of the bar being spliced .
num metal materials for joints in concrete pavement .
num sheet metal bottom strips the sheet metal strip for protecting the bottom and side edges of transverse expansion joints shall be composed of galvanized sheet metal of num inches minimum thickness and shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
the sheets shall be furnished in accordance with the dimensions shown in the plans .
they may be in one continuous piece or spliced .
when splicing is used the metal shall be lapped not less than num inches and securely fastened by welding or otherwise in such manner as to leave the spelter undamaged and produce a smooth sliding surface in contact with the pavement slab .
the splices shall be spaced not less than num feet apart and not less than num feet from either end .
the complete sheet shall not vary from a straight line by more than num inch from end to end .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certified mill analysis from the manufacturer of the sheet metal bottom strips including test results for thickness dimension grade length size and spacing .
each certified mill analysis shall cover only one type of metal material for joints .
num return to table of contents num bars and chairs for longitudinal joints transverse reinforcing steel across the joint shall be deformed steel bars conforming to the requirements of num except that the bars may be any grade shown in astm anum .
these bars and the chairs to hold them in place shall be of the type and spacing as indicated in the plans .
num dowel bars dowel bars shall be plain steel bars conforming to the requirements of astm anum for any grade of steel shown .
they shall be of the length size and spacing as shown in the plans .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certified test report from the manufacturer of the dowel bars confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certified test report shall conform to the requirements of section num and include metallurgical mill analysis grade length and size .
each certification shall cover only one lot for dowel bars .
num chairs and metal expansion caps the chairs and metal expansion caps shall be of an approved type as shown in the plans .
dowel bars for expansion joints shall have a metal cap on one end so placed to provide ample space for movement of the slab .
continuous sleeves covering one half of the length of the bar will not be permitted .
other fasteners may be approved .
dowel bars shall be coated with an approved material to break the bond .
num metal dowel bar assemblies for joints in concrete pavement .
num approved product list apl the dowel bar assembly used shall be a product included on the departments apl .
manufacturers or distributors seeking approval of their material in accordance with this specification shall demonstrate the performance of their products in accordance with the requirements in num thru num .
num rigidity the dowel bars shall be supported by an approved welded assembly possessing sufficient rigidity to hold the dowel bars in position to such accuracy that error or deviation from its required position in any bar in the entire installation after the pavement has been finished shall be no greater than num inch .
the assembly shall have continuous parallel spacer bars and two continuous parallel bearing members of no less than num inch diameter wire .
one spacer bar shall be located at or near each end of the dowel .
alternate ends of dowels shall be welded to a spacer bar in such a manner as to maintain the dowels parallel to each other and permit sliding movement in the joint .
the free ends of each dowel shall be retained securely in place by means of wire loops or metal tubes welded to the other spacer bar .
an expansion cap shall be installed on one end of each bar if the dowels are being used in an expansion joint .
suitable struts or ties shall be provided to hold the assembly in correct position during installation .
the assembly shall have an upright support welded to the spacer bar and continuous bearing member at the end of each dowel and a continuous bearing member .
if the upright support consists of a single vertical wire the support shall be no less than num inch diameter wire .
otherwise the support shall be no less than num inches in diameter .
num sand plates sand plates if required shall be made from no less than num inch sheet steel .
each plate shall have no less than num square feet of bearing area .
the plates shall be num return to table of contents furnished in sufficient number to provide uniform support for the complete assembly .
they may be furnished separate from the assembly units or attached thereto by welding suitable clips or other approved means .
num welds the welds of the assembly shall be made securely .
a broken weld will be cause for rejection of the length of section of the assembly where it occurs .
num assembly placement when the dowel bar assembly is in place it shall act as a rigid unit with each component part securely held in position relative to the other member of the assembly .
the entire assembly shall be held securely in place during placing consolidating and finishing the concrete by means of metal pins .
pins used on granular subbase or cold mixed bituminous stabilized subbase shall penetrate at least num inches below the dowel bar assembly .
the pins shall be of no less than num inch diameter wire and shall be provided with a hook or arm welded to the pin in such a manner that it shall secure the assembly in place .
nail securing systems may be used as an anchoring device on hot bituminous stabilized subbase .
the nail shall be no less than num inch in diameter no less than num inches in length and the nail head or attached washer shall be not less than num inch outside diameter .
the nail shall be driven through both ends of a metal strap after it has been placed around one of the lower transverse bars on the dowel bar assembly .
at least eight pins or nails shall be used for each num foot section a lane width of assembly .
sand plates if required shall be drilled to receive the pins .
the contractor shall provide the equipment and personnel necessary to verify dowel bar location after the concrete is placed and has received the initial screeding .
num materials the wire for the welded assembly shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of astm anum .
after fabrication apply one coat of alkyd primer meeting the material requirements of sspc paint num .
apply the primer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num wire for site cage machines the wires for site cage machines shall meet the requirements of astm anum or astm anum .
num return to table of contents section num nonmetallic accessory materials for concrete pavement and concrete structures num joint materials .
num preformed joint filler for pavement and structures preformed joint filler shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum or aashto mnum or cellulose fiber types meeting all the requirements of aashto mnum except for the asphalt content is acceptable provided they contain minimums of num zinc borate as a preservative and num waterproofing wax .
for aashto mnum unless a particular type is specified either type i type ii or type iii may be used .
preformed joint fillers shall have a thickness equal to the width of the joint required and shall be furnished in lengths equal to the widths of the slabs in which they are to be installed except that strips which are of a length not less than the distance between longitudinal joints or between longitudinal joint and edge may be used if laced or clipped together in a manner approved by the engineer .
the depth and shape of the joint filler shall conform to the dimensions shown in the plans .
for doweled joints proper provision shall be made for the installation of the dowels .
num certification the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certification confirming that the preformed joint filler meets the requirements of this section .
the certification shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num joint sealer for pavement and structures num general this specification covers joint sealer intended for use in sealing joints in asphaltic concrete pavement and portland cement concrete pavement .
these materials may also be used to seal joints in portland cement concrete bridges and other structures .
num material the joint sealant shall be composed of a mixture of materials typically but not limited to bituminous based that will melt when heated for application and then solidify to form a resilient and adhesive compound capable of sealing joints in portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete against the infiltration of moisture and foreign materials throughout normal pavement conditions and at ambient temperatures .
the manufacturer shall have the option of formulating the material according to their specifications .
however the requirements delineated in this specification shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the material shall cure sufficiently to not flow from the joint or be picked up by vehicle tires after num hours at numf .
the material shall be capable of a uniform application consistency suitable for filling joints without the inclusion of large air holes or discontinuities and without damage to the material .
materials for pavement joints shall be tested according to astm dnum .
num physical requirements of joint sealants for portland cement concrete only parameter limits pour point at least numf lower than the safe heating temperature as stated by the manufacturer .
conepenetration non immersed at numf num g num s less than or equal to num mm num return to table of contents parameter limits flow at numf num h less than or equal to num mm bond nonimmersed numf for num cycles no cracking separation or opening that at any point is over num inch deep in the sealant or between the sealant and the substrate .
the depth of a crack separation or opening shall be measured perpendicular to the side of the sealant showing the defect .
at least two test samples in a group of three representing a given sample of sealant shall meet this requirement .
num physical requirements of joint sealants for portland cement concrete andor asphaltic concrete parameters limits pour point at least num lower than the safe heating temperature as stated by the manufacturer .
conepenetration non immersed at numf num g num s less than or equal to num mm flow at numf num h less than or equal to num mm bond nonimmersed numf for num cycles num extension no cracking separation or opening that at any point is over num inch deep in the sealant or between the sealant and the substrate .
resilience at numf recovery greater than or equal to num asphaltic concrete compatibility at numf no failure in adhesion formation of an oily exudates at the interface between the sealant and the asphaltic concrete or softening or other deleterious effects on the asphaltic concrete or sealant .
the depth of a crack separation or opening shall be measured perpendicular to the side of the sealant showing the defect .
at least two test samples in a group of three representing a given sample of sealant shall meet this requirement .
num approved product list apl the joint sealant materials used shall be one of the products listed on the departments apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products shall submit product datasheets performance test reports from an independent laboratory showing the product meets the requirements of this section and a apl application in accordance with section num .
information on the apl application must identify the sealant type .
num shipment the material shall be delivered in containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark product name lot number and date of expiration .
num bond breaker rod the bond breaker rod shall be a closed cell expanded polyethylene foam rod of the size and dimensions shown in the plans .
it shall be compatible with the joint sealant and no bond or reaction shall occur between the rod and the sealant .
all bond breaker rods installed shall be covered by a sealant at the end of each work day .
bond breaker tape approved by the sealant manufacturer may be used in lieu of bond breaker rod when sealing random cracks .
num low modulus silicone sealant materials num low modulus silicone sealants silicone sealant shall be furnished in a one part or premeasured twopart formulation meeting the requirements specified herein .
num return to table of contents acetic acid cure sealants are not acceptable .
a primer as specified in num for bonding sealant to concrete shall be used if required by the manufacturer .
when a manufacturers product is tested and approved by the department using a primer primer will be required for project installation .
do not use low modulus silicone sealants types a b or c for bridge expansion joints .
silicones shall be identified in the following manner type a a low modulus nonsag nonselfleveling silicone formulation used in sealing horizontal and vertical joints in cement concrete pavements and bridges i.e .
concreteconcrete joints .
tooling is required .
type b a very low modulus selfleveling silicone formulation used in sealing horizontal joints including joints on moderate slopes in cement concrete pavements and bridges i.e .
concreteconcrete joints .
tooling is not normally required .
type c an ultralow modulus selfleveling silicone formulation used in sealing horizontal joints including joints on moderate slopes in cement concrete pavements and bridges i.e .
concreteconcrete joints .
it can also be used to seal the joints between cement concrete pavements and asphalt concrete shoulders including asphaltasphalt joints .
tooling is not normally required .
type d an ultralow modulus selfleveling silicone formulation coldapplied rapidcure used to seal expansion joints that experience both thermal andor vertical movements .
the material must cure by chemical reaction and not by evaporation of solvent or fluxing of harder particles .
tooling shall not be required .
use in accordance with standard plans index num for bridge deck expansion joints with backer rods or as shown in the plans for other joints with or without backer rods .
num physical requirements silicone sealant type test method type a type b type c type d flow astm dnum no flow slump maximum astm dnum num inches extrusion rate minimum astm cnum procedure a num mlmin num mlmin num mlmin num mlmin tackfree time at num numf and num to num relative humidity astm cnum num minutes maximum num minutes maximum num minutes maximum num num minutes specific gravity astm dnum method a num to num num to num num to num num to num durometer hardness shore a astm dnum num num return to table of contents silicone sealant type test method type a type b type c type d cured seven days at num numf and num num relative humidity durometer hardness shore num cured num days at num numf and num num relative humidity astm dnum num num tensile stress maximum at num elongation astm dnum die c num psi num psi num psi elongation cured seven days at num numf and num num relative humidity astm dnum die c num minimum num minimum elongation cured num days at num numf and num num relative humidity astm dnum die c num minimum num minimum ozone and ultraviolet resistance astm cnum no chalking cracking or bond loss after num hours minimum .
bond to cement mortar briquets primed if required aashto tnum num psi minimum num return to table of contents silicone sealant type test method type a type b type c type d cured seven days at num numf and num num relative humidity bond to cement mortar briquets cured num days at num numf and num num relative humidity aashto tnum num psi minimum num psi minimum movement capability astm cnum no adhesive or cohesive failure and adhesion num cycles at num to num no adhesive or cohesive failure and adhesion num cycles at num portland cement mortar briquets shall be molded and cured num days minimum in accordance with aashto tnum .
saw cut cured briquets in half clean and dry at num plus or minus numf .
bond the two halves together with a thin section of sealant .
after cure of sealant briquets shall be tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
num field cure sixinch samples of the sealant shall be taken by the engineer from the joint at the end of a two week curing period and tested for durometer hardness by fm ansiastm dnum except that the requirements of a num inch sample width shall not apply .
a minimum hardness of num is required as evidence of adequate cure .
num approved product list the low modulus silicone sealant used shall be one of the products listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products shall submit product datasheets performance test reports from an independent laboratory showing the product meets the requirements of this section an infrared identification curve num to num m and an apl application in accordance with section num .
information on the apl application must identify the sealant type .
num shipment the material shall be delivered in containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark product name lot number and date of expiration .
num primer when required by the manufacturers product a primer shall be used .
the manufacturer shall perform quality control tests on each lot of sealant primer material furnished to each project and submit a certified report that each lot of num return to table of contents primer material furnished to a project meets the companys specifications for that product and the primer is suitable for its intended use .
sealant primer material shall be delivered in containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark and product name lot number and date of expiration .
num backer rod and tape bond breakers backer rods and tape shall be compatible with the joint sealant and approved by the sealant manufacturer .
no bond or reaction shall occur between the rod and the sealant .
num installation installation material selection joint dimensions bond breaker suitability by type and project shall be in agreement with the requirements of standard plans indexes num and num .
any modifications or exceptions to these requirements shall be shown in the plans .
for new construction projects or general use where the joints to be sealed have uniform width a closed cell expanded polyethylene foam backer rod bond breaker shall be required .
for rehabilitation projects and similar joint seals where the joints to be sealed have irregular width an open cell expanded polyethylene foam backer rod bond breaker with an impervious skin shall be required .
the backer rod shall be compatible with the joint sealant .
no bond or reaction shall occur between the rod and the sealant .
tape bond breaker approved by the sealant manufacturer may be used in lieu of backer rod bond breaker when sealing joints andor random cracks as required .
type d silicone sealant shall be placed when the ambient temperature is rising and is between numf and numf and the temperature is expected to rise for the next three hours minimum to provide to adequate joint opening and compression of the sealant during curing .
all installed bond breakers shall be covered by sealant at the end of each work day .
a tolerance in crosssectional height at midpoint of minus num inches to plus num inches will be allowed to the nominal values shown for each joint width on the plan sheet .
the engineer shall check one joint for each num feet of roadway by cutting out specimens .
if the cross section of the cut specimen is out of the allowable range additional specimens shall be taken as follows one joint every num feet of pavement not to exceed num feet .
if the average of the specimens is out of tolerance the contractor shall remove and replace the entire num foot section at no additional expense to the department .
installation tolerance shall be verified at num foot intervals .
num precured silicone sealant num general precured silicone sealants are intended for sealing vertical joints on concrete surfaces .
type vnum sealant is intended for contraction joints or joints with movements less than num inches .
type vnum sealant is intended for expansion joints not exceeding num of the nominal joint opening .
type vnum sealant may be substituted for type vnum sealant .
the joint sealant must be listed on the apl .
num physical requirements sealant material shall be a nominal num inches thick available in standard widths from num inch to num inches colored to match the finish surface coating of the concrete and meet the following minimum testing requirements num return to table of contents test property description test method type vnum type vnum minimum movement cohesionadhesion astm cnum num num dryroom temperature loss of adhesioncohesion astm cnum none none water immersion loss of adhesioncohesion astm cnum none none frozen loss of adhesioncohesion astm cnum none none heat loss of adhesioncohesion astm cnum none none artificial weathering loss of adhesioncohesion astm cnum none none tear propagation astm cnum nt or pt no tear or partialknotty tear nt or pt no tear or partialknotty tear ultimate elongation astm dnum num num num approved product list the precured silicone sealant used shall be one of the products listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
applications must include test results an infrared identification curve num to num m and a product data sheet with the recommended adhesive and installation requirements .
num compression seals and adhesive lubricant num preformed elastomeric compression seals preformed elastomeric compression seals shall meet the requirements of astm dnum except that immersion oil irm num may be substituted for oil no .
num in the oil swell test procedure .
num compression seal adhesive lubricant compression seal adhesive lubricant shall meet the requirements of astm dnum .
the material shall be fluid from numf to numf numc to numc .
num certification the manufacturer shall submit a certified test report for each lot of material furnished to each project along with a statement certifying that the material conforms to this specification and identifying the project number and manufacturers lot number .
num verification samples provide verification samples in accordance with section num .
num structure bearing pads .
num general furnish elastomeric structure bearing pads as shown in the contract documents .
elastomeric bearings as defined herein shall include plain pads elastomer only and laminated bearings with steel or fabric laminates .
flash tolerance finish and appearance of bearings shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the rubber handbook as published by the rubber manufacturers association inc. rmafnumt.num for molded bearings and rma fnum for extruded bearings .
num return to table of contents num materials use elastomer that is grade num or higher as defined in the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications crystallization resistant num virgin polychloroprene neoprene .
use only new materials reclaimed material is not allowed in the finished product .
no wax antiozonants or other foreign material may accumulate or be applied to the surfaces of the bearing .
the steel layers of the laminated pads shall utilize num gauge steel sheet num inches thick .
the steel utilized for the steel layers and for external load bearing plates if specified shall meet the requirements of astm anum or astm anum grade num type i steel sheet .
external load bearing plates shall be finished or machined flat to within num inches .
the bottom surfaces of external load plates masonry plates designed to rest on bearing pads shall not exceed an out of flatness value of num inches .
external load bearing plates shall be protected from rust until all exposed surfaces can be field painted .
any rust inhibitor shall be removed from all surfaces prior to welding .
num sampling a sampling lot shall consist of a maximum of num bearing pads of a single type of bearing plain steel laminates fabric laminates of the same design materials thickness and manufacturer referred to here as like pads delivered to the project site or to an offsite storage facility within the state of florida in reasonable proximity to the project site as determined by the engineer .
organize stockpiled pads into groups of like pads by lot so that they can be readily identified and sampled by the engineer .
num ancillary structure pads sampling is not required and acceptance is by certification .
num bridge structure pads for lot sizes that exceed num a minimum of two bridge bearing pads per lot will be selected by the engineer one for testing and one for confirmation in the event of a failing test result .
lots will be sampled only after all like pads in the lot are at the project site or in an offsite storage facility .
when the total number of like pads consists of a single lot of num or less sampling is not required and acceptance is by certification .
submit to the engineer a certification conforming to the requirements of section num stating that the structure bearing pads meet the requirements of this section .
samples shall consist of complete pads as detailed in the plans .
furnish additional complete bridge bearing pads to replace those selected for testing .
bridge bearing pads shall be available for sampling a minimum of three weeks prior to their installation .
the sample bridge bearing pads shall be tested by an independent laboratory approved by the department .
num dimensional tolerances fabricate elastomeric bearings within the dimensional tolerances specified below or as designated in the plans .
if any of the dimensions are outside the limits specified the bearing pad shall be rejected .
measurement tolerance inches num .
overall vertical dimensions design thickness num inches num num design thickness num inches num num num .
overall horizontal dimensions measurements num inches num num measurements num inches num num num .
thickness of individual layers of elastomer laminated bearings only at any point within the bearing num num .
variation from a plane parallel to the theoretical surface as determined by measurements at the edge of the bearings top slope relative to bottom num radians sides num num return to table of contents measurement tolerance inches num .
position of exposed connection members num num .
edge cover of embedded laminates of connection members num num num .
position and size of holes slots or inserts num note if the variation in thickness of individual layers of elastomer is greater than that allowed in the tolerance for measurement num num in .
use the following equation to determine compliance num vhr num provided  num where  radians and v in are absolute values of steel laminate rotation and vertical displacement .
if the specified layer elastomeric layer thickness is hr the bearing length is l and hnum and hnum are the measured maximum and minimum thicknesses at the edges of the layer then vhr numhnumhnum and hnumhnuml for interior layers and hnumhnuml for top and bottom layers provided that the minimum elastomer layer thickness hnum in .
num ancillary structures plain fiber reinforced or fabric laminated bearing pads num plain pads plain pads shall be either molded extruded or vulcanized in large sheets and cut to size .
cutting shall not heat the material and shall produce a smooth finish conforming to ansi bnum num m num mils .
plain pads shall be molded or extruded to the finished thickness .
plying pads of lesser thickness together shall not be permitted .
external load plates when used shall be protected from rusting and shall be hot bonded by vulcanization during the primary molding process .
the finished pads shall withstand a minimum uniform compressive load of num psi when tested in accordance with fm num .
num fiber reinforced or fabric laminated pads fiber reinforced pads shall be constructed with a homogeneous blend of elastomer and randomoriented high strength synthetic fiber cords .
bearing pads may be molded and vulcanized in large sheets and cut to size .
cutting shall be performed so as to prevent heating and must produce a smooth finish conforming to ansi bnum .
fabric laminated bearings shall be constructed of multiple layers of fabric and elastomer .
the fabric shall be composed of num ounce cotton duck and the pads manufactured in accordance with military specification milcnum .
ensure the fabric is free of folds or ripples and parallel to the top and bottom surfaces .
fiber reinforced and fabric pads shall withstand a minimum uniform compressive load of num psi when tested in accordance with fm num .
num certification the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certification conforming to the requirements of section num stating that the ancillary structure pads meet the requirements of this section and the physical and heat resistance properties of section num of fm num .
for bearing pads to be used under metal railings submit certification indicating compliance with either astm dnum mnum bc suffix grade num basic requirements type b class c or the physical and heat resistance properties of fm num .
num bridge structures elastomeric bearing pads bearings with steel laminates shall be cast as a unit in a mold and bonded and vulcanized under heat and pressure .
bearings with steel laminates which are designed to act as a single unit with a given shape factor must be manufactured as a single unit .
the mold shall have a standard shop practice mold finish .
the internal steel laminates shall be blast cleaned to a cleanliness that conforms to sspcspnum at the time of bonding .
plates shall be free of sharp edges and burrs and shall have a minimum edge cover of num inches .
external load plates sole plates shall be hot bonded to the bearing during vulcanization .
edges of the embedded steel laminates including the laminate restraining devices and around holes and slots shall be covered with not less than num inches of elastomer or the minimum edge cover specified in the plans .
all exposed laminations or imperfections that result num return to table of contents in less than the specified elastomer cover of any surface of the steel laminations shall be repaired by the manufacturer at the point of manufacture .
the repair shall consist of sealing the imperfections flush on the finished pads with a bonded vulcanized patch material compatible with the elastomeric bearing pad .
repairs employing caulking type material or repairing the bearings in the field will not be permitted .
num testing test bridge bearing pads in accordance with fm num .
laminated bridge bearings must meet a minimum compressive load of num psi and non laminated plain pads must meet a minimum compressive load of num psi .
if any properties are identified as noncompliant with the criteria specified the bearing shall be rejected and the confirmation sample tested .
if the confirmation sample test results are also noncompliant the lot shall be rejected .
num marking each elastomeric bearing pad shall be permanently marked .
the marking shall consist of the order number lot number pad identification number elastomer type and shear modulus or hardness when shear modulus is not specified .
where possible the marking shall be on a face of the bridge bearing pad that will be visible after erection of the structure .
num certified test results for bridge bearing pads submit complete certified test results from the independent laboratory for all tests specified properly identified by lot and project number to the engineer .
num certification the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certification conforming to the requirements of section num stating that the bearing pads plain fiber reinforced or elastomeric meet the requirements of this section .
the certification shall designate the bearings in each lot and state that each of the bearings in the lot was manufactured in a reasonably continuous manner from the same batch of elastomer and cured under the same conditions .
num fiber reinforced polymer frp reinforcing bars .
num general obtain frp reinforcing bars from producers currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
use only solid round thermoset glass fiber reinforced polymer gfrp or carbon fiber reinforced polymer cfrp reinforcing bars .
bars shall be manufactured using pultrusion variations of pultrusion or other suitable processes noted in the producers quality control plan subject to the approval of the state materials office smo .
for gfrp use only bars manufactured using vinyl ester resin systems and glass fibers classified as ecr that meet the requirements of astm dnum .
num bar sizes and loads the sizes and loads of frp reinforcing bars shall meet the requirements in table num .
the measured crosssectional area including any bond enhancing surface treatments shall be determined according to table num .
table num sizes and tensile loads of frp reinforcing bars bar size designation nominal bar diameter in nominal cross sectional area measured crosssectional area innum minimum guaranteed tensile load kips num return to table of contents table num sizes and tensile loads of frp reinforcing bars innum minimum maximum gfrp bars cfrp bars num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num material requirements producers shall submit to the state materials office a test report of the physical and mechanical property requirements in table num and table num as applicable for the types and sizes of frp reinforcing produced .
qualification testing shall be conducted by an independent laboratory approved by the department for performing the frp test methods .
three production lots shall be randomly sampled at the production facility by a designee of the state materials office .
the minimum number of specimens per production lot shall be as indicated in table num and table num .
the coefficient of variation cov for each test result shall be less than num .
outliers shall be subject to further investigation per astm enum .
if the cov exceeds num the number of test specimens per production lot may be doubled a maximum of two times to meet the cov requirement .
otherwise the results shall be rejected .
a production lot is defined as a lot of frp reinforcing produced from start to finish with the same constituent materials used in the same proportions without changing any production parameter such as cure temperature or line speed .
table num physical and mechanical property requirements for straight frp reinforcing bars property test method requirement specimens per lot fiber mass fraction astm dnum or astm dnum num numn shortterm moisture absorption astm dnum procedure num num hours immersion at numf num numm longterm moisture absorption astm dnum procedure num immersion to full saturation at numf num numm glass transition temperature tg astm dnum dma or astm enum dsc tmastm dnum dsc tmg numf numf numm num return to table of contents table num physical and mechanical property requirements for straight frp reinforcing bars property test method requirement specimens per lot total enthalpy of polymerization resin astm enum identify the resin system used for each bar size and report the average value of three replicates for each system degree of cure astm enum num of total polymerization enthalpy numn measured cross sectional area astm dnum within the range listed in table num numn guaranteed tensile loada value listed in table num tensile modulus num ksi for gfrp num ksi for crfp alkali resistance with load astm dnum num months test duration followed by tensile strength per astm dnum num tensile strength retention numm transverse shear strength astm dnum num ksi numn bond strength to concrete block pullout aci numr method b.num or astm dnum num ksi numm a guaranteed tensile load shall be equal to the average test result from all three lots minus three standard deviations .
n tests shall be conducted for all bar sizes produced .
m tests shall be conducted for the smallest median and largest bar size produced .
num additional requirements for bent frp bars for all bars produced by bending straight solid frp bars before the resin is fully cured the minimum inside bend radius shall be at least three times the nominal diameters for bar sizes num through num and four times the nominal diameters for sizes num and num .
the straight portion of a bent frp reinforcing bar shall be extracted with sufficient length for tensile testing according to table num .
when the bent shape does not allow for the tensile testing of one of its straight portions test specimens produced at the same time during the same production lot shall be used .
table num physical and mechanical property requirements for bent frp reinforcing bars property test method requirement specimens per lot fiber mass fraction bent portionb astm dnum or astm dnum num numm num return to table of contents table num physical and mechanical property requirements for bent frp reinforcing bars property test method requirement specimens per lot shortterm moisture absorption bent portionb astm dnum procedure num num hours immersion at numf num numm longterm moisture absorption bent portionb astm dnum procedure num immersion to full saturation at numf num numm glass transition temperature bent portionb astm enum dsc tm astm dnum dsc tmg numf numm degree of cure bent portionb astm enum num of total polymerization enthalpy numm measured crosssectional area straight portion astm dnum within the range listed in table num numm guaranteed tensile loada straight portion value listed in table num tensile modulus straight portion num ksi for gfrp num ksi for crfp alkali resistance without load straight portion astm dnum num months test duration followed by tensile strength per astm dnum num tensile strength retention numm strength of num bends aci num method b.num or astm dnum num guaranteed tensile load listed in table num numm transverse shear strength straight portion astm dnum num ksi numm a guaranteed tensile load shall be equal to the average test result from all three lots minus three standard deviations .
b bent portion specimens shall be extracted from a central location within a num bend .
m tests shall be conducted for the smallest median and largest bent bar size produced .
num material acceptance submit to the engineer a certification for each production lot from the producer of the frp reinforcing bars confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certifications shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num sampling the engineer will select a minimum of six straight bars with minimum lengths of num feet each and a minimum of five bent bars from each shipment representing a random production lot per bar size of frp reinforcing for testing in accordance with table num .
testing shall be conducted at the contractors expense by a department approved independent laboratory .
each test shall be replicated a minimum of three times per sample .
submit the test results to the engineer for review and approval prior to installation .
num return to table of contents table num testing requirements for project material acceptance of frp reinforcing bars property test method requirement test required for straight bar test required for bent bar fiber mass fraction astm dnum or astm dnum num yes yes bent portionb shortterm moisture absorption astm dnum procedure num num hours immersion at numf num yes yes bent portionb glass transition temperature astm dnum dma or astm dnum dsc tmg numf numf yes yes bent portionb degree of cure astm enum num of total polymerization enthalpy yes yes bent portionb measured cross sectional area astm dnum within the range listed in table num yes yes straight portion guaranteed tensile loada value listed in table num yes no tensile modulus num ksi for gfrp num ksi for cfrp yes no a guaranteed tensile load shall be equal to the average test result from all three lots minus three standard deviations .
b bent portion specimens shall be extracted from a central location within a num bend .
num frp spirals for concrete piling .
frp spirals for reinforcing in concrete piling shall be cfrp conforming to the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents section num prestressing strand and bar num strands for prestressing .
num carbon steel strands for prestressing the steel strands for prestressing concrete members shall be grade num lowrelaxation seven wire strand and shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
num stainless steel strands for prestressing the stainless steel strands for prestressing concrete members shall be a high strength stainless steel hsss conforming to the chemical requirements of astm anum uns snum or snum type num and the mechanical and dimensional requirements of astm anum except the minimum ultimate tensile strength shall be num ksi .
num carbon fiber reinforced polymer cfrp strands for prestressing obtain cfrp prestressing strands from producers currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
cfrp strand shall meet the requirements of this section .
table num typical sizes and loads of cfrp prestressing strands and bars type nominal diameter in nominal cross sectional area innum nominal ultimate load pu kips nominal ultimate tensile stress ksi single strand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num single strand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num single strand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num numstrand nummm  num num num num num steel bars for prestressing .
the steel bars for prestressing concrete members shall conform to the requirements of astm anum type ii .
num steel parallel wire assemblies for prestressing .
the wire assemblies for prestressing concrete members shall consist of parallel wires of the number and size shown in the plans and shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
num return to table of contents num anchorages for prestressing .
num for strands and bars num steel strands and bars meet the requirements of section num .
num carbon fiber reinforced polymer cfrp strands meet the requirements of aci numr b.num test method for performance of anchorages of frp bars .
num for steel parallel wire assemblies anchorage for parallel wire assemblies may be provided by type ba button anchorages coldend deformation of the wires bearing against suitable anchorage plates or by type wa wedgetype anchorages without cold end deformations of the sandwichplate or conical type .
the anchorage device shall be capable of developing at least num of the specified ultimate strength of the total number of wires anchored .
conical type anchorages shall be embedded within the ends of the concrete members unless otherwise specified .
anchorages shall generally bear against embedded grids of reinforcing steel of approved type .
alternate type anchorages will be considered if proposed by the contractor .
any alternate anchorage will be required to develop the full specified ultimate strength for bars or at least num of the specified ultimate strength for parallel wire assemblies .
num required tests for prestressing strand and bar .
num general tests shall be performed to determine the physical characteristics of prestressing reinforcement .
for tests specified to be made by the producer submit certified test results to the engineer prior to use .
num strands num steel strands acceptance of steel prestressing strands shall be based on samples taken by the department and the producers certified mill analysis certifying that the test results meet the specification limits of astm or aashto as specifically designated .
prior to use submit to the engineer the producers certified mill analysis for each heat or production lot per shipment of strand .
certifications for steel prestressing strand shall contain for each heat number or production lot all test results required by astm anum and the modulus of elasticity expressed in psi or the stressstrain curve with units identified .
the engineer will select samples and certified mill analysis representing each shipment at a frequency of one sample per producer per size of strand per shipment .
num carbon fiber reinforced polymer cfrp strands producers shall submit to the state materials office smo a test report of the physical and mechanical property requirements in table num .
qualification testing shall be conducted by an independent laboratory approved by the department for performing the frp test methods .
three production lots shall be randomly sampled at the production facility by a designee of the smo .
the minimum number of specimens per production lot shall be as indicated in table num .
the coefficient of variation cov for each test result shall be less than num .
outliers shall be subject to further investigation in accordance with astm enum .
if the cov exceeds num the number of test specimens per production lot may be doubled a maximum of two times to meet the cov requirement .
otherwise the results shall be rejected .
a production lot is defined as a lot of cfrp strand produced from start to finish with the same constituent materials used in the same proportions without changing any production parameter such as cure temperature or line speed .
num return to table of contents table num physical and mechanical property requirements for cfrp prestressing strands property test method requirement specimens per lot fiber mass fraction astm dnum or astm dnum num num shortterm moisture absorption astm dnum procedure num num hours immersion at numf num .
num num longterm moisture absorption astm dnum procedure num immersion to full saturation at numf num num glass transition temperature tg astm dnum dma or astm enum dsc tmastm dnum dsc tmg numf numf num total enthalpy of polymerization resin astm enum identify the resin system used for each bar size and report the average value of three replicates for each system degree of cure astm enum num of total polymerization enthalpy num measured cross sectional area astm dnum within num to num of nominal values listed in table num num ultimate tensile strength uts value listed in table num tensile modulus num ksi alkali resistance with load astm dnum num months test duration at num numf .
apply sustained tensile stress to induce num microstrain followed by tensile test per astm dnum tensile strength retention num of uts num creep rupture strength astm dnum num months test duration at laboratory conditions .
apply sustained tensile load equivalent to num uts followed by tensile test per astm dnum equivalent sustained load num uts and tensile strength retention num uts num num return to table of contents num material acceptance submit to the engineer a certification for each production lot from the producer of the cfrp strand confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certifications shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num sampling the engineer will select a minimum total of num feet from each shipment representing a random production lot per size of cfrp strand for testing in accordance with table num .
the minimum discrete sample length shall be num feet .
testing shall be conducted at the contractors expense by a department approved independent laboratory .
each test shall be replicated a minimum of three times per sample .
submit the test results to the engineer for review and approval prior to installation .
table num testing requirements for project material acceptance of cfrp prestressing strand property test method requirement fiber mass fraction astm dnum or astm dnum num shortterm moisture absorption astm dnum procedure num num hours immersion at numf num glass transition temperature astm dnum dma or astm enum dsc tmastm dnum dsc tmg numf numf degree of cure astm enum num of total polymerization enthalpy actual cross sectional area astm dnum within num to num of nominal values listed in table num ultimate tensile strength value listed in table num tensile modulus num ksi num steel bars acceptance of steel prestressing bar shall be based on samples taken by the department and the producers certified mill analysis certifying that the test results meet specification limits of the astm or aashto as specifically designated .
prior to use submit to the engineer the producers certified mill analysis for each heat or production lot and size per shipment of bars .
certifications of steel prestressing bar shall contain for each heat number or production lot all test results required by astm anum and the modulus of elasticity expressed in psi or the stressstrain curve with units identified .
the engineer will select samples and certified mill analysis representing each shipment at a frequency of one sample per heat or production lot per size of bar per shipment .
num steel wires acceptance of steel wires shall be based on the producers certified mill analysis of test results meeting the specification limits of the astm or aashto as specifically designated .
prior to use submit to the engineer the producers certified mill analysis for each heat or production lot per shipment of wire .
certifications of steel prestressing wire shall contain for each heat number or production lot all test results required by astm anum .
num return to table of contents section num nonshrink grout num scope .
this section covers only prepackaged nonshrink cementitious grout for structural use .
num type permitted .
only nonmetallic formulations of grouts are allowed .
gas producing metal oxidizing and expansive aggregate grouts are not allowed .
num sampling and testing methods .
perform concrete sampling and testing in accordance with the following methods making and curing concrete test specimens in the laboratory astm cnum time of setting concrete mixtures by penetration resistance astm cnum determining lowlevels of chloride in concrete and raw materials fm num compressive strength of hydraulic cement mortars astm cnum flow of grout for preplaced aggregate concrete flow cone method astm cnum measuring changes in height of cylindrical specimens from hydraulic cement grout astm cnum expansion and bleeding of freshly mixed grout for preplaced aggregate concrete in the laboratory astm cnum num requirements .
when tested as provided in num the grout shall meet the following requirements property test value compressive strength one day num psi minimum num days num psi minimum time of set final num hours maximum chloride content numlbydnum maximum hardened height change at num num num and num days num to num hardened height change at num num and num days height change num days expansion num num hours bleeding final num num hours num return to table of contents num product acceptance on the project .
nonshrink grout used shall be one of the products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
acceptance will be made in accordance with the products listed on the apl .
num rejection .
materials shall be rejected at the point of use if the materials are caked lumpy or show any signs of deterioration .
materials shall be rejected if the grout does not achieve the design fluidity or consistency when mixed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
all broken or open packages shall be rejected .
num packaging .
cementitious materials for grouts must be packaged in suitable moisture resistant containers and clearly labeled .
where applicable manufacturers recommendations limitations and cautions shall be clearly visible on each label .
num return to table of contents section num postinstalled anchor systems for structural applications in concrete elements num general .
postinstalled anchor systems intended for structural applications in concrete elements consist of adhesivebonded anchor systems .
num approved product list apl .
manufacturers of postinstalled anchor systems may apply for inclusion of individual products on the departments approved product list apl .
the application shall be made in accordance with section num and shall include certified test reports from an independent testing laboratory which shows the material system meets all the requirements of this section .
num certification .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with certification from the manufacturer of the anchor system confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certification shall conform to the requirements of section num .
each certification shall cover only one lot of anchoring materials .
num adhesive bonding material systems .
num general adhesive bonding material systems for structural applications shall consist of prepackaged numpart chemical components .
the material systems shall be specifically intended for use in structural applications for bonding anchors and dowels to hardened concrete .
applications are limited to anchors and dowels installed in positions ranging from vertically downward to horizontal .
do not use material from containers which are damaged or have been previously opened .
use only full packages of components .
combining of adhesive bonding components from bulk supplies is not permitted .
material systems shall be prepackaged to automatically proportion and mix the materials for use .
manual proportioning of the components will not be permitted .
num minimum performance requirements fm num when tested in accordance with fm num the adhesive bonding material system for general use shall meet the following requirements uniform bond stress type hv type hshv confined tension num psi num psi damphole installation num psi num psi elevated temperature num psi num psi horizontal orientation num psi num psi short term cure num psi num psi specified bond strength num psi num psi maximum coefficient of variation for uniform bond stress num .
long term load creep num return to table of contents num .
the rate of displacement shall decrease during the num day application of load .
num .
at num days the total displacement due to creep with load still applied shall be less than num inches and during the last num days of the num day load duration the total displacement due to creep shall be less than num inches .
num .
after removal of the num day load the uniform bond stress from a subsequent confined tension test shall not be less than num psi .
num product identification fingerprint properties fm num references for comparison including infrared absorption density or average weight gel time or setting time and bond strength shall be determined in accordance with fm num .
num packaging and marking the adhesive bonding material system shall be delivered to the project site in original unopened containers with the manufacturers label identifying the product .
each package shall be clearly marked with the following information manufacturers name and address product name date of manufacture expiration date lot identification number storage and handling requirements each package shall include the manufacturers instructions for anchor and dowel installation .
the instructions shall include the following information diameters of drilled holes for applicable anchor and dowel sizes .
cleaning procedure for drilled holes including a description of permitted and prohibited equipment and techniques .
allowable temperature ranges for storage installation and curing .
identification of acceptable mixingdispensing nozzles .
fabrication requirements for anchors and dowels .
description of tools permitted or required for installation .
method of identifying properly proportioned and mixed adhesive materials .
time and temperature schedule for initial set and fullstrength cure .
special requirements for special installation conditions such as damp holes or horizontal or near horizontal orientation of the anchor or dowel .
num return to table of contents section num duct filler for posttensioned structures num description .
this section covers filler materials used to fill voided areas within ducts to protect post tensioning steel .
grout applications are differentiated into three applications horizontal vertical and repair .
num approved product list .
only posttensioning grouts and flexible filler material listed on the departments approved product list apl shall be used .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num and include certified test reports from an independent laboratory audited by and meeting the requirements of iso num showing the material meets all the requirements specified herein .
a written certification from the manufacturer that the product meets the requirements of this section must be submitted .
any change of materials or material sources requires new testing and certification of the conformance of the grout with this specification .
grout products will be qualified by application horizontal vertical or repair .
num general requirements .
num grout grouts shall be prepackaged in clearly labeled moisture proof containers .
grout bags shall indicate application type date of manufacture lot number and mixing instructions .
the quality control data sheet for each lot number and shipment sent to the job site shall be provided to the contractor by the grout supplier and submitted to the engineer .
materials with a total time from manufacture to usage in excess of six months shall be tested and certified by the supplier that the product meets the quality control specifications before use or the material shall be removed and replaced .
num flexible filler microcrystalline wax flexible filler shall be delivered to the project site in clearly labeled prepackaged containers and stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as applicable for the particular project .
the manufacturers quality control data sheet indicating compliance with table num for each shipment sent to the job site shall be submitted to the contractor and furnished to the engineer .
num grout .
num mixing the material shall be mixed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num grout physical properties num gas generation the grout shall not contain aluminum or other components which produce hydrogen carbon dioxide or oxygen gas .
num laboratory testing the grout shall meet or exceed the specified physical properties stated herein as determined by the following standard and modified astm and fm test methods conducted at normal laboratory temperature numfnumf and conditions .
use the midrange of the water content indicated in the manufacturers technical data sheet to produce the time of efflux shown in table num .
table num num return to table of contents property test value test method total chloride ions max .
num lbsydnum fm num gradation num passing the no .
num num passing the no .
num num passing the no .
num astm cnum hardened height change num hours and num days num to num astm cnum expansion num for up to num hours astm cnum wet density laboratory report maximum and minimum obtained test value lbftnum astm cnum wet density field report maximum and minimum obtained test value lbftnum astm cnum or astm dnum compressive strength num day average of num cubes numpsi astm cnum initial set of grout min .
num hours max .
num hours astm cnum time of efflux immediately after mixing max .
num seconds astm cnum bleeding num hours num percent astm cnum pressure induced bleeding num percent astm cnum surface resistivity num days num kohmscm aashto tnum relative viscosity rvf determined from dynamic sheer rheometry num fm num use astm cnum procedure to determine the percent passing after washing the sieve .
the time of efflux is the time to fill a one liter container placed directly under the flow cone .
modify the astm cnum test by filling the cone to the top instead of to the standard level .
modify astm cnum to conform with the wick induced bleed test as follows a use a wick made of a num inch length of astm anum seven wire num inch diameter strand .
wrap the strand with num inch wide duct or electrical tape at each end prior to cutting to avoid splaying of the wires when it is cut .
degrease with acetone or hexane solvent and wire brush to remove any surface rust on the strand before temperature conditioning .
b mix the conditioned dry ingredients with the conditioned mixing water and place num ml of the resulting grout into the num ml graduate cylinder .
measure and record the volume of the grout .
c completely insert the strand into the graduated cylinder .
center and fasten the strand so it remains essentially parallel to the vertical axis of the cylinder .
measure and record the level of the top of the grout .
d calculate the bleed water if any at the end of the num hour test period and the resulting expansion per the procedures outlined in astm cnum with the quantity of bleed water expressed as a percent of the initial grout volume .
note if the bleed water remains above or below the top of the original grout height .
note if any bleed water is absorbed into the specimen during the test .
num accelerated corrosion test method actm perform the actm as outlined in appendix b of the specification for grouting of posttensioning structures published by the posttensioning institute .
report the time to corrosion for both the grout being tested and the control sample using a num watercement ratio neat grout .
a grout that shows a longer average time to corrosion in the actm than the control sample and the time to corrosion exceed num hours is considered satisfactory .
num variation in testing for specific applications .
num return to table of contents num horizontal applications horizontal grout applications are defined as grouting of all superstructure tendons and transverse substructure tendons in caps struts etc .
all physical requirements defined in num and num are applicable for grouts used in horizontal applications .
num vertical applications vertical grout applications are defined as grouting of substructure column tendons .
all physical requirements defined in num and num are applicable for grouts used in vertical applications .
num repair applications repair applications are used to augment grouting operations which did not completely fill the duct or anchorage .
for new construction repairs may be made with the same filler approved for use in the tendon as long as the volume of the void is less num gal .
in all other cases use a nonsanded grout meeting the requirements of num and num that meets or exceeds num kohmcm at num days when tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
each sieve may be washed and dried before weighing in accordance with the procedure in astm cnum modified for sieve size .
num flexible filler microcrystalline wax .
num storage and preparation store and prepare wax according to the manufacturers product data sheet .
reject wax that shows any sign of segregation prior to application even though it conforms to these specifications .
use equipment designed for pumping the wax in a fluid state to fill the tendon ducts .
num laboratory testing the wax shall meet or exceed the specified physical properties stated herein as determined by the following standard and modified astm and fm test methods conducted at normal laboratory temperature numfnumf and conditions .
table num property test value test method salt fog num hoursnumc no corrosion astm bnum corrosive constituent concentration chlorides sulfides and nitrates sulfate num ppm total num ppm astm dnum astm dnum astm dnum congealing point numc astm dnum cone penetration at numc num dmm astm dnum bleeding at numc num astm dnum resistance to oxidation num hours at numc num mpa astm dnum kinematic viscosity at numc num nummmnums astm dnum test sample consists of a num inch x num inch steel panel blast cleaned to a nace surface preparation spnum or equivalent with a num to num mil surface profile .
the plate is covered with a layer of wax equivalent to num grams wax per square inch of panel .
prepare sample in accordance with nf mnum sections numa through numc or equivalent .
other analytical methods are acceptable as long as equivalency to the above methods has been established by the department .
num return to table of contents drainage materials section num precast concrete pipe gaskets num round rubber gaskets for pipe joints .
except where oring type gaskets are specified for special cases and for special type pipe round rubber gaskets for use in concrete pipe joints shall meet the requirements of astm cnum with the additional requirements that the gasket used shall be of such cross sectional area and perimeter as to properly fit the space provided in the pipe joint in which it is to be used .
prior to use the gasket shall be stored in as cool a place as practicable .
num cold adhesive preformed plastic gaskets for sealing elliptical concrete pipe joints .
num general cold adhesive preformed plastic gaskets shall be of a material shape and size so as to effect a permanent water tight seal in joints of elliptical concrete pipe .
a minimum of two pieces of gasket material shall be used in each joint .
the gasket material shall be protected by a numpiece removable wrapper .
to facilitate application the numpiece wrapper shall be so designed that onehalf may be removed longitudinally without disturbing the other half .
the size of the gasket shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation for the particular joint in which it is to be used .
however the minimum size for each of the gaskets used in a joint shall be in accordance with the following pipe size inches nominal gasket size inches minimum crosssection innum up to num by num num num num by num to num by num num num over num by num num num the above minimum size requirements are based on a joint designed with a maximum taper of num degrees and an inplace annular space of approximately num inch .
num composition the gasket sealing the joints shall be produced from blends of refined hydrocarbon resins and plasticizing compounds reinforced with inert mineral filler .
the material shall contain no solvents and shall not produce irritating fumes or obnoxious odors .
the gasket shall not depend on oxidizing evaporation or chemical action for its adhesive or cohesive strength .
the chemical composition of the gasket material shall meet the following requirements minimum maximum bitumen petroleum plastic content by weight num num ashinert mineral matter by weight num num num return to table of contents minimum maximum volatile matter numf by weight num the gasket joint sealing compound when immersed for num days at ambient room temperature separately in num solution of caustic potash a mixture of num hydrochloric acid a num solution of sulfuric acid and a saturated hydrogen sulfide solution shall show no visible deterioration .
the physical properties of the gasket joint sealing compound as shipped shall meet the following requirements minimum maximum specific gravity numf num num ductility numf num mm softening point numf numf penetration num mm numf num gms five seconds num num num certification the manufacturer of the gasket material shall submit to the engineer certified test results covering each shipment of material to each project .
num resilient connectors for sealing precast structures to pipe joints .
num general resilient connectors shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
the connectors shall also be compatible with the precast structure and pipe .
num approved product list apl all resilient connectors shall be listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
num profile rubber gaskets for concrete pipe joints .
a round pipe the gaskets shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
b elliptical pipe the gaskets shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
additionally the gaskets used shall be of such cross sectional area and perimeter as to properly fit the space provided in the pipe joint in which it is to be used .
the gaskets shall be stored in as cool a place as practicable prior to use .
num return to table of contents section num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arch including underdrain num general requirements .
corrugated steel pipe including round culvert pipe pipe arch and underdrain and coupling bands for each type shall conform to aashto mnum .
except for underdrain corrugated steel pipe including pipe arch shall be fabricated with helical corrugations with a minimum of two annular corrugations formed on each end of each pipe to accommodate a coupling band .
annular fabrication is not permitted unless specifically called for in the plans or specifications .
provide as part of the shipping ticket the actual mean inside diameter and total measured lengths of each lot of pipe shipped to the project .
include the minimum and maximum inside diameters used to calculate the actual mean inside diameter .
test the pipe joints hydrostatically at the specified pressure using test methods in astm dnum with the exceptions of sections num and num .
in lieu of section num deflect one side of the pipe to a num reduction in internal diameter using the parallel plate testing methodology of astm dnum .
load the deflected pipe to within num the actual pipe diameter from the centerline of the gasket or just beyond the end of the hugger band whichever is greater .
ensure that the loading mechanism does not contact the hugger band or associated hardware .
testing of pipe joints shall be done at the manufacturing plant and witnessed by the engineer or designated representative .
num round culvert pipe .
for round culvert pipe used as sidedrain unless shown otherwise in the plans the minimum thickness of the metal including galvanizing aashto mnum or aluminum coating aashto mnum shall be as specified below .
alternatively if no future maintenance concerns exist the contractor may propose the pipe gage based on the departments drainage manual and culvert service life estimator for approval by the engineer .
table i thickness of metal for sidedrain pipe nominal diameter inches metal sheet gauge no .
mean thickness metal inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents table i thickness of metal for sidedrain pipe nominal diameter inches metal sheet gauge no .
mean thickness metal inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and over num num table ii permissible variation in thickness of metal for pipe and connecting bands metal sheet gauge no mean thickness of metal inches permissible variation inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pipe arch .
for corrugated metal pipe arch in addition to the requirements shown in aashto mnum thickness of the metal shall be as shown for the equivalent size round pipe in tables i and ii above and the fabrication of the pipe arch sections shall be such as to insure a substantially flat invert .
num alternate connecting bands .
in addition to the connecting bands as specified in aashto mnum alternate types of connecting bands are specified in num for use with the types of installations as shown .
num bituminous coating and paved invert .
when bituminous coating is specified the pipe or pipe arch shall be coated in accordance with the requirements of aashto mnum for type a fully bituminous coated .
when bituminous coated and paved invert are specified the pipe or pipe arch shall be coated and paved in accordance with aashto mnum for type c fully bituminous coated and paved .
the temperature of the asphalt at the time of coating and the duration of the pipe submerged time shall be optimized such that excess coating does not adhere to the pipe .
num return to table of contents num paved interior .
when bituminous coated and paved interior are called for the coating and paving shall meet the requirements specified above for bituminous and paved invert type c with the following additions and exceptions num .
the smooth pavement formed by the asphalt cement shall extend over the entire interior of the pipe .
num .
the exterior coating and the interior paving shall be applied .
num .
no markings will be required on the outside of the pipe to designate the center line of the top of the pipe .
num .
lifting lugs shall be attached to the pipe and shall be suitably placed to facilitate moving the pipe without damage to the exterior or interior bituminous material .
num basis of acceptance of bituminous coating and paving .
the acceptance of the bituminous coating paved invert and paved interior will be based on the manufacturers certified mill tests .
num underdrain pipe .
corrugated metal pipe for underdrain shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum except that class iv pipe as specified in section num therein shall not be used .
num return to table of contents section num structural plate steel pipe and pipe arch num description .
this section covers the materials for corrugated galvanized steel structural plate pipe and pipe arch including the necessary bolts and nuts for connecting plates and for assembling the pipe or pipe arch at the point of destination when so specified .
the sizes of the pipe or pipe arch shall be as shown in the plans .
num materials .
structural plate pipe and pipe arch shall be of galvanized steel complying with the requirements of aashto mnum with the additional requirement that the minimum thickness of the plates shall be as shown in the plans .
num tolerance in span and height .
a tolerance of plus or minus num will be allowed in the specified span and height of pipe arches .
a tolerance of minus num inches to plus num inches will be allowed in the specified diameter of round pipe .
num bituminous coating .
when bituminous coating is specified all plates shall be fully coated on both sides with asphalt cement .
the bituminous coating shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for type a .
num mill analysis and guarantee .
six certified copies of mill analysis and guarantee shall be furnished to the engineer and acceptance of the pipe will be based on such reports .
num assembly diagrams .
diagrams for assembling shall be furnished unless the pipe or pipe arch is furnished completely assembled .
num fabrication .
the fabrication of the pipe and pipe arch shall comply with the applicable requirements of section num of the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
unless otherwise specified the pipe and pipe arch shall be of full section for the entire length .
num assembly .
when purchase contracts stipulate that the pipe be assembled the dealer shall furnish the pipe and pipe arch completely assembled at the point of destination or at the site as specified and in lengths as specified .
num direct purchases by the department .
when the department purchases the pipe or pipe arch direct from the dealer the quantity to be paid for shall be the number of feet of pipe and of pipe arch as ordered provided that num return to table of contents sufficient materials meeting the requirements of these specifications shall be furnished to construct the pipe and pipe arch of the length and sizes shown .
the quantity shall be the net length as ordered with no allowance for length in excess thereof .
the price per foot for direct purchases shall be full compensation for furnishing the complete materials for the pipe or pipe arch including all bolts and nuts required for connecting the plates .
when assembling of the pipe or pipe arch is specified such price shall also include all labor equipment tools and incidentals required for completely assembling the pipe or pipe arch .
num return to table of contents section num aluminum pipe including underdrain pipe arch and structural plate pipe and pipe arch num general requirements .
aluminumalloy culvert pipe and underdrains shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum and the additional provisions contained herein .
except for underdrain corrugated aluminum pipe including pipe arch shall be fabricated with helical corrugations with a minimum of two annular corrugations formed into each end of each pipe to accommodate a coupling band .
annular fabrication is not permitted unless specifically called for in the plans or specifications .
provide as part of the shipping ticket the actual mean inside diameter and total measured lengths of each lot of pipe shipped to the project .
include the minimum and maximum inside diameters used to calculate the actual mean inside diameter .
test the pipe joints hydrostatically at the specified pressure using test methods in astm dnum with the exceptions of sections num and num .
in lieu of section num deflect one side of the pipe to a num reduction in internal diameter using the parallel plate testing methodology of astm dnum .
load the deflected pipe to within num the actual pipe diameter from the centerline of the gasket or just beyond the end of the hugger band whichever is greater .
ensure that the loading mechanism does not contact the hugger band or associated hardware .
testing of pipe joints shall be done at the manufacturing plant and witnessed by the engineer or designated representative .
for sidedrains unless shown otherwise in the plans the minimum thickness of the metal shall be as specified below .
alternatively if no future maintenance concerns exist the contractor may propose the pipe gage based on the departments drainage manual and culvert service life estimator for approval by the engineer .
table i thickness of metal for sidedrain pipe nominal diameter or equivalent inches sheet gauge no .
mean thickness of metal inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num return to table of contents table i thickness of metal for sidedrain pipe nominal diameter or equivalent inches sheet gauge no .
mean thickness of metal inches num and over num num where bituminous coated aluminum pipe is specified the bituminous coating shall meet the requirements as specified for corrugated steel pipe in num .
bituminous coated and paved aluminum pipe shall meet the additional requirements specified in num and num as applicable .
class iv pipe shall not be used .
num aluminum alloy structural plate pipe pipe arch and arches .
num general requirements aluminum alloy structural plate pipe pipe arch and arches shall conform to aashto mnum with the exceptions and additions specified herein .
the nominal thickness of the plate shall be as shown in the plans .
num bolts and nuts in lieu of shaped bolts and nuts standard type bolts and nuts with special shaped washers may be used .
for aluminum bolts and nuts the material shall conform to the chemical requirements shown in table i of astm bnum for alloy num .
nuts shall be lubricated at the factory with a suitable wax compound .
the bolts may be sampled and tested before erection or may be accepted on the basis of the manufacturers certification .
for steel bolts and nuts the material shall meet the requirements of either astm anum or astm fnumgrade anum as appropriate and shall be hot doubledipped galvanized .
aluminized steel bolts or other equally suitable devices for connecting the plates may be used if approved by the engineer .
num certification of tests submit to the engineer prior to installation a certified mill analysis and certification verifying that the aluminum parts and components are of the alloys specified and comply with the requirements of this section .
num direct purchases by the department the provisions of num shall also apply to departmental purchases of aluminum alloy structural plate pipe pipe arches and arches .
num pipe markings in lieu of the coined markings required by aashto mnum section num information may be ink stamped on the pipe at the time of manufacture .
a qc label with the pipe fabricators identity the date of corrugating or forming into pipe and the date of final qc inspection shall be applied to the inside walls of pipe using indelible ink .
the pipe markings must be clearly legible upon arrival at the jobsite and at the time of installation .
pipe with illegible or incomplete markings may be rejected .
num return to table of contents section num cast iron pipe num cast iron culvert pipe .
cast iron culvert pipe of diameter num inches and over shall conform with the requirements of aashto mnum including the requirements for the coating as specified in article num .
cast iron culvert pipe smaller than num inches in diameter shall meet ansi anum and the joints shall meet ansi anum .
unless a particular type or class of pipe is designated in the plans the contractor may furnish any class included in the above specifications .
only one class or type shall be furnished for any one contract .
the pipe shall be smooth bore pipe .
num cast iron soil pipe .
cast iron soil pipe for roof drains or for other purposes where such pipe is designated shall meet the requirements of either of the following num .
astm anum for servicetype pipe .
num .
the building code of the municipality or other governmental authority having jurisdiction within the area of the installation .
num return to table of contents section num optional drainage products and liner repair systems num polyvinylchloride pvc pipe or acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene abs plastics pipe .
num for bridge drains pvc pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum for type i grade num schedule num pvc pipe with a minimum polymer cell classification of num per astm dnum and a minimum of num by weight of titanium dioxide for uv protection .
num pressure pipe pressure pipe for direct burial under pavement shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum for type i grade i schedule num for sizes up to and including num inches and schedule num for sizes up to num inches .
pressure pipe num inches in diameter and larger shall conform to the requirements of awwa cnum drnum and astm dnum type i grade i or other types as may be specifically called for in the plans or special provisions .
num pipe marking all pvc pipe shall be marked as required by article num of astm dnum and acceptance of the pipe may be based on this data .
num nonpressure pipe pvc pipe and abs pipe intended for directburial or concrete encasement shall meet the following requirements num .
pvc pipe astm dnum sdrnum or astm fnum profile wall without perforations .
num .
abs pipe astm dnum .
the manufacturer of the pvc or abs pipe shall submit to the engineer the mill analysis covering chemical and physical test results .
num underdrain pvc pipe for use as underdrain shall conform to the requirements of astm fnum or astm fnum .
also pvc underdrain manufactured from pvc pipe meeting astm dnum perforated in accordance with the perforation requirements given in aashto mnum or aashto mnum will be permitted .
num edgedrain pvc pipe for use as edgedrain shall conform to the requirements of astm fnum astm fnum or astm dnum pipe shall be perforated in accordance with the perforation requirements given in aashto mnum or aashto mnum .
additional perforations will be required as indicated in standard plans index num for pipes designated under astm fnum and astm dnum .
pvc pipe intended for direct burial in asphalt shall meet the following requirements num .
astm dnum sdrnum or astm fnum num .
nema tcnum pipe material and compounds and nema tcnum pipe fittings for pvc numc electrical conduit pipe nema ecpnum and nema ecpnum .
underwriter laboratory specifications referenced under nema specifications for electrical conductivity are not required .
num .
pipe shall withstand asphalt placement temperatures specified without permanent deformation .
num .
perforations shall be in accordance with aashto mnum or aashto mnum .
num pvc pipe num inches to num inches pvc pipe for side drain cross drain storm drain and other specified applications shall conform to aashto mnum for smooth wall pvc num return to table of contents pipe or astm fnum for pvc ribbed pipe .
resin shall contain a minimum of num by weight of titanium dioxide for uv protection .
mitered end sections are not to be constructed of pvc .
pvc pipe shall be installed within two years from the date of manufacture .
obtain pipe from a production facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion shall meet the requirements of section num .
num material acceptance prior to use submit to the engineer a certification from the manufacturer confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certification shall conform to the requirements of section num .
project sampling shall be performed in accordance with num .
num corrugated polyethylene tubing and pipe .
num general for underdrain corrugated polyethylene tubing and fittings shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum .
for edgedrain corrugated polyethylene tubing and fittings shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum except as modified in num .
for storm drain side drain french drain and cross drain corrugated polyethylene pipe shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum and num .
the tubing or pipe shall not be left exposed to sunlight for periods exceeding the manufacturers recommendation .
num edgedrain num inches to num inches the requirements for edgedrain as specified in aashto mpnum are modified as follows num .
coiling of tubing num inches in diameter or greater is not permitted .
tubing shall have a minimum pipe stiffness of num psi at num deflection .
num corrugated high density polyethylene hdpe pipe num inches to num inches num general class i numyear design service life corrugated hdpe pipe used for side drain storm and cross drain or french drain shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum and plant certification from the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
corrugations shall be annular .
pipe resin shall conform to astm dnum with a minimum cell classification numc and between num to num carbon black .
mitered end sections are not to be constructed of polyethylene .
obtain pipe from a production facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion shall meet the requirements of section num .
num additional requirements for class ii numyear design service life type s hdpe pipe class ii hdpe pipe shall meet the requirements in table num in addition to those in num .
perforations will not be allowed .
manufacturers may only use ground class ii hdpe pipe for reworked plastic .
table num stress crack resistance of pipes pipe location test method test conditions requirement pipe liner fm num procedure a num igepal solution at numf and num psi applied stress num replicates average failure time of the pipe liner shall be num hours no single value shall be less than num hours .
num return to table of contents table num pipe corrugationnum molded plaque astm fnum num igepal solution at numf and num psi applied stress num replicates average failure time shall be num hours no single value shall be less than num hours .
junction fm num procedure b and fm num full testnum test at num temperaturestress combinations numf at num psi numf at num psi numf at num psi num replicates at each test condition determine failure time at num psi at numf num years num lower confidence using num failure time valuesnum the tests for each condition can be terminated at duration equal to or greater than the following criteria num hr at numf num psi num hr at numf num psi num hr at numf num psi single testnum test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi .
num replicates the average failure time must be equal to or greater than num hr longitudinal profilesnum fm num procedure c and fm num full testnum test at num temperaturestress combinations numf at num psi numf at num psi numf at num psi num replicates at each test condition determine failure time at numpsi at numf num years num lower confidence using num failure time valuesnum .
the tests for each condition can be terminated at duration equal to or greater than the following criteria num hr at numf num psi num hr at numf num psi num hr at numf num psi single testnum test temperature numf and applied stress of num psi .
num replicates the average failure time must be equal to or greater than num hr no value shall be less than num hours oxidation resistance of pipes pipe location test method test conditions requirement liner andor crownnum oit test astm dnum num replicates to determine initial oit value on the as manufactured not incubated pipe .
num minutes minimum num return to table of contents table num liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num and oit test astm dnum three samples for incubation of num days at numfnum and applied stress of num psi .
one oit test per each sample average of num minutesnum no values shall be less than num minutes liner andor crownnum mi test astm dnum at numocnumkg num replicates on the as manufactured not incubated pipe .
num gnum minutes liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num and mi test astm dnum at numcnumkg num replicates on the three aged sampled after incubation of num days at numfnum and applied stress of num psi mi retained valuenum shall be greater than num and less than num .
note fm florida method of test .
num required only when the resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num a higher test temperature numf may be used if supporting test data acceptable to the state materials engineer is submitted and approved in writing .
num full test shall be performed on alternative pipe diameter of pipe based on wall profile design raw material cell classification and manufacturing process .
full test must be performed on maximum and minimum pipe diameters within a manufacturing process .
num computer program to predict the num year scr with num lower confidence can be obtained from fdot .
num single test for the junction and longitudinal profile may be used on alternating pipe sizes within a manufacturing process .
single point tests may not be used on maximum and minimum pipe sizes within a manufacturing process except by approval of the engineer .
single point tests may be used for quality assurance testing purposes .
num longitudinal profiles include vent holes and molded lines .
num oit and mi tests on the crown are required when resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num the incubation temperature and duration can also be num days at numf .
num the tests for incubated and asmanufactured pipe samples shall be performed by the same lab same operator the same testing device and in the same day .
num the mi retained value is determined using the average mi value of incubated sample divided by the average mi value of as manufactured pipe sample .
num material acceptance meet the requirements of num .
num laboratory accreditation manufacturers seeking evaluation of a product in accordance with departmental procedures must submit test reports conducted by a laboratory qualified by the geosynthetic accreditation institutelaboratory accreditation program gailap or qualified by iso num accreditation agency using personnel with actual experience running the test methods for class ii hdpe pipe .
submit the test reports to the state materials office .
num steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe num general steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe used for side drain storm and cross drain or french drain shall meet the requirements of aashto mpnum or astm fnum and the testing requirements for stress crack and oxidation resistance in table num .
pipe resin shall conform to astm dnum with a minimum cell classification numc and between num to num carbon black .
mitered end sections are not to be constructed of steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe .
obtain pipe from a production facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion shall meet the requirements of section num .
num material acceptance meet the requirements of num .
num return to table of contents num laboratory accreditation meet the requirements of num except use personnel with actual experience running the test methods for steel reinforced polyethylene ribbed pipe .
num fiberglass reinforced polymer pipe .
num for bridge drains fiberglass pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum astm dnum or astm dnum for type i grade num class e using polyvinyl ester as the only resin .
the minimum hoop stress designation shall be a .
the resin shall contain uv stabilizers or a twopart num solids polyurethane coating .
num ductile iron pipe .
num for bridge drains ductile iron pipe shall conform to the requirements of awwa cnum .
num hot dip galvanized steel pipe .
num for bridge drains hot dip galvanized steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
num flexible transition couplings and pipe .
num for bridge drains flexible transition couplers and pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum .
num profile wall polypropylene pp pipe num inches to num inches .
num class i pp class i numyear design service life pp pipe used for side drain cross drain storm drain and french drain shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum and plant certification from the ntpep .
corrugations shall be annular .
polypropylene compound shall conform to the requirements of astm fnum .
mitered end sections are not to be constructed of polypropylene .
obtain pipe from a production facility that is listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion shall meet the requirements of section num .
num additional requirements for class ii numyear design service life pp pipe meet the requirements in table num in addition to those in num .
manufacturers may only use ground class ii pp for reworked plastic .
table num stress crack resistance pipe location test method test conditions requirement pipe liner fm num procedure a num igepal solution at numc and num psi applied stress num replicates average failure time of the pipe liner shall be num hours no single value shall be less than num hours.num oxidation resistance pipe location test method test conditions requirement pipe liner andor crownnum oit test astm dnum num replicates to determine initial oit value on the as manufactured not incubated pipe .
num minutes minimum num return to table of contents table num pipe liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num and oit test astm dnum three samples for incubation of num days at numcnum .
one oit test per each sample average of num minutesnum no values shall be less than num minutes pipe liner andor crownnum mi test astm dnum at numocnumkg num replicates on the as manufactured not incubated pipe .
num gnum minutes pipe liner andor crownnum incubation test fm num and mi test astm dnum at numcnumkg num replicates on the three aged sampled after incubation of num days at numcnum mi retained valuenum shall be greater than num and less than num .
note fm florida method of test .
num if due to sample size this test can not be completed on the liner then testing shall be conducted on a molded plaque sample .
samples can be removed if test time exceeds num hours without failure .
num oit and mi tests on the crown are required when resin used in the corrugation is different than that of the liner .
num the incubation temperature and duration can also be num days at numc or num days at numc .
num the tests for incubated and asmanufactured pipe samples shall be performed by the same lab same operator the same testing device and in the same day .
num within each replicate set of tests the discrepancy range shall be within num .
if an outofrange discrepancy occurs repeat the two mi tests on the same pipe sample .
if insufficient material is available a repeat of one test is acceptable .
num the mi retained value is determined using the average mi value of incubated sample divided by the average mi value of as manufactured pipe sample .
num material acceptance meet the requirements of num .
num laboratory accreditation meet the requirements of num except use personnel with actual experience running the test methods for profile wall polypropylene pipe .
num filter fabric sock for use with underdrain .
for type i underdrain specified in standard plans index num filter sock shall be an approved strong rough porous polyester or other approved knitted fabric which completely covers and is secured to the perforated plastic tubing underdrain in such a way as to prevent infiltration of trench backfill material .
the knitted fabric sock shall be a continuous one piece material that fits over the tubing like a sleeve .
it shall be knitted of continuous num denier yarn and shall be free from any chemical treatment or coating that might significantly reduce porosity and permeability .
the knitted fabric sock shall comply with the following physical properties weight applied ozsq .
yd .
num min astm dnum grab tensile strength lbs .
num min .
astm dnum equivalent opening size eos no .
num min .
corps of engineers cwnum burst strength psi num min .
astm dnum tested wet .
manufacturers certification to meet test requirement .
the knitted fabric sock shall be applied to the tubing in the shop so as to maintain a uniform applied weight .
the tubing with knitted fabric sock shall be delivered to the job site in num return to table of contents such manner as to facilitate handling and incorporation into the work without damage .
the knitted fabric sock shall be stored in uv resistant bags until just prior to installation .
torn or punctured knitted fabric sock shall not be used .
num liner repair systems for rehabilitation of pipe and other drainage structures .
num general liner systems shall have at least the minimum stiffness required for the intended application in accordance with the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
num folded liner folded liner shall be manufactured in an out of form state usually collapsed circumferentially and folded on the long axis .
after installation in a host structure the liner is formed by means of heat and pressure to fit the host structure .
when installed folded liner shall extend from one structure to the next in one continuous length with no intermediate joints .
num polyethylene folded polyethylene liner shall meet the requirements of astm num or astm fnum with a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black .
num pvc folded pvc liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum meet all the requirements for cell classification num or num or astm fnum meet all the requirements for cell classification num .
num curedinplace folded resin impregnated flexible tubing shall meet the requirements of astm fnum and astm dnum .
num prefabricated slip pipe liner when used in slip lining applications prefabricated liner shall be round flexible or semirigid liner manufactured in lengths that may be joined in a manhole or access pit before insertion in a host pipe .
num polyethylene num .
solid wall polyethylene pipe liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum or aashto mnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black .
num .
profile wall polyethylene pipe liner shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black num .
steel reinforced polyethylene pipe liner shall meet the requirements of aashto mpnum astm fnum or astm fnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black .
num pvc num .
solid wall pvc pipe liner shall meet the requirements of astm dnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num .
num .
profile wall pvc pipe liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum astm fnum or aashto mnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num .
num fiberglass prefabricated fiberglass pipe liner shall meet the requirements of astm dnum .
num spiralwound liner spiralwound liner shall consist of coils of profile strips or one piece profile strips that are wound directly into a host pipe helically num polyethylene polyethylene spiralwound liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum or astm fnum except the resin shall conform to astm dnum with a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black .
num pvc pvc spiralwound liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum or astm fnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num .
num return to table of contents num steel reinforced steel reinforced spiralwound liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum or astm fnum except the resin shall conform to astm dnum with a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black .
the steel reinforcement shall be fully encapsulated to prevent exposure to corrosive elements .
num segmental panel liner segmental panel liner consists of custom fit flat or curved panels that are formed to the inside wall of a host structure .
num polyethylene polyethylene segmental panel liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum except the resin shall conform to astm dnum with a minimum cell classification of num and between num to num carbon black .
num pvc pvc segmental panel liner shall meet the requirements of astm fnum and shall have a minimum cell classification of num .
num point repair liner point repair liner may be used to repair and rehabilitate an isolated portion of an existing structure and may consist of any materials covered by this specification .
materials that shall be used as primary components of point repair apparatus are num .
stainless steel which shall meet the requirements of aashto mnumm astm anum or astm anum num .
aluminum which shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum num .
rubber which shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
num coating liner coating liners consist of liquid slurry foam or gel that is spread or sprayed over the interior surface of an existing structure to rehabilitate it with or without fiber reinforcement .
coating liner installers shall submit to the department proof of experience for on site supervision and previously completed contracts including the following num .
project name and location num .
names of contracting parties num .
owners names num .
a brief description of the work num .
dates of completion of coating liner work materials that may be used for coating are num .
hydrophilic urethanebased foams or gels which shall meet the requirements of astm fnum .
num .
epoxy resins and unsaturated styrenebased resins which shall meet the resin material requirements of astm fnum .
num .
cementitious materials as recommended by the manufacturer including annular backfill low density cellular concrete shotcrete gunite centrifugally cast and prepackaged grout .
num return to table of contents section num miscellaneous components for manholes inlets and other structures num clay brick and shale brick .
this brick shall meet the requirements of astm cnum grade mw or astm cnum grade mm .
num concrete brick .
concrete brick shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
num concrete masonry units .
concrete masonry units for use in manholes inlets and similar structures shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
num precast grade adjustment rings .
precast grade adjustment rings shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
num composite rubber adjustment rings .
composite rubber adjustment rings shall meet the following minimum material requirements physical properties requirements test method density lb.ftnum num num astm dnum test a durometer hardness molded surfaces shore a numa num astm dnum tensile strength psi num minimum astm dnum ultimate elongation num num astm dnum compression deformation initial num num astm dnum compression deformation final num num astm dnum coefficient of thermal expansion numxnum numxnum astm enum num acceptance .
submit to the engineer a certification from the manufacturer stating that the bricks concrete masonry units precast grade adjustment rings or composite rubber adjustment rings meet the requirements of this section .
acceptance of materials will be in accordance with section num .
num return to table of contents timber products and materials section num inspection of timber products num control of quality .
all timber products manufactured for incorporation into the work shall be produced by a producertreater approved by the department for such production .
obtain timber products from a plant that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
if approval is withdrawn by the department during production for a construction project it is the contractors responsibility to obtain another approved producertreater to produce the timber products or await reestablishment of approval of the disapproved producertreater .
cost or delays associated with producertreater approval or disapproval shall be borne by the contractor .
the producertreater of timber products shall exercise quality control through an approved producer quality control qc plan conforming to section num .
products produced under this qc plan will not relieve the contractor of his responsibility for unsuitable materials or workmanship which might become apparent at the job site nor of the necessity of his replacing any material which might be determined upon subsequent inspection to be unsuitable .
num preparations prior to requesting inspection .
prior to the requested time of inspection for approval of a producertreater the authorities of the treating plant shall become knowledgeable with the most current requirements of the departments specifications as appropriate to his productiontreatment .
the producertreater shall make his facility totally accessible to appropriate departments inspection personnel .
such access for inspection shall include but not be limited to all physical artifacts and processes materials records and copies of certified shipping documents such as a treatment certification a treating report and an assay report .
all calls for inspections shall be made at least two weeks in advance .
upon approval of a producertreater facility the department will inspect the facility periodically for continued approval .
num certification .
each ordershipment to the job site must be accompanied with a notarized certification indicating compliance to the appropriate specifications .
the certification shall include the projectorder number charge numbers and assay retention results .
the producertreater shall maintain all pertinent documents for a period of three years .
each timber product must also have a preapproved producertreater identification mark on every item delivered to the job site .
num return to table of contents section num structural timber num general specifications for all structural timber .
this section specifies the requirements for pine timber to be used as structural members in the departments work including untreated timber as well as timber to be treated .
all such timber shall be manufactured and graded in accordance with the current edition of the standard grading rules for southern pine timber of the southern pine inspection bureau .
the timber shall meet the requirements of no .
num grade or as otherwise specified in the plans .
num timber for other specific uses .
num specification grade for timber to be used for columns sills wheelguards bulkhead sheeting bracing fender wales or any other purpose for which the grade is not specified otherwise the specification grade shall be as follows nominal thickness nominal width grade num to num inches num inches and wider no .
num boards num to num inches num inches and wider no .
num dimension num inches and larger num inches and larger no .
num timbers num permissible knot sizes for fender wales for timber used as fender wales the maximum permissible size of knot at any point on any face shall be as follows for nominal width of face of num num inches .
for nominal width of face of num num inches .
num untreated pine timber specific requirement for heartwood .
in addition to meeting all of the requirements of num and num pine timber which is to be used as untreated timber will be required to show at least num of heartwood on any girth .
num return to table of contents section num timber piling including timber sheet piling num general .
piles shall be of timber which will stand the driving for which they are intended .
they shall be sound and solid .
piling cut from southern pine shall contain at least num of summer wood .
cypress piles used for purposes other than as foundation piling shall have at the butt a diameter of red or black heart of at least num inches .
douglas fir used for timber piling shall be pacific coast douglas fir .
piles shall be cut above the ground swell shall have a form taper and shall not vary more than plus or minus num inches from the specified length .
specific requirements for timber sheet piles are contained in num .
num diameter of butt and tip .
for round piles the minimum butt diameter shall be num inches measured at a section num feet from the end .
for piles up to num feet in length the minimum tip diameter shall be num inches .
for lengths in excess of num feet a graduated reduction in tip diameter at the rate of num inch for each num feet of length in excess of num feet will be permitted .
this reduction will correspond to num inch tips for num foot piles and num inch tips for num foot pile at which length these allowable reductions shall cease .
as an exception to the above when so shown in the plans num inch diameter tips on timber piles less than num feet in length will be accepted .
no piles shall have tips less than num inches in diameter .
the maximum diameter at the cutoffs shall be num inches .
num straightness requirements .
a straight line drawn from the center of the butt to the center of the tip shall not at any point fall further away from the center of the pile than a distance equal to num of the length of the pile .
the surface of the pile shall not contain kinks greater than num inch in num feet as measured by a straightedge .
num peeling and trimming .
the pile shall be peeled soon after cutting .
in the operation of removing the bark from the pile not more than three annual rings of the solid wood shall be removed .
all knots shall be trimmed close to the body of the pile .
num permissible knots and other defects .
the diameter of sound knots shall not exceed onethird of the diameter of the pile at the point where the knot occurs .
in these specifications a sound knot shall be defined as a knot which is solid across its face is as hard as the surrounding wood and shows no indication of decay .
it may vary in color from red to black and may contain a pith hole not more than num inch in diameter .
an unsound knot may or may not be as hard as the surrounding wood but contains decay and will be allowed only in accordance with the restrictions in astm dnum .
num return to table of contents any defect or combination of defects which would be more injurious than the maximum allowable knot will not be acceptable .
turpentine cuts will be allowed on all timber piles provided that no single cut shall exceed onehalf of the circumference of the pile and that the length of the cut shall not be more than num of the length of the pile .
piles to be used as outside piles in timber bents shall not have more than one turpentine cut .
num timber sheet piles .
unless a particular species of timber is called for in the plans timber sheet piles may consist of any species which will satisfactorily stand driving .
they shall be sawn square and shall be free from worm holes loose knots wind shakes decayed or unsound portions and other defects which might impair the strength or tightness the piles shall be of the dimensions shown in the plans and shall be treated in accordance with section num .
num return to table of contents section num timber fence posts and braces num types of timber and treating requirements .
timber fence posts and braces shall be of southern yellow pine and shall be treated in accordance with section num .
prior to the treatment all knots on the posts shall be trimmed close to the body of the post .
num requirements for cutting .
round or sawn posts will be permitted but all posts on a single project shall be the same .
sawn post shall comply with aashto mnum have a minimum fb of num num psi be grade stamped by an inspection agency accredited by the american lumber standards committeealsc and shall meet the requirements of num .
round posts shall be cut from sound and solid trees and shall contain no unsound knots .
the butt shall be cut at a sufficient distance above the ground swell of the tree that there will be no abrupt change in crosssection of the post .
the butts shall be sawn square .
the post tops shall be sawn neatly and at right angles to the vertical axis of the post .
num knots etc .
sound knots will be permitted provided the diameter of the knot does not exceed one third of the diameter of the piece at the point where it occurs .
peck in cypress posts shall be limited as provided for knots the area of permissible peck not exceeding the area occupied by permissible knots and a combination of peck and knots not exceeding the aggregate of knots allowed .
the posts shall be free from decayed wood rot and red heart and of ring shake or season checks which penetrate at any point more than one fourth the diameter of the piece or are greater than num inch wide .
num peeling .
all posts shall be peeled for their full length and all inner and outer bark removed except that isolated strips of inner bark which do not exceed num inch in width or num inches in length will be permitted .
num straightness .
the straightness of the post shall be such that for any num foot post or for any num feet of length for longer posts a straight line from the center of the tip to the center of the butt or from center of the cross sections at the extremes of the num foot lengths shall not fall outside the center of the midsection of the num foot length by more than num inches .
num dimensions .
num minimum lengths allowable line posts num feet .
corner and pull posts num feet num inches .
braces as required by the plans .
num return to table of contents a tolerance of minus num inch to plus num inches will be allowed in the lengths shown for the posts .
num minimum allowable cross section round line posts num inch diameter .
round braces corner and pull posts num inch diameter .
square line posts num inches by num inches .
square braces corner and pull posts num inches by num inches .
the minimum diameters specified for round posts are applicable before preservative treatment .
when the treated post is inspected at the job site a tolerance of num inch under such diameters will be allowed to compensate for shrinkage resulting from treatment and storage .
num return to table of contents section num timber treatment including treating materials num general .
the work specified in this section is the treating of structural timber timber piling and timber posts .
the method of treatment for all such timber materials shall be in accordance with aashto m num or american wood protection association awpa use category system ucs unum with the exceptions and additions as specified herein .
num preservative .
num salt or brackish water use the treating of southern yellow pine syp lumber or timber for use in salt or brackish water environments shall be done with chromated copper arsenate cca in accordance with awpa unum .
num above ground or ground contact and fresh water immersion use the treating of syp lumber and timber for above ground or ground contact and fresh water immersion applications shall be done with ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate acza copper azole ca micronized copper azole mca alkaline copper quat acq micronized copper quat mcq or cca with the following exceptions treatment of the wood products of the pedestrian bridges wood rails at buildings or rest areas and fence posts shall be done either with ca mca or acq .
num process .
all timber and lumber items shall be treated in accordance with awpa tnum .
num requirements for preservative materials .
acq cca ca mca and acza shall be in accordance with the appropriate awpa p standard .
mca shall be in accordance with the appropriate icc evaluation service icces esr report .
num requirements for retention .
num piling all pilings shall be treated in accordance with awpa unum .
num structural timber and sheet piles all structural timber and sheet piles shall be treated in accordance with awpa unum .
num posts all posts shall be treated in accordance with awpa unum .
num determination of retention retention shall be determined by assay performed and certified by the treating company in accordance with the applicable awpa standards .
num penetration requirements .
the penetration of the treatment shall be in accordance with awpa tnum .
num handling waterborne preservative treated piling .
in handling of piles that have been treated with chromated copper arsenate cca or ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate acza cable slings shall be used .
mechanical grabbers or pointed tools shall not be permitted .
rough or careless handing shall be avoided at all times .
num return to table of contents num identification of treating plants for round piling .
the treating plant shall brand or place a distinctive permanent mark on each round pile approximately num feet from the butt end such that the plant responsible for the treatment can be readily determined at any time during the service life of the piling .
num return to table of contents metal materials and fabrication details for metal items section num posttensioning components num description .
this section covers all posttensioning pt components remaining in a completed structure including temporary erection pt left inplace and permanent pt for design capacity .
manufacturers seeking approval of pt systems for inclusion on the structures design office sdo list of approved posttensioning systems must use materials and components meeting requirements of this section and section num .
submit a complete pt system application package including component drawings system drawings and test reports from a certified laboratory or laboratories as defined in num to the sdo for review acceptance and inclusion on the list of approved posttensioning systems .
any marked variations from original test values or any evidence of inadequate field performance of a pt system will result in the pt system being removed from the list of approved posttensioning systems .
num material references meet the requirements of this section and the following epoxy compounds section num bar posttensioning section num duct filler for post tensioned structures section num reinforcing steel mild section num parallel wire posttensioning section num strand posttensioning section num use products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
num component standards .
all pt system components must be materials compatible with the filler material and installation process used to encapsulate the tendons .
the component materials must not chemically degrade during the design life of the structure .
substitution modification or deletion of components of pt systems as shown on the sdo website for approved posttensioning systems excluding local zone reinforcement is not permitted .
inclusion of all possible subcomponents is required for pt system and component testing however subcomponents of approved systems may be eliminated from final installations based on project specific requirements provided all componenttocomponent interface hardware are included as necessary to maintain connections and pt system integrity .
provide only pt systems utilizing tendons completely encapsulated in grout or flexible filler filled anchorages and ducts .
do not use systems transferring prestress force by bonding prestress steel strand directly to concrete .
embedded anchorages for bars are permitted .
strand or strandtendon couplers are not permitted .
stamp all components of a pt system with the suppliers name trademark model number and size corresponding to catalog designation .
all miscellaneous hardware components including but not limited to splices joints duct couplers connections inlets outlets drains ports valves and plugs are part of approved pt systems .
num anchorage assembly num return to table of contents num .
construct anchorages from ferrous metal .
num .
anchorages shall develop at least num of pt steel actual ultimate strength when tested in an unbonded state without exceeding anticipated anchor set .
num .
average concrete bearing stress shall be in compliance with aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num .
test anchorages with typical local zone reinforcement shown in system drawings .
num .
test anchorages in accordance with aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications or the guideline for european technical approval of posttensioning kits for prestressing of structures etagnum june num edition with the exception that the design concrete strength used in the testing will be num psi .
for anchorages that will be used for tendons with flexible filler test anchorages in accordance with etagnum section numi .
num .
anchorages with grout or flexible filler outlets shall be suitable for inspection from either top or front of anchorage .
anchorages may be fabricated to facilitate both inspection locations or may be two separate anchorages of the same type each providing singular inspection entry locations .
num .
geometry of grout and flexible filler outlets must facilitate access for borescope inspection directly behind wedge plate using a straight num inch diameter drill bit .
num .
ferrous metal components of an anchorage that are to be embedded in concrete shall be galvanized in accordance with section num .
other anchorage assembly components including wedges wedge plates and local zone reinforcement need not be galvanized .
num .
all anchorages shall have a permanent vented anchorage cap bolted to the anchorage .
num trumpets num .
trumpets associated with anchorages shall be constructed from ferrous metal galvanized per astm anum polypropylene plastic or polyolefin .
num .
trumpet thickness at transition location shall be the thickness of the duct or greater .
num wedges and wedge plates num .
wedge plate shall be ferrous metal .
num .
wedge plates must have centering lugs or shoulders to facilitate alignment with bearing plate .
num .
for longitudinal tendons greater than four strands design system with separate wedge plate and anchorage plate .
num filler containment assembly num duct and pipe num .
use plastic duct steel pipe or a combination of plastic duct and steel pipe in accordance with this section .
num .
ducts shall be manufactured by a seamless fabrication method .
fabricate all duct splices to prevent kinks during all phases of construction .
num .
do not alter the natural duct color that results from uv protected polymer .
num .
corrugated ferrous metal ducts are prohibited .
num corrugated plastic duct num .
pt systems with duct injected with grout shall use corrugated polypropylene plastic material except where steel pipe is required .
num return to table of contents num .
furnish ducts with minimum wall thickness as follows table num corrugated plastic duct minimum wall thicknesses duct shape duct diameter duct wall thickness flat any size num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch round num inch num inch num smooth plastic duct num .
pt systems with duct injected with flexible filler shall use smooth plastic duct .
num .
duct shall be polyethylene resin material .
num .
duct shall have a maximum dimension ratio dr of num as established by either astm dnum or astm fnum as appropriate for manufacturing process used .
num .
duct shall have a minimum pressure rating of num psi .
num steel pipe steel pipes shall be astm anum type e grade b schedule num and galvanized in accordance with section num .
num minimum internal diameter num .
for prestressing bars duct shall have a minimum internal diameter of num inches larger than bar outside diameter measured across deformations .
num .
for prestressing bars with couplers duct shall have a minimum internal diameter of num inches larger than largest dimension of the largest enclosed element .
num .
for multistrand tendons ducts must have a minimum cross sectional area num times pt steel crosssectional area .
num connections fittings and tolerance num .
devices or methods for all duct connections e.g .
splices joints couplers connection to anchorages shall produce smooth interior alignment with no lips or kinks .
num .
use of tape is not permitted to join or repair duct to make connections or for any other purpose .
num .
use a reducer when adjacent sections of duct are directly connected to each other and the outside diameters vary more than plus or minus num inch .
num .
provide all connections that are external to the concrete with a minimum pressure rating of num psi .
num .
use heat shrink sleeves and circular sleeve couplers made from polyolefin or polypropylene material or duct couplers made from polyolefin or polypropylene material with orings or seals to make connections between sections of corrugated plastic duct or between corrugated plastic duct and trumpets .
num return to table of contents num .
use heat shrink sleeves and circular sleeve couplers made from polyolefin or polypropylene material to make connections between corrugated plastic duct and steel pipe .
num .
use heat shrink sleeves with or without circular sleeve couplers made from polyolefin or polypropylene material to make connections between corrugated plastic duct and anchorages with integral trumpets .
num .
use heat welding techniques electrofusion duct couplers or elastomer sleeves and stainless steel band clamps to make connections between sections of smooth plastic duct .
num .
use elastomer sleeves and stainless steel band clamps to make connections between smooth plastic duct and steel pipe .
num .
use welding or elastomer sleeves and stainless steel band clamps to make connections between sections of steel pipe that are external to the concrete .
num .
use welding elastomer sleeves and stainless steel band clamps or heat shrink sleeves and circular sleeve couplers made from polyolefin or polypropylene material to make connections between steel pipe and trumpets that are internal to the concrete .
num .
use elastomer sleeves with a minimum wall thickness of num inches and reinforced with a minimum of four ply polyester reinforcement .
use a num inch wide stainless steel power seated band and clamps on each end of the elastomer sleeves to secure the sleeves to plastic ducts or steel pipes .
seat the bands with a num pound force prior to clamping them in place .
num segmental duct couplers num .
include segmental duct couplers for permanent internal pt systems at joints between match cast precast segments .
num .
use o rings or compression seals between adjoining sections of segmental duct couplers .
num .
plastic duct couplers shall be polyolefin or polypropylene material .
num .
metallic components shall be stainless steel per num .
num .
segmental duct couplers shall mount perpendicular to the bulkhead at segment joints and provide for duct alignment .
num .
segmental duct couplers shall be able to receive duct at an angle of num degree deviation from perpendicular .
num .
segmental duct couplers must be able to accommodate angular deviation of duct without tendon strands touching duct or coupler on either side of segment joint .
num .
ducts for prestressing used exclusively for temporary erection pt that is to be removed from structure are not required to be coupled across segment joints .
num orings num .
orings with cross section diameters less than or equal to num inches and compression seals with thicknesses less than or equal to num inches for use with segmental duct couplers anchorage caps and other similar components shall conform to the requirements of table num .
num return to table of contents table num oring and compression seal material properties cross section diameter or thickness num in mechanical properties shore hardness astm dnum num ultimate elongation astm dnum num min .
tensile strength astm dnum num psi min .
accelerated testing thermal deterioration num hours num f astm dnum change in tensile strength num change of elongation num change of hardness num points compression set method b num hours num f astm dnum num volume change due to absorption of hnumo method d for num hours numf astm d num num environmental resistance ozone resistance exposure method b astm dnum pass low temp .
nonbrittle after num min .
numf astm dnum pass num .
orings with cross section diameters greater than num inches and compression seals with thicknesses greater than num inches for use with segmental duct couplers anchorage caps and other similar components shall conform to the requirements in table num with the additions and modifications in table num .
table num orings and compression seal material properties cross section diameter or thickness num in mechanical properties shore hardness astm dnum num tensile strength astm dnum num psi min .
compression set method b num hours num f astm dnum num num .
compression force maximum force to compress an oring or compression seal to its final compressed position shall not be greater than num psi times the area encircled by oring or seal .
num .
voided area compression seals must accommodate material flow within its own cross sectional area by using a hollow or voided design .
num heat shrink sleeves num .
heat shrink sleeves shall have unidirectional circumferential recovery and be sized specifically for duct size being coupled .
num .
use irradiated and cross linked high density polyethylene backing for external applications and lineardensity polyethylene for internal applications .
num return to table of contents num .
use adhesive with the same bond value to steel and polyolefin plastic materials .
num .
heat shrink sleeves shall have an adhesive layer that meets the requirements of the following table table num heat shrink sleeve adhesive layer minimum requirements property test method minimum requirements internal application external application minimum fully recovered thickness num to num mils num mils peel strength astm d num num pli num pli softening point astm e num numof numf lap shear din num numm num psi num psi tensile strength astm d num num to num psi num psi hardness astm d num num to num shore d num shore d water absorption astm d num less than num less than num color yellow or black black minimum recovery heat recovery test num to num num operating temperature numf numf num .
install heat shrink sleeves using procedures and methods specified in the manufacturers instructions .
num attachments num anchorage caps num .
provide permanent anchorage caps made of stainless steel nylon polyester or acrylonitrile butadiene styrene abs .
num .
seal anchorage cap with oring seals or precision fitted flat gaskets placed against the bearing plate .
num .
place a vent hole of num inch minimum diameter suitable for filler venting and inspection of the content inside the anchorage cap from the top or front of the anchorage cap as appropriate e.g .
anchorage caps not accessible after filler injection must have a vent at the top of the cap .
anchorage caps may be fabricated to facilitate both inspection locations .
num .
anchorage caps shall have a minimum pressure rating of num psi .
num .
stainless steel bolts shall be used to attach cap to anchorage .
num .
certified test reports documenting steel chemical analysis shall be submitted when stainless steel anchorage caps are used .
num inlets outlets drains ports valves and plugs num .
provide permanent inlets outlets drains ports valves and threaded plugs made of nylon polyolefin materials or stainless steel .
num .
all inlets outlets drains and ports shall have pressure rated mechanical shutoff valves or plugs .
mechanical shutoff valves must be num turn ball valves .
num .
inlets outlets drains ports valves and plugs shall have a minimum pressure rating of num psi .
num return to table of contents num .
inlets outlets and ports shall have a minimum inside diameter of num inches for strand and num inches for single bar tendons and fourstrand ducts .
num .
drains shall have a minimum inside diameter of num inches .
locate drains and inlets and outlets serving as drains at the bottom of the duct cross section .
num .
dual inline mechanical shutoff valves are required for vertical pt systems .
num .
specifically designate temporary items not part of the permanent structure on pt system drawings .
num steel reinforcing num mild num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to section num and section num .
num .
test typical local zone reinforcement for compliance with aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications as applicable .
include reinforcement details in system drawings submitted for system approval .
num prestressing num strand prestressing strands shall be in accordance with section num .
num bar num .
prestressing bars shall be in accordance with section num .
num .
bar couplers shall be in compliance with aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
num .
test bar couplers in accordance with aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications or the guideline for european technical approval of post tensioning kits for prestressing of structures etagnum june num edition .
for bar couplers that will be used for tendons with flexible filler test bar couplers in accordance with etagnum section numi .
num .
use only spherical nuts to anchor bars at bearing plates .
num pt system materials num .
use material specifications in this section for all pt system components and subcomponents .
num .
use only virgin material for all nonferrous components .
num .
test only samples taken from finished product as applicable .
num nylon use one of the following cell classes according to astm dnum num .
spanum weather resistant .
num .
spanum heat stabilized .
num .
spanum ultimate strength not less than num psi with uv stabilizer added .
num polyolefin conform to both of the following num .
contains antioxidants with a minimum oxidation induction time oit according to astm dnum of not less than num minutes .
num .
remolded finished material has a minimum failure time of three hours when tested for stress crack resistance using astm fnum at an applied stress of num psi .
num stainless steel conform to the following num .
astm anum type num for metallic components other than bolts .
num .
astm fnum type num for bolts .
num return to table of contents num polypropylene conform to all of the following num .
noncolored unfilled polypropylene according to astm dnum with a cell class range of ppnumbnum to ppnumbnum .
num .
contains antioxidants with a minimum oxidation induction time oit according to astm dnum of not less than num minutes .
num .
contains a nonyellowing light stabilizer .
num polyethylene resin conform to all of the following num .
meets requirements of astm dnum with a minimum cell class of numc .
num .
contains antioxidants with a minimum oxidation induction time oit according to astm dnum of num minutes .
num elastomer sleeves conform to all of the following num .
meet requirements of astm dnum using ozone chamber exposure method b no cracks permitted under numx magnification .
num .
manufactured using an elastic polymeric material that is compatible with concrete the pt system components to which the sleeves will be attached and the filler material and filler material installation process .
identify the applicable astm specifications that the sleeve material complies with .
num system preapproval requirements .
num independent testing use independent laboratories meeting the credentials described in this section to perform all testing and to submit certified test reports for materials and components .
certification may be performed by a qualified independent laboratory outside of the united states only if the facility is preapproved by the state materials office .
conform all testing procedures used for materials or components to applicable american society of testing and materials astm and international federation of structural concrete fib specifications or as modified in this section .
num material laboratory test plastic components in a certified independent laboratory accredited through the laboratory accreditation program of the geosynthetic accreditation institute gai or the american association for laboratory accreditation anumla .
num component and system laboratory test individual components and the pt system as a whole witnessed by andor in a certified independent laboratory audited by the aashto materials reference laboratory amrl .
num testing requirements num component and system tests corrugated duct smooth duct and all associated components that are used for both internal and external pt systems e.g .
couplers anchorages inlets outlets drains ports valves plugs etc .
shall meet the requirements of fib technical report bulletin num titled polymerduct systems for internal bonded posttensioning performance level num plnum with modifications as shown in table num .
table num required component and system tests reference to fib bulletin num required tests for each pt system typenum procedures appendix test description internal pt system internal pt system with external pt system num return to table of contents table num required component and system tests reference to fib bulletin num required tests for each pt system typenum with grout flexible filler with flexible filler component assessment a.num dimensional requirement yes no no a.num stiffness of duct yesnum no no a.num longitudinal load resistance yes yes yes a.num lateral load resistance yes no no a.num flexibility of duct system yes yes no a.num leak tightness of duct system yes yes no a.num concrete pressure on duct yesnum no no a.num wear resistance of duct yes no no a.num wear resistance of duct under sustained load yes no no a.num bond behavior of duct yes no no a.num precast segmental duct coupler system yesnum yesnum no a.num fracture resistance of duct no no no system assessment b.num leak tightness of anchorageduct assembly yesnum yesnum yesnum b.num eit performance of duct system no no no b.num eit performance of anchorage duct assembly no no no b.num full scale duct system assembly yesnum yesnum yesnum b.num leak tightness of assembled duct system yesnum yesnum no num .
yes test is required no test is not required .
num .
do not preload strand into duct prior to testing .
num .
identify duct as meeting performance class i or ii criteria .
num .
use an epoxy compound meeting the requirements of section num type ab .
num .
perform tests on the largest assembly and the smallest assembly for each family of pt systems .
a family of pt systems is defined a group of pt strandbar assemblies of various sizes using common anchorage devices and design .
num .
for each test use a pt system assembly consisting of at least one of each component and connection type required to install a tendon from anchorage cap to anchorage cap .
for bar tendon systems use between num and num feet of duct with a straight profile .
num filler containment assembly pressure test in addition to the other testing specified in this section test all filler containment assemblies i.e .
anchorages anchorage caps inlets outlets drains ports valves plugs etc .
as follows num .
assemble the anchorage and anchorage cap with all required filler injection attachments .
num .
seal the opening in the anchorage where the ducttrumpet connects .
num .
condition the assembly by maintaining a pressure of num psi in the system for three hours .
num .
after conditioning lock off the air supply to the assembly .
num .
after lock off the assembly must sustain num psi internal pressure for five minutes with no more than num psi or num reduction in pressure .
num return to table of contents this test may be combined with the external duct systems pressure test for external pt systems .
num external pt systems pressure test in addition to the other testing specified in this section test all external pt systems as follows num .
prepare a system assembly consisting of at least one of each component and connection type required to install a tendon from anchorage cap to anchorage cap using between num and num feet of duct with a straight profile .
num .
condition the assembly by maintaining a pressure of num psi in the system for three hours .
num .
after conditioning lock off the air supply to the assembly .
num .
after lock off the assembly must sustain num psi internal pressure for five minutes with no more than num psi reduction in pressure .
num vacuum test for internal and external pt systems with flexible filler in addition to the other testing specified in this section test internal pt systems with flexible filler and all external pt as follows num .
prepare a system assembly consisting of at least one of each component and connection type required to install a tendon from anchorage cap to anchorage cap using between num and num feet of duct .
num .
condition the assembly by maintaining a num vacuum in it for num hour .
num .
after conditioning lock off the air supply to the assembly .
num .
after lock off the assembly must sustain a num vacuum for num minutes with no more than a num loss of vacuum .
num standard tendon sizes develop and test pt systems for both internal and external applications that can accommodate the following department standard tendon sizes that are used for designing and detailing num .
standard strand tendon sizes num num num num num num and num strand tendons each using num inch diameter strand .
systems using alternate anchorage sizes or num inch diameter strand that provide equivalent force to these standard sizes may be submitted for approval .
num .
standard bar tendon diameters num num num num num and num inch diameter bars .
num system modifications contact the sdo for direction before attempting to change preapproved pt system materials or components .
repeat all appropriate material component and entire system tests if any component of a preapproved pt system is modified or replaced excluding local zone reinforcement .
submit an updated application to the sdo containing test reports and revised system drawings for proposed modified systems .
num component samples furnish all required material samples to laboratories for testing and to the department as requested at no cost to the department .
num calculations drawings and certification show fully detailed drawings of all component configurations connections anchorages inlets outlets drains high point inspection port details anchorage inspection details permanent anchorage caps application limits of the pt system and installation procedures of components for approval and posting on the sdos website for approved posttensioning systems .
submit details of typical local zone reinforcement in system drawings signed and sealed by a specialty engineer .
indicate that all pt system components are stamped with the following num .
manufacturers name num .
trademark model number num return to table of contents num .
size corresponding to catalog description on pt system drawings .
submit an application package cover letter signed by an officer of the pt system vendor certifying that the submitted pt system as a whole and all of its individual components meet or exceed all material and componentsystem requirements of this section as demonstrated by the submittal .
indicate in this certification that all testing required by this section was performed by a certified independent laboratory or laboratories as defined in num and that all tests were performed to applicable astm and fib specifications .
submit proof of current laboratory accreditation specifically indicating applicable accreditation categories related to pt systems .
submit all material and component certifications required throughout this section .
num return to table of contents section num structural steel and miscellaneous metal items other than aluminum num structural steel .
num structural steel materials unless otherwise specified in the contract documents provide structural steel for bolted or welded construction in accordance with structural steel for bridges astm anum .
if the grade is not shown elsewhere in the contract documents provide the grade as directed by the engineer .
all grades as specified in the contract documents are to conform to astm anum as shown in table num below table num structural steel materials astm anum grade product form yield strength ksi tensile strength ksi num p s b num min num num p s b num min num min numw p s b num min num min nums s num num min hps numw p s b num min num min hps numw p b num min num hpsnumw num in or less p b num min num hpsnumw over num in p b num min num p plates s structural shapes b bars num testing for structural steel subjected to tensile stress used for main load carrying members or components as defined in section num meet the astm anum impact test requirements for nonfracture and fracture critical tension components as specified in the contract documents .
meet the requirements for zone num minimum service temperature numf .
if not specified elsewhere in the contract documents provide structural steel in accordance with astm anum requirements for nonfracture and fracture critical tension components as directed by the engineer .
num steel castings .
num carbon steel castings provide carbon steel castings that conform to the requirements of astm anum .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents all castings are to be grade num or grade num .
num corrosion resistant steel castings provide corrosion resistant ironchromium or ironchromiumnickel castings that conform to the requirements of astm anum .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents all castings are to be grade ca numm .
num steel forgings .
provide steel forgings from which pins rollers trunnions shafts gears or other forged parts are fabricated that conform to astm anum .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents all forgings are to be class c d f or g. num return to table of contents num iron castings .
num gray iron castings provide gray iron castings that conform to the requirements of astm anum .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents provide gratings manhole covers and frames to class numb and machinery parts to class num .
for manholes constructed within the area of vehicular traffic the frames and gratings shall be machine ground so the irregularity of contact will be minimized and the grates will be rattle proof .
num ductile iron castings provide ductile iron castings that conform to the requirements of astm anum .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents provide castings to grade num .
in addition to the specified test coupons test specimens from parts integral with the castings such as risers are to be tested for castings with a mass more than num pounds to determine that the required quality is obtained in the castings in the finished condition .
num malleable iron castings provide malleable iron castings that conform to the requirements of astm anum .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents provide castings to grade num .
num bolts nuts and washers not designated as highstrength .
provide bolts that conform to the requirements of astm anum or astm anum .
provide nuts that conform to the requirements of astm anum and washers that conform to astm fnum unless specified as ordinary rough or machine bolts as approved by the engineer .
washers provided to astm fnum and nuts to astm anum may be used with the engineers approval .
use double nuts when ordinary rough or machine bolts are specified in the contract documents .
num highstrength bolts nuts washers and directtensionindicator dti devices .
use high strength bolts nuts washers and dti devices meeting the following requirements bolts grade anum or grade anum heavy hex .
only use grade anum high strength bolts with the approval of the engineer .
nuts astm anum heavy hex .
select nuts in accordance with astm fnum table num .
if grade c d or cnum nuts are selected provide with a minimum rockwell hardness of num hrb or a minimum brinell hardness of num hb .
use nuts meeting the requirements of astm anum only when approved by the engineer .
washers astm fnum and astm fnum table num .
use washers meeting the requirements of astm fnum only when approved by the engineer .
identifying marks in accordance with astm fnum table num and astm anum .
dti devices meeting the requirements of astm fnum .
furnish plain dti devices for use with plain bolts if the finish coat of paint is applied after installation and testing of the dti device and will cover the remaining gap .
otherwise coat the dti device in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
when the contract documents call for uncoated weathering steel in any component of the connected part provide type num bolts and washers and nuts with weathering characteristics .
if one side of the assembly is coated and the other exposed weathering steel coat the fastener assembly on the coated side similarly such as the case for weathering steel tub girders coated on the inside only .
num return to table of contents ensure that fastener assemblies are properly lubricated in accordance with astm anum supplementary requirements snum and snum .
num anchor rods and bridge bearing materials .
provide anchor rods washers masonry plates bearings and other miscellaneous metal components that conform to the following requirements provide anchor rods that conform to the requirements of astm fnum unless the engineer approves the use of anchor rods meeting the requirements of astm anum with nuts that meet the requirements of astm anum hex nuts heavy and with a finish consistent with the rod .
nuts meeting the requirements of astm anum may be used only with the engineers approval .
use washers meeting the requirements of astm fnum with a finish consistent with the rod .
washers meeting the requirements of astm anum may be used only with the engineers approval .
num miscellaneous metal items .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents provide the following specific materials .
num pipe railings provide steel pipe conforming to the requirements of astm anum for standard weight pipe .
num steel sheet piling provide steel sheet piles conforming to the requirements of astm anum astm anum or astm anum .
num steel sign supports and accessories provide steel members for sign supports that meet the material requirements specified in the contract documents .
num structural tubing num materials provide steel structural tubing as one of the following coldformed welded or seamless conforming to the requirements of astm anum grade b or c coated in accordance with the contract documents hotformed welded or seamless tubing conforming to the requirements of astm anum coated in accordance with the contract documents astm anum when weathering characteristics are required or as indicated elsewhere in the contract documents .
num testing structural steel tubing subjected to tensile stresses used in main load carrying members or components as defined in section num shall meet the impact test requirements of astm anum for nonfracture and fracture critical tension components for zone num .
minimum average energy shall be num ftlbf at numf nonfracture critical or num ftlbf at numf fracture critical .
num steel for concrete reinforcement requirements for concrete reinforcement are contained in section num .
num steel guardrail requirements for steel guardrail are contained in section num .
num field splice filler materials provide field splice filler materials in accordance with the contract documents .
if unspecified and less than num inches thick provide astm anum or astm anum .
num steel pipe piling provide seamless or longitudinal or helical welded pipe conforming to the requirements of api numl grade lnum xnum or higher or astm anum grade num .
provide longitudinal or helical welded pipe with only complete joint penetration cjp welds conforming to the requirements of api numl or aws dnum .
num return to table of contents num galvanizing .
num plates structural shapes bars and strip when galvanizing is specified in the contract documents for ferrous metal products other than fasteners and hardware items provide galvanizing in accordance with the requirements of astm anum specifications for zinc hotdip galvanized coatings on iron and steel products .
num fasteners and hardware when zinc coating is required in the contract documents fasteners and hardware items shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm anum specification for zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware except for high strength fasteners as noted below num .
do not galvanize grade anum bolts .
num .
mechanically galvanize grade anum type num bolts in accordance with astm bnum class num .
num .
for all anchor rods and hardware treat the coated rods nuts and washers with chromate after coating in a water solution containing num sodium dichromate num ouncesnum gallons .
coat the bolt nut and washer used in the fastener assembly by the same zinc process and submit a test report on the zinc coating thickness .
num .
for anchor rods fabricated from material having a yield strength greater than num psi apply an electroplated zinc coating sc num type ii in accordance with astm bnum .
num qualifications of galvanizer use galvanizers listed on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion shall meet the requirements of section num .
num certifications and verification .
num general supply a certified mill analysis to the engineer for all metal materials to be used in fabrication including but not limited to plates bars shapes and fasteners in accordance with their respective astm or aashto specification .
show or attach the full and complete designation of the project for which the materials are intended for use and specifically crossidentify each furnished piece to the order material .
material meeting equivalent aashto and astm specifications may be supplied under either specification .
provide materials in accordance with the latest edition of the specifications shown below as approved by the engineer .
num conformance the certified mill analysis will indicate that the material is in conformance with the applicable material specification and will include actual values from required tests .
check the certified mill analysis against the appropriate specification to ensure that materials conform to contract documents .
num certified mill analysis source the certified mill analysis must originate from the producer of the material and not from a supplier .
material from stock may only be accepted if it can be positively identified and the appropriate documentation is submitted .
num verification samples provide verification samples in accordance with section num .
num heat treatments .
provide procedures and perform heat treatments in accordance with section num .
num return to table of contents section num general provisions for aluminum items including welding num surface appearance and protection .
the exterior surfaces of aluminum castings pipes tubes formed sheets and structural shapes shall when placed in the work have a clean uniform silvery appearance free of dark streaks and discoloration .
aluminum members including specifically aluminum light poles and signs poles which are of such size or shape that the surfaces might be marred during transit and prior to their being installed shall be appropriately and adequately protected against such damage by wrapping with paper or by other effective means .
numcertification and mill analysis .
for aluminum materials used for pipe tube sheet and other structural shapes for structures other than drainage the fabricator must maintain a certified mill analysis of the alloys for three years following fabrication .
num welding aluminum sign structures .
welding and weld details shall be in accordance with section num of the aashto lrfd specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals ansi and aws dnum structural welding code aluminum including the requirements for qualifications of procedures and welders as specified therein .
num .
alloys the aluminum alloys to welded under these specifications may be any of the following alloys wrought nonheattreatable alloys alloy num alloy alclad num alloy num alloy num alloy num alloy num wrought heattreatable alloys alloy num alloy num cast heattreated alloy alloy sgnuma astm designation num .
filler metals the filler metals to be used with particular base metals shall be as shown in the table below except that other filler metals may be used if approved by the engineer .
base metal filler metal num to num ernum alclad num to alclad num ernum num to num ernum num to num ernum num return to table of contents base metal filler metal num to num ernum num to num ernum num to num ernum num to num ernum sgnuma to num ernum sgnuma to num ernum ernum ernum and ernum may be used interchangeably for these base metals .
num welding aluminum structures other than sign structures .
the welding of aluminum structures other than sign structures such as aluminum bridge and railing structures and their aluminum components shall be in accordance with ansi and aws dnum structures welding codealuminum including the requirements for qualifications of procedures and welders as specified therein .
num return to table of contents section num components for guardrail num description .
this section covers the material and fabrication requirements for guardrail components .
num materials .
all timber and steel components supplied under this specification shall be from producers currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the departments production facility listing must meet the requirements of section num .
num timber timber products must have a minimum stress grade of num psi and meet the material requirements of section num .
timber is to be dressed on four sides snums and treated in accordance with the post requirements in section num .
num steel steel guardrail materials must meet the component fabrication requirements in num .
where specified components must be welded in accordance with the american welding society structural welding code ansiaws dnum using material conforming to enumxx .
nondestructive testing of welds is not required .
num fabrication .
num posts posts shall not vary more than num inch from the specified length shown in the standard plans .
num timber posts posts shall be shaped and drilled prior to wood treatment .
num steel posts posts must conform to the requirements of astm anum astm anum or astm anum .
posts must be fabricated from rolled sections with crosssections defined in the american institute of steel construction aisc manual of steel construction .
posts must be drilled or punched prior to galvanizing in accordance with astm anum .
num special steel posts posts and plate materials must meet the requirements of astm anum and astm anum .
posts and plates must be drilled punched and welded prior to galvanizing in accordance with astm anum .
num offset blocks offset blocks must not vary more than num inch from the specified dimensions in the standard plans .
num steel offset blocks blocks must meet the requirements for steel posts .
num timber offset blocks blocks must meet the requirements for timber posts .
num composite offset blocks composite offset blocks must be listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product for approval must submit an application in accordance with section num and include the following num .
test reports from an independent laboratory showing the product meets all crash test requirements of mash .
num .
test reports from an independent laboratory showing the composite material meets the following physical requirements composite block test method requirement durometer hardness astm dnum shore d minimum num num return to table of contents composite block test method requirement durometer hardness after uv exposure astm dnum num points change from initial after exposure per astm dnum num hours cycle c type uvbnum lamps num steel panels wbeam thriebeam thriebeam transitions terminal connectors end shoes end units and all other compatible panels must meet the requirements of aashto mnum for beams and rails for either class shown .
type ii zinc coating will be required on all panels .
num bolts hex and button head bolts including nuts washers and other accessories must meet the material requirements of aashto mnum except bolts must be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
num barrier delineators barrier delineators must meet the requirements of sections num and num and be listed on the apl .
num end delineators retroreflective sheeting is to be yellow type iv or greater in accordance with section num and listed on the apl .
num steel plates steel plates must meet the requirements of astm anum .
drill holes prior to galvanizing in accordance with astm anum .
num pipe rail pipe is to be schedule num in accordance with astm anum and if applicable welded prior to galvanizing .
num rub rail rail materials must meet the requirements of num .
num steel tube foundations steel tube foundations must meet the requirements of astm anum grade b .
after all punching drilling stamping and welding is complete steel tube foundations are to be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
brackets and fixtures must meet the requirements of astm anum .
foundations must be drilled or punched prior to galvanizing in accordance with astm anum .
num approach terminal assemblies approach terminals must be listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product for approval must submit num .
a completed application in accordance with section num including product drawings meeting the dimensions of standard plans index num and that is signed and sealed by a registered florida p.e .
num .
independent test reports indicating that the product meets all crash test requirements of mash .
num return to table of contents pavement markings coatings and recycled material miscellaneous section num materials for raised pavement markers and bituminous adhesive num raised pavement markers rpms .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product must submit an application in accordance with section num along with performance test reports from the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep showing that the product meets the requirements of this section .
the rpm description shall be in order of type color and retroreflective surface condition in accordance with astm dnum and the following chart .
rpm class class description usage expected normal service astm surface designation b retroreflective temporarypermanent long life h hard abrasion resistant lens d retroreflective temporary one month monodirectional yellow bidirectional yellow num performance requirements .
num class b rpms the rpms shall meet the performance requirements specified in astm dnum section num for luminous intensity flexural strength compressive strength resistance to cracking and thermal cycling as modified herein .
num composition the rpm shall consist of materials conforming to astm dnum .
num physical requirements the physical size of the rpm shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
laboratory and field samples for rpms and bituminous adhesives shall meet the requirements of astm dnum and include the following requirements the minimum area of each retroreflective face shall be num square inches .
the minimum base size shall be num square inches .
num abrasion resistant meet the coefficient of luminous intensity requirements of astm dnum after abrasion .
num inservice minimum retroreflective intensity class b retroreflective pavement markers shall retain a minimum coefficient of luminous intensity for num months of not less than num of the values shown in table num of astm dnum and a minimum luminous intensity of num cdfc at the end of two years .
num class d rpms .
num return to table of contents num body requirements provide rpms made of nonferrous material .
rpm dimensions are based on an x and y axis where the y dimension is parallel to the centerline and the x axis is num to the y axis .
the base must be approximately num inches along the x axis and approximately num inch along the y axis .
the vertical wall must be a minimum of num inches long with a minimum height of num inches and a maximum height of num inches with retroreflective sheeting affixed to the upper portion of the vertical wall .
the retroreflective sheeting must be a minimum of num inch in width and extend the full length of the vertical wall .
num color requirements the color of the body and the retroreflective strips must be yellow .
num flexibility and deformation resistance the vertical wall of the tabs must be flexible to bend under normal traffic and resistant to permanent deformation for a minimum of one month .
num adhesion provide tabs that adhere to the pavement such that no tab dislodges .
num retroreflective sheeting provide retroreflective sheeting of type iv or greater and meet the requirements of section num .
num removability ensure the entire rpm is removable without damaging the asphalt surface .
num packaging and labeling .
shipment shall be made in containers which are acceptable to common carriers and packaged in a manner which ensures delivery in perfect condition .
each package shall be clearly marked with the apl number name of the manufacturer type color quantity enclosed and date of manufacture .
show the designation of the class b marker in accordance with astm dnum .
num bituminous adhesive for class b raised pavement markers .
num general bituminous adhesive as recommended by the rpm manufacturer shall be used for bonding the rpm to the pavement .
num specific requirements for bituminous adhesives the bituminous adhesive shall meet the properties of adhesives per astm dnum section anum including fillerfree and filler alone properties .
num performance requirements the performance of the adhesive shall be determined in accordance with the test methods listed in astm dnum .
num product acceptance on the project .
acceptance will be made in accordance with the requirements of sections num and num .
num return to table of contents section num pavement marking materials num general requirements .
num packaging and labeling the name and address of the manufacturer shall be shown on the label .
the label must also show the color date of manufacturer lot number and apl number .
the label shall warn the user of any special handling or precautions of the material as recommended by the manufacturer .
any packaging and labeling not so marked will not be accepted .
num storage all materials must have a container storage life of one year from date of manufacture .
any pavement marking materials which although inspected and approved at the point of manufacture hardens or livers in the containers will be rejected even though it conforms to these specifications in all other respects .
num mixing all paints shall be delivered to the project completely mixed and ready to be used without additional oil or thinner .
thinners shall not be used under any circumstances .
num approved product list apl all pavement marking materials shall be one of the products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num and the infrared identification curve num to num m for the vehicle component .
the department will test all pavement marking materials in accordance with fmnum part b .
a notation of the number of coats and the thickness of each coat at which the product passes testing may be placed on the apl .
when listed this will be the minimum criteria for application of the pavement marking material .
num .
num samples field samples will be obtained in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule .
num .
num color materials other than white and yellow shall meet the color requirements as identified in num cfr num table num appendix to part num subpart f. white colored materials will only be required to meet the initial daytime chromaticity requirements .
yellow materials for pavement markings shall meet the following performance requirements .
the initial daytime chromaticity for yellow materials shall fall within the box created by the following coordinates initial daytime chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x num num num num y num num num num the nighttime chromaticity for yellow materials shall fall within the box created by the following coordinates nighttime chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x num num num num y num num num num num return to table of contents num additional requirements pavement marking materials shall be characterized as nonhazardous as defined by resource conservation and recovery act rcra num cfr num .
provide supporting independent analytical data or product material safety data sheets sds identifying any components listed in table num of num cfr num .
additionally retroreflective elements shall contain no more that num ppm by weight of lead or arsenic when tested in accordance with the environmental protection agency epa testing methods num numb and numc .
num glass spheres .
num general requirements glass spheres shall be of a composition designed to be highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering for the production of a reflective surface without altering day visibility of the marking .
the general requirements of num apply to glass spheres .
num specific properties the large type num or larger glass spheres used for drop on beads shall have an adhesion coating .
type num glass spheres used for drop on beads shall have a dual coating .
beads used in the intermix of materials are not required to be coated .
the following physical requirements apply property test method specification roundness astm dnum min num by weight roundness astm dnum min num by weight refractive index becke line method numc num minimum refractive index becke line method numc num minimum type num num num and num beads high index beads sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve astm dnum grading designation type num aashto type num fp num type num fp num type num fp num high index no .
num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num no .
num num num num return to table of contents num sampling a random num pound sample of glass spheres shall be obtained for each num pound shipped .
send each num pound sample to the state materials office .
num containers the spheres shall be furnished in new num pound moistureproof bags or num pound triwall boxes .
all containers shall meet interstate commerce commission requirements for strength and type .
num standard paint .
num general standard paints shall include water reducible products that are single packaged and ready mixed .
the paint shall have the capability of being cleaned and flushed from the pavement marking machines using regular tap water and any required rust inhibitors .
the manufacturer shall have the option of formulating the paint according to his own specifications .
however the requirements delineated in this specification and section num shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the paint shall be free from all skins dirt and foreign objects .
num composition component test method criteria total solids by weight astm dnum minimum num pigments by weight astm dnum minimum num vehicle solids of vehicle minimum num tionum type ii rutile white paint only astm dnum minimum num lbgal volatile organic content voc astm dnum maximum num gl vehicle solids of vehicle total solids pigment num pigment num physical requirements test laboratory samples in accordance with astm enum and enum and also meet the following criteria property test method minimum maximum density astm dnum num num lbgal viscosity at numf astm dnum num ku num ku fineness of grind astm dnum numhs dry opacity at num mils wft astm dnum num bleed ratio astm dnum num flexibility astm dnum method b pass abrasion resistance astm dnum pass num set to bear traffic time the paint shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes .
num abrasion resistance test four samples using a taber abrader .
the paint shall be applied to specimen plates using a drawdown blade having a clearance of num mils .
clean with a soft brush and weigh each sample .
abrade samples for num cycles with a combined load of num g arm plus auxiliary weight on each arm and csnum wheels .
clean the num return to table of contents samples with a soft brush and weigh again .
the average weight loss for the four plates shall not exceed num mg per plate .
num retroreflectivity the white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and num mcdlxmnum respectively .
the retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the six month period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num application properties meet the requirements of section num for application properties .
num packaging and labeling the paint shall be placed in num gallon openend steel drums with a reusable multiseal sponge gasket or num gallon intermediate bulk container ibc .
no more than num gallons of paint shall be placed in any drum or num gallons in any ibc to allow for expansion during transport and storage .
clearly mark the containers with the weight in pounds per gallon the volume of materials in units of gallons .
num durable paint .
num general durable paints shall include water reducible products that are single packaged and ready mixed .
the paint shall have the capability of being cleaned and flushed from the pavement marking machines using regular tap water and any required rust inhibitors .
the manufacturer shall have the option of formulating the material according to his own specifications .
however the requirements delineated in this specification and section num shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the paint shall be free from all skins dirt and foreign objects .
the manufacturer shall provide the recommended thickness prior to installation .
num composition component test method criteria total solids by weight astm dnum num minimum pigments by weight astm dnum num minimum vehicle solids on vehicle num minimum tionum type ii rutile white paint only astm dnum num lbgal minimum volatile organic content voc astm dnum num gl maximum vehicle solids of vehicle total solids pigment num pigment vehicle solids shall be num acrylic emulsion polymer .
num physical requirements test laboratory samples in accordance with astm enum and enum and also meet the following criteria num return to table of contents property test method minimum maximum density astm dnum num num lbgal na viscosity at numf astm dnum num ku num ku fineness of grind astm dnum numhs dry opacity at num mils wft astm dnum num bleed ratio astm dnum num flexibility astm dnum method b pass abrasion resistance astm dnum pass num set to bear traffic time the paint shall set to bear traffic in not more than ten minutes .
num abrasion resistance test four samples using a taber abrader .
the paint shall be applied to specimen plates using a drawdown blade having a clearance of num mils .
air dry each sample until fully cured based on the manufacturers product recommendation .
clean with a soft brush and weigh each sample .
abrade samples for num cycles with a combined load of num g arm plus auxiliary weight on each arm and csnum wheels .
clean the samples with a soft brush and weigh again .
the average weight loss for the four plates shall not exceed num mg per plate .
num retroreflectivity the white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and num mcdlxmnum respectively .
the retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the num month period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num application properties application properties shall meet the requirements of section num .
num packaging and labeling the paint shall be placed in num gallon openend steel drums with a reusable multiseal sponge gasket or num gallon intermediate bulk container ibc .
no more than num gallons of paint shall be placed in any drum or num gallons in any ibc to allow for expansion during transport and storage .
clearly mark the containers with the weight in pounds per gallon the volume of materials in units of gallons .
num standard thermoplastic material .
num general the manufacturer shall utilize alkyd based materials only and shall have the option of formulating the material according to his own specifications .
however the requirements delineated in this specification and section num shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the pigment glass spheres and filler shall be well dispersed in the resin .
num composition num return to table of contents component test method white yellow binder num minimum num minimum tionum type ii rutile astm dnum num minimum glass spheres aashto tnum num minimum num minimum yellow pigment minimum per manufacturer calcium carbonate and inert filler num mesh sieve num maximum num maximum percentages are by weight .
the alkydmaleic binder must consist of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one synthetic resin must be solid at room temperature and high boiling point plasticizers .
at least onehalf of the binder composition must be num maleicmodified glycerol of rosin and be no less than num by weight of the entire material formulation .
num glass spheres the glass spheres in the intermix shall consist of num type num and num type num and meeting the requirements of this section .
num sharp silica sand sharp silica sand used for bicycle markings and pedestrian crosswalk lines shall meet the following gradation requirements sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve astm dnum num num num num to num num physical requirements laboratory samples shall be tested in accordance with astm dnum and shall meet the following criteria property test method minimum maximum water absorption astm dnum num softening point astm dnum numf low temperature stress resistance aashto tnum pass specific gravity water displacement num num indentation resistance astm dnum type a durometer num num impact resistance astm dnum method a num nm flash point astm dnum numf the durometer and panel shall be at numf with a num g load applied .
instrument measurement shall be taken after num seconds .
num set to bear traffic time the thermoplastic shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes .
num retroreflectivity the white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively .
the retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the three year apl testing period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num return to table of contents num application properties application properties shall meet the requirements of section num .
num packing and labeling the thermoplastic material shall be packaged in suitable biodegradable or thermodegradable containers which will not adhere to the product during shipment and storage .
the container of thermoplastic material shall weigh approximately num pounds .
the label shall also warn the user that the material shall be heated in the range as recommended by the manufacturer .
num preformed thermoplastic material .
num general the manufacturer shall have the option of formulating the material according to his own specifications .
however the requirements delineated in this specification and section num shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the pigment glass spheres and filler shall be well dispersed in the resin .
num composition the preformed thermoplastic shall consist of high quality materials pigments and glass spheres or other reflective material uniformly distributed throughout their crosssectional area with a reflective layer of spheres or other reflective material embedded in the top surface .
num glass spheres material shall contain no less than num glass spheres by weight .
num color materials shall meet the performance requirements specified in num and the following additional requirements .
the initial luminance factor cap y shall not be less than num .
num physical requirements laboratory samples shall be tested in accordance with astm dnum and shall meet the following criteria property test method minimum maximum softening point astm dnum numf low temperature stress resistance aashto tnum pass indentation resistance astm dnum type a durometer num num impact resistance astm dnum method a num nm the durometer and panel shall be at numf with a num g load applied .
instrument measurement shall be taken after num seconds .
the test specimen for astm dnum shall be num in .
x num in .
x num in .
and shall not be notched .
num retroreflectivity the white pavement markings other than crosswalks and bicycle markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum .
crosswalks and bicycle markings shall attain initial retroreflectivity of not less than num mcdlxmnum .
black pavement markings shall have a retroreflectance of less than num mcdlx mnum .
the retroreflectance of the white pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num skid resistance the surface of the pavement markings shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of num bpn british pendulum number when tested according to astm enum .
bicycle markings and pedestrian crosswalks shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of num bpn .
num application properties application properties shall meet the requirements of section num .
num return to table of contents num packing and labeling the thermoplastic material shall be packaged in suitable biodegradable or thermodegradable containers which will not adhere to the product during shipment and storage .
clearly mark each container with the thickness of the preformed material in units of inches .
num permanent tape materials .
num general the materials for permanent tape pavement markings shall consist of white or yellow weatherresistant reflective film as specified herein .
the pigment glass spheres and filler shall be well dispersed in the resin .
however the requirements delineated in this specification and section num shall apply .
num composition permanent tape pavement markings shall consist of highquality plastic materials pigments and glass spheres uniformly distributed throughout their cross sectional area with a reflective layer of spheres embedded in the top surface .
num skid resistance the surface of the pavement markings shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of num bpn when tested according to astm enum .
bicycle markings and pedestrian crosswalks shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of num bpn .
num thickness the apl will list the specified thickness of each approved product .
num durability and wear resistance the film shall be weather resistant and through normal wear shall show no significant tearing rollback or other signs of poor adhesion .
num conformability and resealing the pavement markings shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults under traffic at pavement temperatures recommended by the manufacturer .
the film shall be capable of use for patching worn areas of the same types of film in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num tensile strength the pavement markings shall have a minimum tensile strength of num psi when tested according to astm dnum .
a rectangular test specimen num inches by num inch by num inches minimum thickness shall be tested at a temperature range of num to numf using a jaw speed of num inchmin .
num pigmentation the pigment shall be selected and blended to provide a material which is white or yellow conforming to standard highway colors through the expected life of the pavement markings .
test laboratory samples in accordance with astm enum and enum .
num glass spheres the pavement markings shall have glass retention qualities such that when at room temperature a num inches by num inches specimen is bent over a num inch diameter mandrel axis a microscopic examination of the area on the mandrel shall show no more than num of the spheres with entrapment by the material of less than num .
the bead adhesion shall be such that spheres are not easily removed when the film surface is scratched firmly with a thumbnail .
num retroreflectivity the materials shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum for white markings and not less than num mcdlxmnum for yellow markings .
the pavement markings shall retain a minimum retroreflectance for two years of not less than num mcdlxmnum for white markings and not less than num mcdlxmnum for yellow markings .
the retroreflectance of the white yellow and contrast pavement markings at the end of the five year apl testing period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num packaging and labeling ship all permanent tape materials in containers which will not adhere to the product during shipment and storage .
clearly mark each container with the thickness of the preformed material in units of inches .
num return to table of contents num two reactive component material .
num general two reactive component materials intended for use under this specification shall include but not be limited to epoxies polyesters and urethanes .
the manufacturer shall have the option of formulating the material according to his own specifications .
however the criteria outlined in this specification and section num shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the material shall be free from all skins dirt and foreign objects .
num composition component test method criteria tionum type ii rutile white material only astm dnum minimum num by weight volatile organic content voc astm dnum maximum num gl num physical requirements test laboratory samples in accordance with astm and also meet the following criteria property test method minimum maximum adhesion to concrete astm dnum astm dnum or aci num concrete failure hardness astm dnum type d num abrasion resistance astm dnum pass num set to bear traffic time the material shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes .
num abrasion resistance test four samples using a taber abrader .
the material shall be applied to specimen plates using a drawdown blade having a clearance of num mils .
clean with a soft brush and weigh each sample .
abrade samples for num cycles with a combined load of num g arm plus auxiliary weight on each arm and csnum wheels .
clean the samples with a soft brush and weigh again .
the average weight loss for the four plates shall not exceed num mg per plate .
num retroreflectivity the white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively .
the retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num application properties application properties shall meet the requirements of section num .
num packaging and labeling the two reactive component material shall be placed in num gallon openend steel drums with a reusable multiseal sponge gasket or num gallon intermediate bulk container ibc .
no more than num gallons of material shall be placed in any drum or num gallons in any ibc to allow for expansion during transport and storage .
clearly mark the containers with the volume of materials in units of gallons and the product name .
num profiled thermoplastic material .
num general the manufacturer shall utilize alkyd based materials only and shall have the option of formulating the material according to his own specifications .
however the num return to table of contents requirements delineated in this specification shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
the pigment reflective elements and filler shall be well dispersed in the resin .
num composition component test method white yellow binder num minimum num minimum tionum type ii rutile astm dnum num minimum reflective elements aashto tnum minimum per manufacturer minimum per manufacturer yellow pigment minimum per manufacturer calcium carbonate and inert filler num mesh sieve minimum per manufacturer minimum per manufacturer note percentages are by weight .
the alkydmaleic binder must consist of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one synthetic resin must be solid at room temperature and high boiling point plasticizers .
at least onehalf of the binder composition must be num maleicmodified glycerol of rosin and be no less than num by weight of the entire material formulation .
num retroreflective elements the reflective elements in the intermix shall be determined by the manufacturer and identified for the apl .
num physical requirements laboratory samples shall be tested in accordance with astm dnum and shall meet the following criteria property test method minimum maximum water absorption astm dnum num softening point astm dnum numf low temperature stress resistance aashto tnum pass specific gravity water displacement num num indentation resistance astm dnum type a durometer num impact resistance astm dnum method a num nm flash point astm dnum numf the durometer and panel shall be at numf with a num g load applied .
instrument measurement shall be taken after num seconds .
num set to bear traffic time when applied at the temperatures and thickness specified by section num the baseline material shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes .
the bumps shall set to bear traffic in not more than num minutes at ambient air temperatures of numf or less and in not more than num minutes for ambient air temperatures exceeding numf .
num retroreflectivity the white and yellow pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum and not less than num mcdlxmnum respectively .
the retroreflectance of the white and yellow pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num return to table of contents num durability durability shall include flattening of the profile or raised portions of the line .
the flattening of the profile or raised portion of the line shall not exceed num at the end of the three year period .
num application properties application properties shall meet the requirements of section num .
num packing and labeling the thermoplastic material shall be packaged in suitable biodegradable or thermodegradable containers which will not adhere to the product during shipment and storage .
the container of thermoplastic material shall weigh approximately num pounds .
the label shall warn the user that the material shall be heated in the range as recommended by the manufacturer .
num high friction thermoplastic material .
num general the manufacturer shall utilize alkyd based materials only and have the option of formulating the material according to his own specifications .
however the requirements of this specification shall apply regardless of the formulation used .
the pigment reflective elements and filler shall be well dispersed in the resin .
num composition component test method white binder num minimum tionum type rutile astm dnum num minimum reflective elements aashto tnum num minimum per manufacturer skid resistant elements num minimum per manufacturer note percentages are by weight .
the alkydmaleic binder shall consist of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one synthetic resin must be solid at room temperature and high boiling point plasticizers .
at least onehalf of the binder composition must be num maleicmodified glycerol of rosin and be no less than num by weight of the entire material formulation .
num retroreflective elements the reflective elements in the intermix shall be determined by the manufacturer and identified on the apl .
num physical requirements laboratory samples shall be tested in accordance with astm dnum and shall meet the following criteria property test method minimum maximum softening point astm dnum numf hardness of skid resistance elements mohs scale num indentation resistance astm dnum type a durometer num num impact resistance astm dnum method a num nm flash point astm dnum numf the durometer and panel shall be at numf with a num g load applied .
instrument measurement shall be taken after num seconds .
num set to bear traffic time when applied at the temperatures and thicknesses specified by section num the material shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes .
num return to table of contents num retroreflectivity the white pavement markings shall attain an initial retroreflectance of not less than num mcdlxmnum .
the retroreflectance of the white pavement markings at the end of the three year period shall not be less than num mcdlxmnum .
num skid resistance the surface of the pavement markings shall provide a minimum initial skid resistance value of num bpn when tested in accordance to astm enum .
num application properties application properties shall meet the requirements of section num .
num packaging and labeling the thermoplastic material shall be packaged in suitable biodegradable or thermodegradable containers which will not adhere to the product during shipment and storage .
the container of thermoplastic material shall weigh approximately num pounds .
the label shall warn the user that the material is to be heated in the range as recommended by the manufacturer .
num return to table of contents section num recycled plastic products num description .
recycled plastic products shall include certified test reports from an approved independent test laboratory that shows the material meets all specifications herein and the manufacturer shall certify the following num .
the source of the recycled plastic waste including the state fl ga etc .
from which the recycled plastic was obtained and type of waste consumer or industrial .
num .
the total percent of recycled plastic in the final product .
num definitions .
num recycled plastic those plastics composed of postconsumer material or recovered industrial material only or both that may or may not have been subjected to additional processing steps designed to afford products such as regrind or reprocessed or reconstituted plastics .
num postconsumer materials those products generated by a business or consumer that have served their intended end use and that have since been separated or diverted from solid waste for the purpose of collection recycling and redisposition .
num recovered material materials and byproducts that have been recovered or diverted from solid waste but not including those materials and byproducts generated from and commonly used within an original manufacturing process .
num materials .
the materials used for recycled plastic products shall consist of a minimum of num by weight of recycled plastic .
the products shall exhibit good workmanship and shall be free of burns discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects which affect appearance or serviceability .
only chemicals including fillers and colorants designed to inhibit photo degradation biologicalbiochemical decomposition insect infestation or burning will be permitted to enhance durability .
the use of sufficient additives to inhibit photo degradation over the lifetime of the product is required .
num sampling .
one additional product per num or a minimum of one per order shall be included in the order for department testing .
num return to table of contents section num fiber reinforced polymer frp composite structural shapes num description .
this section covers material and fabrication requirements for fiber reinforced polymer frp composite structural shapes .
num product acceptance .
obtain frp composites from a producer that is currently on the departments production facility listing .
producers seeking inclusion on the list shall meet the requirements of section num .
num thermoset pultruded structural shapes .
thermoset pultruded structural shapes must meet the requirements in the materials section of the asce prestandard for load resistance factor design lrfd of pultruded fiber reinforced polymer frp structures .
manufactured components shall be inspected according to astm dnum for dimensional tolerances and astm dnum for visual defects .
pultruded profiles located on bridge and overhead sign structures shall meet a flame spread index of class b in accordance with astm enum and meet the requirements of ulnum with a rating of vnum .
num vacuum infusion processed vip structural shapes num materials num fibers use commercial grade glass fibers that conform to astm dnum .
glass fibers may be in any form such as rovings woven fabrics braided fabrics stitched fabrics continuous fiber mats continuous strand mats continuous filament mats cfm and chopped strand mats csm of any size or weight .
each structural element shall contain a minimum of num by weight of glass fibers oriented in a minimum of two directions in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
tensile strength of glass fiber strands yarns and rovings shall not be less than num ksi in accordance with astm dnum determined by a tension test in accordance with astm dnum .
num resin use a commercial grade thermoset resin for fabricating shapes .
num additives additives such as fillers promoters accelerators inhibitors uv agents and pigments used in the processing or curing shall be compatible with the fiber and resin .
num physical and mechanical properties the physical properties of vip frp products shall conform to the requirements of table num .
the characteristic mechanical properties of vip frp composite structural members determined in accordance with astm dnum shall equal or exceed the minimum requirements in table num for shapes and table num for plates .
table num required physical properties vip frp num return to table of contents table num required physical properties vip frp physical property requirement test method barcol hardness num astm dnum glass transition temperature num f astm dnum coefficient of thermal expansion num x num inin f longitudinal astm dnum moisture equilibrium content num astm dnum section num table num required mechanical properties vip frp shapes property minimum requirement test method longitudinal tensile strength num psi astm dnum transverse tensile strength num psi longitudinal tensile modulus num x num psi transverse tensile modulus num x num psi longitudinal compressive strength num psi astm dnum longitudinal compressive modulus num x num psi transverse compressive modulus num x num psi inplane shear strength num psi astm dnum inplane shear modulus num x num psi astm dnum interlaminar shear strength num psi astm dnum table num required mechanical properties vip frp plates property minimum requirement test method longitudinal tensile strength num psi astm dnum transverse tensile strength num psi longitudinal tensile modulus num x num psi transverse tensile modulus num x num psi longitudinal compressive strength num psi astm dnum transverse compressive strength num psi longitudinal compressive modulus num x num psi transverse compressive modulus num x num psi longitudinal flexural strength num psi astm dnum transverse flexural strength num psi longitudinal flexural modulus num x num psi transverse flexural modulus num x num psi inplane shear strength num psi astm dnum inplane shear modulus num x num psi interlaminar shear strength num psi astm dnum num return to table of contents num fire smoke and toxicity vip profiles located on bridge and overhead sign structures shall meet a flame spread index of class b in accordance with astm enum and meet the requirements of ulnum with a rating of vnum .
num impact tolerance where impact resistance is stipulated impact resistance shall be determined in accordance with astm dnum .
num thermoplastic structural shapes .
num general for the purpose of this specification use the following definitions a. thermoplastic structural shapes tss includes a thermoplastic matrix reinforced with chopped fiberglass filaments .
b. reinforced thermoplastic structural shapes rtss includes a thermoplastic matrix reinforced with chopped fiberglass filaments and continuous frp reinforcing bars meeting the requirements of this section .
steel reinforcing bars are not permitted .
num materials use polyethylene made from recycled post consumer or post industrial thermoplastics .
mix the polyethylene with appropriate colorants uv inhibitors hindered amine light stabilizers antioxidants and chopped fiberglass reinforcement so that the resulting product meets the requirements specified in table num for rtss and table num for tss .
use a minimum of num by weight chopped fiberglass reinforcement for both tss and rtss .
the thermoplastic matrix must not corrode rot warp splinter or crack .
meet the requirements of num for frp reinforcing bar materials .
for rtss members the use of separate materials for skin and core is at the discretion of each manufacturer however both materials must meet the requirements in table num num .
the material surrounding the rebar within num inch from the rebar surface shall not contain voids greater than num inch diameter and extend no further than num inches along the length of the member .
the cross section of the product shall not contain voids exceeding num inches in diameter and the sum of all voids greater than num inches in diameter shall not exceed num of the cross sectional area .
extrude final product as one continuous piece with no joints or splices to the dimensions and tolerances in accordance with table num .
reject any sections containing cracks or splits .
table num rtss matrix property test method requirement density astm dnum num pcf water absorption astmdnum num hrs num weight increase num hrs num weight increase brittleness astm dnum brittleness temperature minus numc impact resistance astm dnum method a izod num ftlbsin hardness astm dnum num shore d ultraviolet astm dnum uva num hours num change in shore d durometer hardness abrasion astm d num weight loss num oz cycles num num return to table of contents table num rtss matrix wheel csnum load num lb chemical resistance astm dnum sea water num weight increase gasoline num weight increase no .
num diesel num weight increase tensile properties astm dnum num psi at break min .
compressive modulus astm dnum num ksi min .
static coefficient of friction astm dnum num wet max .
screw withdrawal astm dnum num lb screw min .
table num tss matrix property test method requirement density astm dnum num pcf impact resistance astm dnum method a izod num ftlbsin hardness astm dnum num shore d ultraviolet astm dnum uva num hours num change in shore d durometer hardness chemical resistance astm dnum or astm dnum sea water num weight increase gasoline num weight increase no .
num diesel num weight increase tensile properties astm dnum num psi at break min .
static coeffecient of friction astm dnum num wet or dry min .
nail withdrawal or screw withdrawal astm dnum num lb nail min .
num lb screw min .
secant modulus at num strain astm dnum num psi min .
flexural strength astm dnum num psi min .
compressive strength astm dnum num psi min .
compressive strength perpendicular to grain astm dnum num psi min .
table num tolerances dimension tolerance length num inch width rtss width tss num inch num inch num return to table of contents table num tolerances height rtss width tss num inch num inch clear cover from outer surface to rebar elements rtss num inch wales num inch other straightness while lying on a flat surface num inches per num feet num return to table of contents section num structural coating materials num general requirements .
num general upon curing all coatings andor coating systems must produce an adherent coating that is visually uniform .
the composition of the coating is left to the discretion of the manufacturer but the finished product shall meet all requirements of this section .
all coats of multicoat systems shall be supplied by the same manufacturer .
multicomponent coatings shall be prepackaged in the required ratios .
num environmental requirements coating materials and their waste shall be characterized as nonhazardous as defined by resource conservation and recovery act rcra subarticle c rules table num of num cfr num toxicity characteristic .
volatile organic compounds voc shall be less than num lbgal when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
num approved product list apl all polymeric coating materials except the materials in num shall be listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products shall submit the product data sheets performance test reports from an independent laboratory showing the product meets the requirements of this section a product sds or performance test reports showing percent weight compositional analysis including chemical abstract number acgih time weighted average and ceiling exposure limits for all components lower and upper explosive limits flash point boiling point amount of volatile organic compounds by weight and specific gravity for each component of the coating system and a apl application in accordance with section num .
num packaging and labeling materials shall be shipped in containers legibly marked with application instructions lot number batch number date of manufacture shelf life and department apl number .
each lot or batch manufactured must have a unique number .
num structural steel coating systems .
num general structural steel coatings shall meet the application requirements of section num .
num performance requirements outdoor exposure testing will be performed by the department .
prepare four composite and four flatscribed test panels in accordance with aashto rnum fedstdnum shade xnum or xnum and submit to the state materials office smo .
also submit one quart wet samples of each component of each coating incorporated in the system being evaluated .
panels will be exposed at the departments outdoor test site in accordance with astm gnum .
all coatings regardless of color shall meet the requirements below .
laboratory testing property test method requirement slip coefficient aashto rnum min .
class b primer only salt fog resistance aashto rnum blister size num average rust creep at the scribe num inches cyclic weathering aashto rnum blister size num num return to table of contents laboratory testing property test method requirement resistance average rust creep at the scribe num inches color retention e num gloss loss less than num units abrasion resistance aashto rnum wear index num mgcycle adhesion aashto rnum avg .
system tensile strength num psi freeze thaw stability aashto rnum avg .
tensile strength num psi coatings identification fourier transform infrared spectroscopy ir scan num to num um for each base catalyst and mixed coating .
impact resistance astm dnum greater than num inchlbs num impact intrusion flexibility aashto rnum astm dnum num inch cylindrical mandrel no cracking outdoor testing property test method requirement rusting astm dnum astm dnum scribed astm dnum unscribed num after num years num after num years num after num years blistering astm dnum num after num years adhesion astm dnumannex anum num psi unscribed area after num years color retention astm dnum e num after num years gloss astm dnum num gloss units after num years num structural steel coating systems for new structures .
num high performance coating systems color pigmented num prime coat zinc dust pigment shall be a minimum of type ii in accordance with astm dnum .
inorganic zinc rich primers shall meet the requirements of the society for protective coatings sspc paint num type i level num .
num intermediate coat intermediate coatings when required by the manufacturer shall be a component of the full coating system .
num finish coat the finish coat shall provide the color and gloss required for the completed coating system .
a finish coat may be comprised of a single pigmented num return to table of contents coat or a pigmented coat with a clear coat .
the clear coat shall contain a dissipating colorant .
the dissipating colorant shall be visible for a minimum of num hours after application and shall completely dissipate within num hours after application .
num inorganic zinc coating system zinc dust pigment shall be a minimum of type ii in accordance with astm d num .
inorganic zinc rich primers shall meet the requirements of sspc paint num type i level num .
the performance requirements for gloss and color retention are not applicable .
num interior box girder coating system num interior coating the interior coat shall be one coat of white polyamide or cycloaliphatic amine epoxy coating .
the faying surfaces are to be masked off and coated with a zinc primer from the apl .
the performance requirements for gloss and color retention are not applicable .
num structural steel coating systems for existing structures .
num prime coat zinc dust pigment shall be a minimum of type ii in accordance with astm dnum .
organic zinc rich primers shall meet the requirements sspc paint num type ii level num .
zinc primers shall be used as galvanizing repair compounds for areas greater than num square inches .
num intermediate coat intermediate coatings when required by the manufacturer shall be a component of the full coating system .
num finish coat finish coating shall provide the color and gloss required for the completed coating system .
a finish coat may be comprised of a single pigmented coating or a pigmented coating with a clear coat .
the clear coat shall contain a dissipating colorant .
the dissipating colorant shall be visible for a minimum of num hours after application and shall completely dissipate within num hours after application .
num galvanized steel coating system .
coatings applied over galvanized steel shall meet the outdoor exposure requirements of num with the exception that test panels shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum prior to application of subsequent coatings .
coatings applied over galvanized steel strain poles mast arms and monotube assemblies shall meet the requirements of section num and num .
num painting strain poles mast arms and monotube assemblies .
paint systems used on galvanized steel strain poles galvanized steel mast arms and galvanized steel monotube assemblies shall meet the color requirements as specified in the contract documents and shall exhibit no loss of adhesion or loss of color greater than numes for five years after final acceptance as specified in num .
a galvanized steel strain pole mast arm or monotube assembly that exhibits a cumulative surface area of delamination in excess of num square inches will constitute an adhesion failure .
delamination shall be defined as any area of exposed metal surface subsequent to hand tool cleaning in accordance with sspcspnum .
a change in the coating color in excess of numes per the cie lab num will constitute a color retention failure .
the department will measure the cie num color chromaticity coordinates for the color of the top coat of the two sample coupons provided with a bykgardner handicolor colorimeter using dnum illuminant and num degree geometry settings .
the departmentmeasured lab chromaticity coordinates shall define the initial color and will be used for resolution of color retention failures and the resolution of color retention disputes .
all paint systems shall num return to table of contents possess physical properties and handling characteristics that are compatible with the application requirements of section num .
materials shall be specifically intended for use over galvanized steel .
num elastomeric coatings .
num general use an elastomeric coating system to provide a waterproof barrier over posttensioning anchorages or other areas designated in the plans .
the components of the coating system shall be supplied by a single manufacturer and sold as a waterproof coating system .
the surface preparation and application of the coating system shall be performed in strict accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
num physical properties the use of an epoxy prime coat is dependent upon the requirements of the manufacturers waterproofing system .
the polyurethane chemistry may be either waterborne aromatic moisturecuring or aromatic moisturesensitive .
the minimum thickness of the system shall not be less than num mils .
the elastomeric coating shall meet the following requirements property test method requirement hardness shore a astm dnum between num and num tensile strength astm dnum num psi elongation astm dnum num tear strength astm cnum num pli abrasion resistance hnum wheels num gmwheel astm cnum num mg loss num revs .
crack bridging num cycles astm cnum system passes elongation recovery astm cnum num num system modifications for use on bridge substructure supply the elastomeric coating system with a num acrylic aliphatic polyurethane top coating .
num class num applied finish coatings .
num general all coatings shall possess physical properties and handling characteristics compatible with the application requirements of section num .
unless otherwise specified the color of the finish coat shall meet fedstdnum table viii shade no .
num or no .
num for uncoated weathering steel bridges .
num coating requirements prepare four num inch by num inch except as required below fiber cement test panels with a mass of num to num pounds per square foot of surface area to perform the laboratory tests .
apply the finish coating to each test panel at a rate of num square feet per gallon plus or minus num square feet per gallon .
seal the corners of all test panels with a high build epoxy or equivalent to prevent moisture ingress at corners and cut edges .
submit the samples to an independent laboratory for testing .
coating performance shall meet the following requirements laboratory testing property test method requirement num return to table of contents laboratory testing property test method requirement resistance to wind driven rain astm dnum no visible water leaks and if the rear face of the block is damp the average gain in weight of the three numxnumxnum blocks must be less than num lb .
freeze thaw resistance aashto rnum no disbondment water vapor transmission astm dnum method b condition c wvtnum perms abrasion resistance astm dnum num liters of sand no loss of coating thickness astm dnum salt spray fog resistance astm bnum num hours no disbondment fluorescent uvcondensation exposure astm dnum num hours num hours uv num hours condensation no blistering astm dnum cracking visual or delamination visual .
chalking astm dnummethod d rating no less than num .
fungal resistance astm dnum rating of num astm dnum include a one quart wet sample of each component of each coating incorporated in the total system being evaluated with the submitted apl application .
num antigraffiti coating materials .
num general requirements antigraffiti coatings intended for use under this specification shall be of a composition capable of preventing the adhesion of and facilitating the removal of acrylic polyurethane and alkyd spray paint .
all antigraffiti coatings shall possess the physical and handling characteristics that are compatible with the requirements of section num .
the manufacturer shall designate the nonsacrificial product as water cleanable or solvent cleanable in accordance with this section .
antigraffiti coatings shall contain less than num lb per gallon volatile organic compounds voc as defined by num cfr part num subpart d evaluated as per astm dnum .
the manufacturer shall supply the following additional information num .
technical data sheet that includes installation instructions and graffiti removal instructions including any solvents or other materials as necessary .
graffiti removal must be accomplished with nonproprietary cleaners as defined in astm dnum .
num .
sacrificial coating removal instructions as applicable .
num .
certification that nonsacrificial antigraffiti coating shall not blister crack check chalk delaminate or exhibit a color change of more than num denum or denum cie lab units for a period of one year after installation .
num performance requirements for laboratory testing use flat test panels prepared in accordance with aashto rnum .
outdoor exposure testing will be performed by the department .
submit four num inch by num inch fiber cement test panels to the smo .
panels will be exposed at the departments outdoor test site in accordance with astm gnum .
coating performance shall meet the following requirements num return to table of contents laboratory testing nonsacrificial property test method requirement graffiti resistance solvent cleanable astm dnum .
complete removal of solventbased acrylic polyurethane and alkyd spray paint after exposure and recleanability cleanability level num num or num accelerated or outdoor exposure is not required .
cure per the spray paint manufacturers requirements and assess cleanability per section num of astm d num .
fluid resistance solvent cleanable astm dnum spot test paint thinner gasoline no blistering discoloration softening or adhesion loss .
outdoor exposure testing nonsacrificial property test method requirement graffiti resistance water cleanable astm gnum num months exposure at fdot test site num psi using pressure washer complete removal of solvent based acrylic polyurethane and alkyd based spray paint .
no delamination or visual defects .
laboratory testing sacrificial property test method requirement cyclic weather testing aashto rnum no salt fog numf num num relative humidity num hours alternating rh every num hours no melting or disbondment outdoor exposure testing sacrificial property test method requirement sacrificial coating removability astm gnum num months exposure at fdot test site complete removal of solvent based acrylic polyurethane and alkyd based spray paint from substrate num return to table of contents erosion control materials section num turf materials num general .
the types of seed and sod will be specified in the contract documents .
all seed and sod shall meet the requirements of the florida department of agriculture and consumer services and all applicable state laws and shall be approved by the engineer before installation .
all seed sod and mulch shall be free of noxious weeds and exotic pest plants plant parts or seed listed in the current category i list of invasive species from the florida exotic pest plant council fleppc httpwww.fleppc.org .
any plant officially listed as being noxious or undesirable by any federal agency any agency of the state of florida or any local jurisdiction in which the project is being constructed shall not be used .
any such noxious or invasive plant or plant part found to be delivered in seed sod or mulch will be removed by the contractor at his expense and in accordance with the law .
all materials shall meet plant quarantine and certification entry requirements of florida department of agriculture consumer services division of plant industry rules .
num seed .
the seed shall have been harvested from the previous years crop .
all seed bags shall have a label attached stating the date of harvest lot number percent purity percent germination noxious weed certification and date of test .
each of the species or varieties of seed shall be furnished and delivered in separate labeled bags .
during handling and storing the seed shall be cared for in such a manner that it will be protected from damage by heat moisture rodents and other causes .
all permanent and temporary turf seed shall have been tested within a period of six months of the date of planting .
all permanent and temporary turf seed shall have a minimum percent of purity and germination as follows num .
all bahia seed shall have a minimum pure live seed content of num with a minimum germination of num .
num .
bermuda seed shall be of common variety with a minimum pure live seed content of num with a minimum germination of num .
num .
annual type ryegrass seed shall have a minimum pure live seed content of num with a minimum germination of num .
num sod .
num types unless a particular type of sod is called for in the contract documents sod may be either centipede bahia or bermuda at the contractors option .
it shall be well matted with roots .
where sodding will adjoin or be in sufficiently close proximity to private lawns other types of sod may be used if desired by the affected property owners and approved by the engineer .
num dimensions the sod shall be taken up in commercialsize rectangles or rolls preferably num inches by num inches or larger except where num inch strip sodding is called for or as num return to table of contents rolled sod at least num inches in width and length consistent with the equipment and methods used to handle the rolls and place the sod .
sod shall be a minimum of num inches thick including a num inch thick layer of roots and topsoil .
reducing the width of rolled sod is not permitted after the sod has been taken up from the initial growing location .
any netting contained within the sod shall be certified by the manufacturer to be degradable within three years .
num condition the sod shall be sufficiently thick to secure a dense stand of live turf .
the sod shall be live fresh and uninjured at the time of planting .
it shall have a soil mat of sufficient thickness adhering firmly to the roots to withstand all necessary handling .
it shall be planted within num hours after being cut and kept moist from the time it is cut until it is planted .
no sod which has been cut for more than num hours may be used unless specifically authorized by the engineer .
a letter of certification from the turf contractor as to when the sod was cut and what type shall be provided to the engineer upon delivery of the sod to the job site .
the source of the sod may be inspected and approved by the engineer prior to being cut for use in the work .
num mulch .
the mulch material shall be compost meeting the requirements of section num hardwood barks shavings or chips or inorganic mulch materials as approved by the engineer or hydraulically applied wood fiber mulch or bonded fiber matrix bfm for the establishment of turf material .
num return to table of contents section num fertilizer num fertilizers .
fertilizers shall comply with the state fertilizer laws .
the numerical designations for fertilizer indicate the minimum percentages respectively of total nitrogen available phosphoric acid and watersoluble potash contained in the fertilizer .
at least num of the nitrogen shall be from a slowrelease source .
num certification .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certified test report from the manufacturer of the commercial fertilizer confirming that the requirements of this section are met .
the certified test report shall conform to the requirements of section num and include test results for total nitrogen available phosphoric acid watersoluble potash and sulfur .
each certification shall cover one batch per type for dry type fertilizer .
num fertilizer rates .
soil laboratory fertilization recommendations are based on the amount lbs of nutrients n pnumonum knumo to apply per given area usually num square feet .. from this recommendation it is necessary to select an appropriate fertilizer grade and then determine how much of this fertilizer to apply to the area .
if a complete fertilizer containing all three primary nutrients is not available in the ratio of npk necessary to match the ratio required in the fertilizer recommendation mixedgrade or singlenutrient fertilizers should be used to satisfy each nutrient requirement .
to calculate fertilizer rates num .
measure the area to be fertilized in square feet .
num .
select fertilizers to be used based on the soil testing laboratory recommendations by matching the ratio of nutrients recommended to the fertilizer grades available .
num .
determine the amount of fertilizer to apply to a given area num square feet .
by dividing the recommended amount of nutrient by the percentage of the nutrient on a decimal basis in the fertilizer .
apply no more than num lbs pnumonum square feet per application prior to planting .
num .
adjust the amount of fertilizer to the project area .
num return to table of contents section num water for grassing the water used in the grassing operations may be obtained from any approved source .
the water shall be free of any substance which might be harmful to plant growth .
effluent water shall meet all federal state and local requirements .
num return to table of contents section num geosynthetic materials num description .
geosynthetic materials are used for nonstructural and structural applications and shall be either geotextiles woven or nonwoven or geogrids woven or extruded that are used for drainage erosion control reinforcement separation or stabilization .
num materials .
num general requirements unless restricted in the plans or specifications the geosynthetic material shall be a woven non woven or extruded material consisting of longchain polymeric filaments or yarns such as polypropylene polyethylene polyester polyamides or polyvinylidene chloride formed into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their relative position to each other .
the base plastic shall contain stabilizers andor inhibitors to make the filaments resistant to deterioration due to ultraviolet light heat exposure and potential chemically damaging environment .
the edges of the material shall be selvaged or otherwise finished to prevent the outer yarn from pulling away from the material and shall be free of any treatment which may significantly alter its physical properties .
num physical requirements each geosynthetic material shall be tested by an independent third party in accordance with the following methods as they apply to the specific application type .
all testing and reported values except apparent opening size aos are to be minimum average roll values in the weakest principal direction unless indicated otherwise in this section .
values for aos are maximum average roll values .
geotextile selection insitu soil type or drainage application class for type dnum dnum dnum materials see table num num passing a no .
num sieve a num to num passing a no .
num sieve b num passing a no .
num sieve c num passing a no .
num sieve with plastic index num d mse joint cover for sand backfill e mse joint cover for coarse aggregate or limerock backfill f as per aashto tnum .
num return to table of contents table num drainage geotextiles test methods and requirements for types dnum dnum and dnum propertytest method dnum dnum dnum minimum permittivity sec num per astm dnum dnuma num dnumb num dnumc num dnumd num dnume num dnumf num dnuma num dnumb num dnumc num dnumd num dnume num dnumf num dnuma num dnumb num dnumc num dnumd num dnume num maximum aos us sieve no .
per astm dnum dnuma num dnumb num dnumc num dnumd num dnume num dnumf num dnuma num dnumb num dnumc num dnumd num dnume num dnumf num dnuma num dnumb num dnumc num dnumd num dnume num minimum grab tensile strength lbs per astm dnum num woven monofilament num other woven geotextiles elongation num num elongation num num elongation num num elongation num num mass per unit area ozsy per astm dnum provide test result provide test result provide test result minimum puncture strength lbs per astm dnum num woven monofilament num other woven geotextiles elongation num num elongation num num elongation num num elongation num num minimum trapezoidal tear lbs per astm dnum num woven monofilament num other woven geotextiles elongation num num elongation num num woven monofilament num other geotextiles elongation num num elongation num num minimum uv resistance per astm dnum retained strength num num hours num num hours num num hours limitations woven monofilament geotextiles only woven geotextiles only .
no slit film geotextiles allowed .
no slit film geotextiles allowed .
num return to table of contents table num drainage geotextiles test methods and requirements for types dnum dnum and dnum propertytest method dnum dnum dnum equivalent opening sizes in millimeters per astm enum are as follows no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num table num test methods and requirements for drainage geotextiles types dnum and dnum propertytest method dnum dnum minimum permittivity secnum per astm dnum num num maximum aos us sieve no .
per astm dnum num num minimum grab tensile strength lbs per astm dnum num num mass per unit area ozsy per astm dnum provide test result provide test result minimum puncture strength lbs per astm dnum num num minimum trapezoidal tear lbs per astm dnum num num minimum uv resistance per astm dnum retained strength num num hours num hours table num test methods and requirements for erosion control materials propertytest method enum enum enum enum enum permittivity sec num per astm dnum num num grab tensile strength lbs per astm dnum num num minimum uv resistance per astm dnum retained strength num num hours num num hours num num hours tensile strength lbsft per astm dnum or dnum numxnum numxnum numxnum filtration efficiency per astm dnum num and min .
flow rate of num galsfmin design shear num psf num psf num psf wide width tensile strength is expressed in units of measure of lbsin in machine direction and cross direction as md x cd .
design shear limits for erosion mats must be determined by num minutes sustained flow in an unvegetated state as determined by tests performed by utah state university texas transportation institute or an independent testing laboratory approved by the state drainage engineer .
num return to table of contents table num test methods and requirements for structural geosynthetics propertytest method structural application type test methods for woven geotextiles test methods for woven or extruded geogrids permittivity secnum r num num num num num astm dnum uv stability min retained strength num hr r num astm dnum astm dnum puncture strength lbs r num astm dnum grab strength lbs r num astm dnum opening size r num num num num num aos us sieve no .
astm dnum aperture size in x in tensile strength lbsft astm dnum astm dnum machine direction ultimate tult num strain r num num num strain r num num num num num strain r num num num num num cross direction ultimate num strain r num num num strain r num num num num num strain r num num num num num strain ultimate tensile strength r num num num num num tear strength lbs astm dnum machine direction r num cross direction r num soilgeosynthetic friction r num num num astm dnum astm dnum creep resistancetcreep lbsft r num num astm dnum astm dnum creep reduction factor tulttcreep r num num installation damage rfid aashto rnum aashto rnum sand r num num num limestone r num num num durability rfd chemical r num num num aashto rnum aashto rnum biological r num num num aashto rnum aashto rnum joint strength rfj mechanical r num num gri gtnum gri num return to table of contents table num test methods and requirements for structural geosynthetics propertytest method structural application type test methods for woven geotextiles test methods for woven or extruded geogrids ggnuma ggnumb sewn r num num astm dnum num overlaps and seams overlaps shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless specified otherwise in the contract documents for a particular application .
to reduce overlaps the geosynthetic material may be sewn together in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
sew the seams with thread meeting the chemical requirements and minimum seam strength requirements in tables num num and num .
num packaging and labeling geosynthetics shall be packaged in a protective covering sufficient to protect the material from temperatures greater than num f sunlight dirt and other debris during shipment and storage .
the manufacturers name product name style number roll dimensions and lot numbers must be clearly labeled on all packaging .
num product acceptance and certification .
num product acceptance all geosynthetic materials shall be one of the products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of products must submit an application in accordance with section num and include independently certified test reports that the material meets the physical requirements of this section .
products will be listed on the apl according to geosynthetic application type .
for products with limited apl approvals installations and design alternatives must not rely on the limitation .
structural geosynthetics are listed with property values .
num certification the contractor shall submit to the engineer a current certification from the manufacturer confirming that the material meets the requirements of this section and is appropriate for the intended use .
the contractor shall also provide two num inch by num inch samples of the geosynthetic material for product identification .
the manufacturers certification shall be attested to within the past one year by a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturing company .
the manufacturer shall maintain test records as required by this specification and these records shall be made available to the department upon request .
num applications .
num nonstructural num drainage select geotextile materials that meet the required permeability and aos based on test results on the soil or fill adjacent to the geotextile for gradation .
materials for drainage applications must be tested in accordance with and meet the physical requirements in num table num .
drainage applications geotextile type description standard plans index num return to table of contents drainage applications geotextile type description standard plans index dnum revetment special rock rubble without bedding stone ditch pavement rubble riprap without bedding stone num dnum revetment standard articulating block gabions num rock rubble and broken concrete with bedding stone ditch pavement rubble riprap with bedding stone num joint cover for mechanically stabilized retaining wall supporting spread footing foundations dnum underdrain num french drain num sheet piling filter filter fabric jacket culvert num concrete pavement subdrainage num joint cover for mechanically stabilized retaining wall dnum slope pavement ditch pavement sandcement riprap or concrete num dnum separation geotextile castinplace retaining wall num erosion control materials used for erosion control applications must be tested in accordance with and meet the physical requirements in num table num .
erosion control applications type description enum staked silt fence enum wind screen enum plastic erosion mat turf reinforcement mat type num enum plastic erosion mat turf reinforcement mat type num enum plastic erosion mat turf reinforcement mat type num num structural num reinforcement separation and stabilization materials for reinforcement separation and stabilization applications must be tested in accordance with and meet the physical requirements in num table num .
the ultimate tensile strength of all rnum materials must be at least num pounds per foot in both the machine and cross machine directions .
num return to table of contents reinforcement separation and stabilization applications type description rnum geosynthetic reinforced soil grsibs rnum reinforcement of foundations over soft soils rnum reinforced soil slopes rnum reinforced embankment rnum construction expedient num return to table of contents section num soil layer materials num description .
all material shall be suitable for plant growth .
the organic matter content of the soil layer after mixing shall be a minimum of num a maximum of num in accordance with fm numtnum and have a ph value of num or greater and less than or equal tonum as determined in accordance with fm num .
the organic matter content shall be created using any of the following materials .
num materials .
soil layer materials may be obtained from either or a combination of the following sources num .
excavation within the limits of construction on the project .
such material may be stockpiled or windrowed on the project in areas approved by the engineer .
num .
designated borrow pits for the project .
num .
from other sources of organic soil materials provided by the contractor .
num organic soil this may consist of muck mucky peat and peat and shall have an organic matter content of num or more if the mineral fraction is more than num clay or more than num organic matter if the mineral fraction has no clay .
num blanket material meet the material classification shown in the plans and standard plans index num .
num compost meet the requirements of florida department of environmental protection rule num type y yard waste type ym yard waste and manure type a municipal solid waste compost or rule num type aa composted biosolids and have unrestricted distribution .
num compost for use as a soil amendment if the electrical conductivity ec value of the compost exceeds numds mmhoscm based on the saturated paste extract method the compost shall be leached with water prior to application .
num compost for use as a mulch the compost shall contain no foreign matter such as glass plastic or metal shards .
the compost shall be slightly coarse to coarse in nature over half of the solids shall be from particles num inches in size and no greater than num inches .
preference shall be given to compost or mulch made from uncontaminated woody waste materials .
num landscape soil landscape soil must be sandy loam or loamy sand with properties of aashto classification anum or anum .
the soil must have an organic matter content of num to num using the loss on ignition loi test in accordance with fm numtnum from a soil testing laboratory approved in accordance with num .
soil must be free of litter and deleterious substance such as cans debris particles greater than num inches and rinsate containing lime or toxic materials .
soil must be free of noxious plants or propagules of plants listed in florida rule numb num and invasive exotic plants listed under category i florida exotic plant pest council .
where shown in the plans or when approved by the engineer existing soil may be amended with compost or biosolids to meet the requirements of this section .
use compost in accordance with fdep rule num and num .
use biosolids in accordance with florida rule num .
num return to table of contents traffic control materials section num temporary traffic control device materials num general .
this section specifies the material requirements for temporary traffic control devices .
all temporary traffic control devices must meet the requirements of nchrp num or mash and current fhwa directives the requirements of this section and be listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation must submit certified test reports showing that their product meets all test requirements set forth by nchrp num or the mash .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of category i devices for inclusion on the apl shall include the manufacturers self certification letter .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of category ii and category iii devices for inclusion on the apl shall include the fhwa wz numbered acceptance letter with attachments and vendor drawings of the device in sufficient detail to enable the engineer to distinguish between this and similar devices .
for devices requiring field assembly or special site preparation vendor drawings shall include all field assembly details and technical information necessary for proper application and installation .
vendor drawings for category iii devices and automated flagger assistance devices afads must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of florida .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of category iv devices for inclusion on the apl must comply with the requirements of section num and include detailed vendor drawings of the device along with technical information necessary for proper application field assembly and installation .
num retroreflective sheeting for temporary traffic control devices .
num approved product list apl sheeting for use on temporary traffic control devices shall be one of the products listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
num sign panels bands for tubular markers vertical panels barricades longitudinal channelizing devices and other devices sign panels bands for tubular markers vertical panels barricades longitudinal channelizing devices and other devices shall meet the requirements of astm dnum for type iii or higher retroreflective sheeting materials identified in section num except for mesh signs shall meet the color daytime luminance and nonreflective property requirements of section num type vi .
num collars for traffic cones collars for traffic cones shall meet the requirements of astm dnum type iii or higher retroreflective prismatic sheeting materials identified in section num including supplementary requirements for reboundable sheeting .
the outdoor weathering shall be for num months for all sheeting types .
num drums drums shall meet the requirements of astm dnum for type iii or higher retroreflective sheeting materials identified in section num including supplementary requirements for reboundable sheeting .
num return to table of contents num portable devices arrow boards changeable message signs regulatory signs radar speed display units and truck mounted changeable message signs .
num general all portable devices shall meet the physical display and operational requirements of the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd and be listed on the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num and include certification showing that the product meets the requirements of this section .
num .
ensure that all assembly hardware less than num inch in diameter including nuts bolts external screws and locking washers are type num or num passivated stainless steel .
stainless steel bolts screws and studs shall meet astm fnum .
nuts shall meet astm fnum .
all assembly hardware greater than or equal to num inch in diameter shall be galvanized .
bolts studs and threaded rod shall meet astm anum .
structural bolts shall meet astm fnum grade anum .
num .
the controllers and associated onboard circuitry shall meet the requirements of the federal communications commission fcc title num subpart b section num regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise by class a digital devices .
num .
the controller and associated onboard circuitry shall not be affected by mobile radio or any other radio transmissions .
num .
an operators manual shall be furnished with each unit .
num .
all portable devices shall be permanently marked with the apl number manufacturers name or trademark modelpart number and date of manufacture or serial number .
num electrical systems num solar powered unit the solar powered unit shall meet the following num .
the unit shall provide automatic recharging of power supply batteries to normal operating levels with meters showing charge .
num .
solar array recovery time for arrow boards and regulatory signs shall be accomplished in a maximum of three hours .
num .
arrow boards and changeable message signs shall be designed to provide num days of continuous operation with minimum onsite maintenance .
num battery life test meet the following num .
the photovoltaic unit shall be designed to provide num days of continuous operation without sunlight with a minimum of onsite maintenance for arrow boards and changeable message signs or num days of continuous operation without sunlight with a minimum of onsite maintenance for regulatory signs and radar speed display units .
num .
the battery shall be equipped with a battery controller to prevent overcharging and overdischarging .
an external battery level indicator shall be provided .
num .
the battery controller and power panel shall be designed to be protected from the elements and vandalism .
num .
automatic recharging of power supply batteries shall be provided with charge indicator meter .
num .
an acdc battery charger unit shall be provided .
num display panel and housing num .
the display housing assembly shall be weathertight .
num return to table of contents num .
the display assembly shall be equipped with an automatic dimming operational mode capable of a minimum of num dimming and a separate manual dimmer switch num .
the display panel background and frame for the display assembly shall be painted flat black and shall meet federal specification ttenum .
num .
the display panel for arrow boards and changeable message signs when raised in the upright position shall have a minimum height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the ground in accordance with the mutcd .
the display panel for radar speed display units when raised in the upright position will have a minimum height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the ground .
num .
the regulatory speed sign panel for regulatory signs and radar speed display units when raised in the upright position shall have a minimum height of num feet from the bottom of the regulatory sign panel to the ground .
num .
the unit shall have an accessible mechanism to easily raise and lower the display assembly .
a locking device shall also be provided to ensure the display panel will remain in the raised or lowered position .
num controller the controller shall meet the following num .
controller and control panel shall be housed in a weather dust and vandal resistant lockable cabinet .
num .
controller and associated onboard circuitry shall meet the requirements of the fcc title num subpart b section num regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise by class a digital devices .
num .
for changeable message signs and arrow boards ensure that the sign control software provides an onsite graphical representation that visibly depicts the message displayed on the sign face .
num .
for changeable message signs if remote communication is included ensure that the sign controller is addressable through the ethernet communications network using software that complies with the national transportation communications for its protocol ntcip num base standard including all amendments as published at the time of contract letting the ntcip simple transportation management framework and conforms to compliance level num .
ensure that the software implements all mandatory objects in the supplemental requirement srnum fdot dynamic message sign ntcip requirements as published on the fdot state traffic engineering and operations office web site at the time of contract letting .
ensure that the sign complies with the ntcip numvnum num vnum numvnum numvnum num vnum and numvnum standards .
ensure that the sign complies with ntcip numvnum section num .
ensure that additional objects implemented by the software do not interfere with the standard operation of mandatory objects .
num support chassis the support chassis shall meet the following num .
the support chassis shall be selfcontained and selfsupporting without the use of additional equipment or tools .
num .
both trailer and truckmounted units are allowed for arrow boards and changeable message signs .
trailer mounted units are required for regulatory signs and radar speed display units .
a. trailer mounted unit num .
the sign power supply unit and all support systems shall be mounted on a wheeled trailer .
num return to table of contents num .
the trailer shall be equipped with class a lights using a plug adaptor .
num .
the trailer shall be equipped with adjustable outrigger leveling pads one on each of the four frame corners .
num .
the trailer shall be designed to be set up at the site with its own chassis and outriggers without being hitched to a vehicle .
num .
the trailer shall be equipped with fenders over the tires and shall be made from heavyduty material sufficient to allow a person to stand and operate or perform maintenance on the unit .
num .
the trailer shall meet all equipment specifications set forth in chapter num of the florida statutes and by such rule regulation or code that may be adopted by the department of highway safety and motor vehicles .
num .
the trailers should be delineated on a permanent basis by affixing retroreflective material known as conspicuity material in a continuous line on the face of the trailer as seen by oncoming road users .
num portable arrow board num arrow board matrix num .
the minimum legibility distance for various traffic conditions are based on the decisionsight distance concept .
the minimum legibility distance is the distance at which a driver can comprehend the arrow board message on a sunny day or a clear night .
the arrow board size that is needed to meet the legibility distance is listed as follows type minimum size minimum number of elements minimum legibility distance b num by num inches num num mile c num by num inches num num mile type b arrow boards may be used on low to intermediate speed num mph to num mph facilities or for maintenance or moving operations on any speed facility .
type c arrow boards shall be used for all other operations on highspeed num mph and greater facilities and may be substituted for type b arrow boards on any speed facility .
num .
devices shall meet all arrow board displays identified in the mutcd .
num .
the element lens should be num inches in diameter .
smaller element lens diameters are permissible only if they provide an equivalent or greater brightness indication and meet the legibility criteria in numa .
num .
the color of the light emitted shall be in accordance with the mutcd .
num .
there shall be a num degree hood for closeup glare reduction .
num .
for solar powered arrow boards the bulbs shall provide a num candle power intensity for day use and an automatic reduction or dimming capacity for night use .
the dimmed night operation shall provide adequate indication without excessive glare .
num .
the flashing rate of the element shall not be less than num flashes or more than num flashes per minute as required in the mutcd .
num .
the minimum element on time shall be num for the flashing arrow and num for the sequential chevron .
num portable changeable message sign num message matrix num return to table of contents num .
message matrix panel shall be a maximum height of num feet by a maximum width of num feet .
num .
the matrix must be capable of displaying three lines of num characters using an num inch font that meets the height to width ratio and character spacing requirements in the mutcd section numl.num paragraphs num num and num .
num .
the matrix must display characters that meet or exceed the numeral and letter sizes prescribed in the mutcd and shs standard highway signs companion document .
fonts and graphics must mimic the characteristics of fonts and graphics defined in nema tsnum the mutcd and shs .
num .
for flip disk matrix signs the disk elements shall be coated on the display side with a highly reflective florescent yellow mylar material and on the back with a flat black to blend in with the flat black background .
num .
similar components shall be interchangeable .
num operation and performance num .
the message shall be displayed in upper case except when lower case is project specific and is allowed by the mutcd .
num .
the message matrix panel shall be visible from onehalf mile and legible from a distance of num feet under both day and night conditions .
under variable light level conditions the sign shall automatically adjust its light source to meet the num feet visibility requirement .
the message panel shall have adjustable display rates so that the entire message can be read at least twice at the posted speed .
num .
the control panel shall have the capability to store a minimum num pre programmed messages .
num .
the controller in the control panel shall be able to remember messages during nonpowered conditions .
num .
the controller shall allow the operator to generate additional messages on site via the keyboard .
num .
for a portable changeable message sign using flipdisk technology the controller shall have the capability to provide a stipulated default message upon loss of controller function .
num .
all messages shall be flashed or sequenced .
in the sequence mode the controller shall have the capability to sequence three line messages during one cycle .
num portable regulatory signs num sign panel assembly the sign panel assembly shall consist of a num inches by num inches speed limit xx sign panel and a when flashing sign panel intended to notify oncoming traffic the speed limit where workers are present .
the sign panel assembly shall meet the following minimum physical requirements num .
the sign panel shall fold down and be pinned in place for towing .
maximum travel height shall be num inches .
num .
construct the sign panel and light housing to allow the unit to be operated in the displayed position at speeds of num mph .
design the sign panel assembly to withstand transport speeds of num mph .
num .
construct the sign panel such that when in the raised position the sign panel will have a height of num feet from the bottom of the lowest panel to the ground in accordance with the mutcd .
num return to table of contents num .
provide the unit with a mechanism to raise and lower the sign panel .
provide the unit with a device to lock the sign panel in the raised and lowered position .
num flashing lights provide a pair of hooded par num led advance warning flashing lamps on each side of the top of the sign panel .
these lamps shall be visible day or night at a distance of one mile with a flash rate of approximately num flashes per minute .
the lamp lens should be at least num inches in diameter .
smaller diameter lens are permissible if they provide an equivalent or greater brightness indication and meet the legibility criteria above .
the color of the light emitted shall be in accordance with the mutcd .
for solar powered units the bulbs shall provide a num candlepower intensity for day use and an automatic reduction or dimming capacity for night use .
the dimmed night operation shall provide adequate indication without excessive glare .
num portable radar speed display unit num display unit panel and housing meet the requirements of num and the following physical requirements as a minimum num .
provide capability to mount a num inches by num inches regulatory sign with interchangeable numbers showing the posted speed limit above the message display .
num .
provide legend your speed either above or below the message display .
num message display the message display shall meet the following physical requirements as a minimum num .
provide a bright led twodigit speed display on a flat black background with bright yellow leds .
num .
each digit shall contain either a sevensegment layout or matrixstyle design .
each digit shall measure a minimum num inches in height .
num .
speed display shall be visible from a distance of at least onehalf mile and legible from a distance of at least num feet under both day and night conditions .
num .
display shall adjust for day and night operation automatically with a photocell .
num radar the radar unit shall not be affected by normal radio transmissions and meet the following physical requirements as a minimum num .
approachonly sensor .
num .
equipped with a low power kband transmitter .
num .
part num fcc acceptance num amps num vdc to num vdc .
fuse and reverse polarity protected .
num .
range of num feet for midsize vehicle capable of accurately sensing speeds of num mph to num mph with over speed function that operates when a vehicle approaches over the posted speed limit .
num truck mounted changeable message sign num general truck mounted changeable message signs shall meet the physical display and operational requirements of the mutcd and be listed on the apl .
num .
sign shall be secured on the vehicle for normal operation .
num .
a fault light shall be located on rear of the sign and operate whenever the sign is displaying a message .
the light shall flash at the same rate as the message being displayed .
num .
an operators manual shall be furnished with each sign .
num return to table of contents num .
the manufacturer name model or part number and date of manufacture or serial number shall be permanently affixed to the sign housing .
num display panel and housing num .
the housing maximum size shall not exceed a width of num inches a height of num inches or a depth of num inches .
num .
the housing shall be designed to withstand exposure to the elements and include a locking device to secure the housing from unauthorized entry .
num .
provisions by convection or fan shall be made for heat dissipation within the unit .
num .
the message matrix panel background and frame for the dynamic message assembly shall be painted flat black federal specification ttenum .
num .
the face of the display shall be easily opened from the front .
faces that open up shall be locked to stay open far enough to allow for servicing of all message panel components .
num .
the face of the sign shall be covered by an impact resistant polycarbonate face that aids against glare and includes an ultraviolet inhibitor to protect from fading and yellowing .
num .
the display panel support structure when raised in the upright position shall be designed to allow for a minimum height of num feet from the bottom of the panel to the ground .
num .
the unit shall have a manual and automatic control mechanism to raise and lower the display assembly .
a locking device shall also be provided to ensure the display panel will remain in the raised or lowered position .
num message matrix num .
the matrix shall utilize light emitting diodes led .
num .
leds used shall be amber num nm dominate wavelength and shall meet the visibility requirements of this specification .
leds shall have a viewing angle no less than num degrees .
led intensity shall not fall below num percent within three years .
num .
all display modules shall be identical and interchangeable .
num .
the matrix shall be capable of displaying a minimum of two lines of eight characters each using a num inch font that meets the height to width ratio and character spacing requirements in the mutcd section numl.num paragraphs num num and num and section numf.num paragraph num .
num .
the matrix shall provide variable letter graphic and symbol sizes from num to num inches .
the matrix must display characters that meet or exceed the numeral and letter sizes prescribed in the mutcd and shs companion document .
fonts and graphics must mimic the characteristics of fonts and graphics defined in nema tsnum the mutcd and shs .
num electrical system num .
the power supply shall be a num vdc system designed to operate the sign with a dedicated battery that is charged by the vehicle electrical system but isolated so it does not drain the vehicle battery .
num .
all internal sign components shall be treated with a protective weather resistant polyurethane or silicone conformal coating to protect against the adverse effects of humidity and moisture .
num sign controller num return to table of contents num .
the sign controller shall be housed inside the sign and shall be equipped with a security lockout feature to prevent unauthorized use .
num .
an external weatherresistant handheld control keypad shall be used to display the message on the sign .
num .
the sign controller shall have the capability to provide a predetermined or blank default message upon loss of controller function .
num operation and performance num .
the message shall be displayed in upper case .
num .
the message matrix panel shall be visible from onehalf mile .
with a num inch character displayed the sign shall be legible from a distance of num feet in both day and night conditions .
under variable light level conditions the sign shall automatically adjust its light source to meet the num foot visibility requirement .
num .
the sign shall have the capability to store a minimum of num common messages and graphics of which a minimum of num shall be userprogrammable messages .
num .
all messages shall be capable of being flashed or sequenced .
in the sequence mode the message shall consist of no more than two phases with each phase consisting of no more than three lines of text .
both message dwell time and message flash rate shall be individually programmable .
num removable tape .
num composition removable tape shall be one of the products listed on the apl .
the pavement stripes and markings shall consist of high quality plastic materials pigments and glass spheres or other retroreflective materials uniformly distributed throughout their cross sectional area with a reflective layer of spheres or other retroreflective material embedded in the top surface .
no foil type materials shall be allowed .
num skid resistance the surface of the stripes and markings shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of num bpn british pendulum number when tested according to astm enum .
bike lane symbols and pedestrian crosswalks shall provide a minimum skid resistance value of num bpn .
num thickness the apl will list the specified thickness of each approved product .
num durability and wear resistance when properly applied the material shall provide neat durable stripes and markings .
the materials shall provide a cushioned resilient substrate that reduces sphere crushing and loss .
the film shall be weather resistant and through normal wear shall show no significant tearing rollback or other signs of poor adhesion .
durability is the measured percent of pavement marking material completely removed from the pavement .
the pavement marking material line loss must not exceed num of surface area .
num conformability and resealing the stripes and markings shall be capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults under traffic at pavement temperatures recommended by the manufacturer .
the film shall be capable of use for patching worn areas of the same types of film in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num tensile strength the stripes and markings shall have a minimum tensile strength of num psi when tested according to astm dnum .
a rectangular test specimen num inches by num inch by num inches minimum thickness shall be tested at a temperature range of numf to numf using a jaw speed of num inches per minute .
num elongation the stripes and markings shall have a minimum elongation of num when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
num return to table of contents num plastic pull test the stripes and markings shall support a dead weight of num pounds for not less than five minutes at a temperature range of numf to numf .
rectangular test specimen size shall be num inches by num inch by num inches minimum thickness .
num adhesive precoat removable tape with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of being affixed to asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete pavement surfaces without the use of heat solvents and other additional adhesives or activators .
ensure that the adhesive does not require a protective liner when the removable tape is in rolled form for shipment .
ensure that the adhesive is capable of temporarily bonding to the roadway pavement at temperatures of numf and the above without pickup distortion by vehicular traffic .
num color meet the requirements of num .
num removability ensure that the manufacturer shows documented reports that the removable tape is capable of being removed intact or in substantially large strips after being in place for a minimum of num days and under an average daily traffic count per lane of at least num vehicles per day .
num temporary raised pavement markers rpms .
temporary rpms shall meet the requirements of section num .
num temporary glare screen .
num design and installation manufactured glare screen systems may be modular or individual units listed on the apl and shall meet the following requirements num .
glare screen units shall be manufactured in lengths such that when installed the joint between any one modular unit will not span barrier sections .
color shall be green similar to fedstdnum .
num .
blades rails andor posts shall be manufactured from polyethylene fiberglass plastic polyester or polystyrene and be ultraviolet stabilized and inert to all normal atmospheric conditions and temperature ranges found in florida .
num .
for paddle type designs the blade width shall not be more than num inches .
blades or screen for individual or modular systems shall be num inches to num inches high and capable of being locked down at an angle and spacing to provide a cutoff angle not less than num degrees .
num .
for glare screen mounted on temporary concrete barrier a strip minimum num inch width and minimum num square inches of reflective sheeting as specified in num must be placed on each side of a panel centered in each barrier section at a spacing not to exceed num feet and positioned in such a manner as to permit total right angle observation by parallel traffic .
num .
prior to approval an impact test shall be performed by the manufacturer to verify the safety performance of the proposed system .
the minimum impact strength of the posts blades rail and the barrier attachment design shall be sufficient to prevent the unit from separating from the barrier when impacted by a num inches outside diameter steel pipe traveling at num mph and impacting midheight on the glare screen assembly .
num .
all hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum or stainless steel in accordance with aisi num .
alternative designs for temporary glare screen may be submitted as a cost savings initiative proposal in accordance with num .
num return to table of contents num temporary traffic control signals .
num general temporary traffic control signals shall meet the physical display and operational requirements of conventional traffic signal described in the mutcd for portable traffic signals and be listed on the apl .
the standard includes but is not limited to the following num .
use signal heads having three num inch vehicular signal indications red yellow and green .
ensure there are two signal heads for each direction of traffic .
num .
the traffic signal heads on this device will be approved by the department .
num .
department approved lighting sources will be installed in each section in accordance with the manufacturers permanent directional markings that is an up arrow the word up or top for correct indexing and orientation within a signal housing .
num .
the masts supporting the traffic signal heads will be manufactured with the lowest point of the vehicular signal head as follows a .
eight feet above finished grade at the point of their installation for pedestal type application or b. seventeen to num feet above pavement grade at the center of roadway for overhead type application .
num .
the yellow clearance interval will be programmed num seconds or more .
under no condition can the yellow clearance interval be manually controlled .
it must be timed internally by the controller as per department specifications .
num .
the green interval must display a minimum of num seconds before being advanced to the yellow clearance interval .
num .
the controller will allow for a variable all red clearance interval from num seconds to num seconds .
num .
portable traffic control signals will be either manually controlled or traffic actuated .
indicator lights for monitoring the signal operation of each approach will be supplied and visible from within the work zone area .
num .
when the portable traffic control signals are radio actuated the following will apply a .
the transmitter will be fcc type accepted and not exceed num watt output per fcc part num .
the manufacturer must comply with all specific limitations noted in fcc part num. b .
the controller will force the traffic signal to display red toward the traffic approach in case of radio failure or interference .
num .
the trailer and supports will be painted constructionmaintenance orange enamel in accordance with the mutcd color .
num .
ensure the certification number is engraved or labeled permanently on equipment .
num .
ensure the device has an external visible water resistant label with the following information certification of this device by the florida department of transportation allows for its use in construction zones only .
num work zone signs .
provide steel flanged uchannel or square tube steel meeting the mechanical requirements of astm anum grade num .
for each uchannel or square tube punch or drill num inch diameter holes on num inch centers through the center of the post starting approximately num inch from the top and extending the full length of the post .
ensure that the weight per foot of a particular manufacturers post size does not vary more than plus or minus num of its specified num return to table of contents weight per foot .
taper the bottom end of the post for easier installation .
machine straighten the uchannel to a tolerance of num of the length .
use only noncorrosive metal aluminum or galvanized steel attachment hardware .
work zone sign systems shall be one of the products listed on the apl .
num temporary raised rumble strips .
num general temporary raised rumble strips shall meet the physical display and operational requirements in the mutcd for temporary raised rumble strips and be listed on the apl .
the temporary raised rumble strip may be either a removable polymer striping tape type or a molded engineered polymer material type as described below num removable polymer striping tape characteristic requirement composition removable polymer striping tape with preapplied adhesive color white black or orange crosssection num in .
to num in .
height x num in .
wide num molded engineered polymer material characteristic requirement composition molded engineered polymer material weight internally ballasted to a minimum of num lbs .
to maintain position in use without the use of adhesives or mechanical fasteners color white black or orange shape beveled on the leading edge crosssection num in .
to num in .
height x num in .
to num in .
wide num automated flagger assistance devices afad .
num general afads shall meet the physical display and operational requirements in the mutcd and be listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product for the apl must include detailed vendor drawings showing typical application of the device in accordance with standard plans index num .
num stopslow automated flagger assistance devices provide a stopslow afad including a stopslow sign that alternately displays the stop face and the slow face of a stopslow paddle without the need for a flagger in the immediate vicinity of the afad or on the roadway .
when a gate arm is used ensure that the gate arm descends to a down position across the approach lane of traffic when the stop face is displayed and then ascends to an upright position when the slow face is displayed .
ensure the gate arm is fully retroreflectorized on both sides with vertical alternating red and white stripes at num inch intervals measured horizontally in accordance with the mutcd .
when the arm is in the down position blocking the approach lane num .
the minimum vertical aspect of the arm and sheeting shall be num inches and num return to table of contents num .
the end of the arm shall reach at least to the center of the lane being controlled .
num redyellow lens automated flagger assistance devices provide a redyellow lens afad that alternately displays a steadily illuminated circular red lens and a flashing circular yellow lens to control traffic without the need for a flagger in the immediate vicinity of the afad or on the roadway .
ensure that the redyellow lens afad includes a gate arm that descends to a down position across the approach lane of traffic when the steady circular red lens is illuminated and then ascends to an upright position when the flashing circular yellow lens is illuminated .
ensure that the gate arm is fully retroreflectorized on both sides with vertical alternating red and white stripes at num inch intervals measured horizontally in accordance with the mutcd .
when the arm is in the down position blocking the approach lane num .
the minimum vertical aspect of the arm and sheeting shall be num inches and num .
the end of the arm shall reach at least to the center of the lane being controlled .
do not provide a change interval between the display of the steady circular red indication and the display of the flashing circular yellow indication .
provide a steady illuminated circular yellow indication with at least a num second duration between the transition from flashing circular yellow indication and the display of the steady circular red indication .
the engineer may approve a different duration provided it falls within the range recommended by the mutcd .
num temporary barrier .
producers of temporary concrete barrier seeking inclusion on the departments production facility listing shall meet the requirements of section num .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of proprietary temporary barrier systems for inclusion on the apl must meet the nchrp report num tlnum criteria or mash tlnum criteria and submit the following num .
product drawings which at a minimum must include a. freestanding and anchored details as appropriate b .
section views and tables showing required setback distance deflection space for all installation configuration options c. alignment and length of need requirements d. transition and overlap details end treatment details num .
installation manuals num .
crash testing reports num .
all relevant fhwa eligibility letters num temporary crash cushion redirective or gating .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of crash cushions for inclusion on the apl must meet the nchrp report num tlnum or tlnum criteria or mash tlnum or tlnum criteria and submit the following num .
product drawings which at a minimum must include num return to table of contents a. anchorage details for both the crash cushion and abutting temporary barrier b .
tables showing the relevant system information and lengths for all options c. length of need location d. transition details e. list of all components num .
installation manuals num .
crash testing reports num .
all relevant fhwa eligibility letters num return to table of contents section num highway lighting materials num general .
num pole design criteria the light poles and bracket arms shall be in accordance with the requirements of the aashto lrfd specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals the fdot structures manual and with the specific requirements contained in this section .
num luminaires driver etc .
all luminaires shall be one of the products listed in the departments approved product list apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
the light source for luminaires shall be either light emitting diodes led magnetic induction or plazma induction .
the luminaire housing shall be constructed of precision cast aluminum with a corrosive resistant polyester powder coat finish .
the standard color shall be gray .
the housing shall have an electrical terminal block to attach the luminaire cable and a hinged door which provides direct access to internal parts .
all hardware on the exterior of the housing shall be stainless steel .
the refractor and lens shall consist of glass or an optical grade polymer .
the manufacturer shall place a permanent tag in the luminaire housing imprinted with the manufacturer name luminaire voltage lamp wattage and provide a blank area for the contractor to inscribe the installation date .
luminaires shall meet the following requirements ul num listed and labeled for installation in wet locations by an osha recognized nationally recognized testing laboratory nrtl be capable of maintaining num intensity at num hours with an ambient temperature of numc ies lmnum and have iesna light distribution curves ies lmnum by an epa recognized laboratory .
the driver shall be rated for num hours and have a power factor greater than or equal to num at full load with a total harmonic distortion less than or equal to num at full load .
the fixture shall accommodate a circuit voltage of numv .
luminaires shall be provided with a minimum numkvnumka internal surge suppression module meeting ul numansi cnum category c. the manufacturer shall submit a five year nonprorated full warranty on all components of the luminaire to the department .
the warranty shall begin on the project acceptance date and include all components of luminaire .
num conductors all conductors shall be colorcoded stranded copper meeting the requirements of nema wc num .
all conductors shall be tested and listed by a nrtl .
service and circuit conductors shall be singleconductor cable type thwnnum and shall not be smaller than no .
num awg .
bonding ground conductor shall have a green jacket and shall not be smaller than no .
num awg .
num conduit conduit shall meet the requirements of section num .
num electrical ground rod the electrical ground rods shall be num inch copper clad steel .
electrical ground rods shall be sectional type where length exceeds num feet .
num return to table of contents num fittings and bends fittings bends and miscellaneous hardware shall be in accordance with the national electrical code nec and shall be compatible with the adjacent conduit and materials .
num conductor splices unless otherwise shown in the standard plans or authorized by the engineer splices shall be made with compression sleeves or split bolt connectors .
the connector shall be sealed in silicone gel that easily peels away leaving a clean connection .
the gel shall be contained in a uv impact and abrasion resistant closure that when snapped around the split bolt will provide a waterproof connection without the use of tools or taping .
num pull boxes pull boxes shall meet the requirements of section num .
num distribution service point equipment all electrical equipment shall be provided with numc terminal lug connectors .
num service main two pole num v num min .
aic solid neutral nema numx stainless steel enclosed circuit breaker rated for service entrance .
num control panel enclosure nema numx stainless steel enclosure ground mounted in accordance with standard plans index num .
dimensions shall be as necessary for equipment inside .
num control panel main disconnect two pole numv num aic with solid neutral in nema num enclosure .
number and rating of branch circuit breakers shall be as indicated in plans .
num lighting contactor two pole numv electrical contactor in nema num enclosure whoa on cover numv coil and fused control power transformer .
num electrical panel single phase two pole numv with solid neutral in nema num enclosure .
num surge protection device type num ul or nrtl listed to num third edition .
surge current rating on per phase basis shall equal or exceed numka .
inominal rating shall be numka or numka .
numv true single phase system modes of protection shall include lg and ng having ul num voltage protection ratings of numv or lower .
numv split phase systems deriving numv across two energized conductors modes of protection shall include lg and ng having ul num voltage protection ratings of numv or lower .
num conventional lighting .
num poles poles for conventional lighting shall be aluminum unless otherwise shown in the plans .
num aluminum poles aluminum poles shall be round one piece continuoustapered highstrength aluminum and of an approved alloy meeting the requirements of the standard plans .
the poles shall be of such length as to provide the approximate luminaire mounting height shown in the plans .
poles installed on bridges walls and median concrete barriers shall be equipped with internal vibration damping devices .
num concrete poles concrete poles may be used only when specified in the plans .
when specified concrete poles shall meet the requirements of section num and standard plans index num for a type piii pole .
num bases aluminum poles shall be installed on transformer bases with the exception of lights installed on bridge pilasters or on top of median concrete barriers .
transformer base poles shall have a grounding lug in the transformer base .
the base shall be arranged for anchoring to a transformer base with four num inch anchor bolts minimum size .
num return to table of contents num bracket arms bracket arms shall be aluminum trusstype construction consisting of upper and lower members with vertical struts and shall have the luminaire end formed to accommodate a num inch pipe slipfitter .
the bracket arms shall meet the design requirements of num .
bracket arms shall be attached to aluminum poles with machine bolts and pole adapters unless approved otherwise .
num luminaires the luminaires shall meet the requirements shown in the plans and the following additional requirements .
a .
a maximum correlated color temperature cct of numk meeting ansi cnuma numk plus or minus numk .
b .
the optical portion of the housing shall be sealed to provide an ip num rating .
the luminaire mounting assembly shall be a slipfitter type designed to accommodate a nominal num inch pipe size num inch o.d .
arm or a pole top mounting assembly designed to accommodate a num inch pole top tenon .
for apl qualification the manufacturer must have a fixture with an iesna light distribution curve ies lmnum by an epa recognized laboratory meeting a minimum pole spacing of num feet using the aginum lighting optimization tool with the following settings setting requirement roadway standard ies rpnum rtable rnum qnum roadway layout two rows opposite with median numr opp wm roadway width num feet median width num feet number of lanes in direction of travel num drivers side of roadway right calculation area bottom mounting height as per manufacturers recommendation setback num feet tilt num optimization criteria avg .
illuminance num fc avg.min .
ratio num max.min .
ratio num lv max.l avg .
ratio num arm length pole top fixtures as provided by the ies file arm mounted fixtures num feet num luminaire cable pole and bracket cable shall be multiconductor type xhhwnum xlp tc with three no .
num awg .
num in line fuse holders in line fuse holders shall provide a breakaway connection and be ul recognized per guide izltnum and rated for numv .
the wire connections in the fuse holders shall be of the copper setscrew type .
fused connections shall utilize an atq or fnq num amp time delay fuse rated for numv .
fuses shall be ul listed to standard num .
the rating for the fuse holders shall be water resistant or submersible rated .
num return to table of contents num surge protection devices for circuit protection at poles the metal oxide varistor mov based spd shall be potted in a manner to be waterproof .
ul listing is not required .
spds per mode surge current rating shall be numka for numv to ground and numka for neutral to ground .
maximum continuous operation voltage mcov shall be not less than numvrms and not greater than numvrms .
all wires and internal spacings shall be insulated for numvrms .
num pole cable distribution system .
num general these requirements are applicable for all systems rated up to and including numv .
the installed system shall be in compliance with standard plans index num num .
systems installed as alternates to the standard plans shall be one of the products listed on the apl .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product shall submit an application in accordance with section num .
alternate systems shall meet the following requirements a modular color coded cable system consisting of rubber cords with integrally molded watertight submersible connectors inline fuses submersible surge arrestor and breakaway connectors shall be installed .
the cables shall extend from an underground pull box near the base of the pole to the luminaires at the top of the pole .
a cable system shall be required at each pole .
the cable system shall consist of the following described components num .
distribution block the red molded body shall contain a three wire female outlet integrally molded to a num inch length of num soow cable with an end molded to the body and the other end shall be spliced in the field to the distribution cable that feeds through the underground pull box near the base of the pole .
the block shall be watertight and submersible when the integrally fused plug on the power cable is engaged and fully seated .
dimensions shall be approximately num inches by num inches by num inches .
the size is important because of limited space .
num .
surge arrestor cable provide a num inch length of num soow cable with a red male plug to match the red female connector cable extending from the fused plug on the power cable .
the other end of the surge arrestor cable shall be integrally molded to a mov waterproof surge arrestor .
the red male plug shall make a submersible connection when mated to the red female connector on the power cable .
a separate num inch length of no .
num thwn green ground wire shall be provided from the surge arrestor to attach to the ground system in the pull box .
num .
power cable this cable feeds the luminaire cable and the surge arrestor cable from the load side of its integrally fused red male plug end .
the red fused plug shall contain numa numv fuses num inch by num inch or equal .
a solid copper slug shall be installed on neutral side for line to neutral service .
both lines shall be fused for line to line service .
the section that feeds the luminaire cable shall be a num foot section of num soow cable with an orange female connector molded to the end extending up into the base of the pole .
this female connector shall pass easily through a standard size num inch pvc elbow and make a submersible connection when mated with the orange male plug on the luminaire cable .
the section that feeds the surge arrestor cable shall be num inches in length of num soow cable with a red female connector on the end .
the red female connector shall make a submersible connection when mated to the red male plug on the surge arrestor cable .
num return to table of contents num .
luminaire cable this cable is type xhhwnum xlptc with three no .
num awg an orange male molded plug molded to match the orange female end of the power cable .
the connector shall require num pounds of force to mate or disengage from the female end .
when engaged the connection shall be watertight and submersible .
the cable strain relief shall extend approximately num inches from the connector .
the distribution block and each connector shall be made of thermosetting synthetic polymer which is nonflame supporting and which remains flexible over a temperature range of minusnumf to plus numf .
hardness of the molded rubber shall be num durometer .
num testing and performance criteria the system shall pass the following performance criteria in accordance with nec num num .
num .
dielectric test no breakdown shall occur with a test potential of numv applied between the primary conductors tied together and the protective ground for a period of oneminute .
num .
leakage current test leakage current shall be measured on the mated connectors between the primary conductors and the protective ground conductor .
when tested at the rated operating voltage the leakage current shall not exceed num ma .
the mated connectors shall then be wrapped in aluminum foil and the leakage current measured between the primary conductors and the foil wrap .
when tested at the rated operation voltage the leakage current shall not exceed num ma .
num .
flame retardant test flammability tests shall be conducted on the cable the molded body of the connectors and the molded protective caps .
these materials shall be subjected to five flame application on for num seconds and off for num seconds .
the materials shall selfextinguish within one minute upon removal of the flame and not burn through .
num .
internal temperature test the internal temperature rise of the contact area of the mated connectors shall not exceed a temperature rise of numf referenced to numf ambient temperature when operated at the maximum current rating .
num .
external temperature test the external temperature rise of the mated connectors and the cable shall not be greater than numf referenced to numf ambient temperature when operated at the maximum current rating .
num .
fault test the mated connectors shall be fault tested by applying a test current of numa num hz for a minimum of num cycles num ms .
the mated connectors shall then satisfactorily pass the dielectric test .
num .
drop test the connectors shall not break crack or suffer other damage when subjected to eight consecutive drop tests from num feet above the concrete floor with the connectors having been rotated num degrees between each drop .
num .
crushing test no breakage of deformation shall result when the mated and unmated connectors are subjected to a crushing force of num pounds for one minute .
following the crush test the dielectric test shall be satisfactorily passed .
num .
impact test no breakage or deformation shall result when the connectors are subjected to an impact caused by dropping a cylindrical num pound weight having a flat face num inches in diameter from a height of num inches .
num .
flex test no detachment or loosening shall result when each connector is subjected to a num cycle flex test at the cablebond area back and forth in a plane through an angle of num degrees .
following the flex test the dielectric test shall be satisfactorily passed .
num return to table of contents num .
no load endurance test no excessive wear shall result when the male and female connectors and protective cap and female connector were subjected to num cycles of complete insertion and withdrawal .
num .
rain test the mated and capped connectors shall be subjected to a continuous water spray simulating worst case outdoor rain down pour for at least one hour at a rate of at least num inches per hour at an operating pressure of num psi .
the dielectric and leakage current tests shall be satisfactorily passed .
the connectors shall be unmated and caps removed .
inspection shall indicate that water had been successfully prevented from reaching the contact areas of the connectors .
num .
watertight immersion test the mated and capped connectors shall be immersed in water for one hour in which the highest point of the test samples in as least num feet below the water level .
immediately following the immersion a satisfactory dielectric and leakage current tests shall be performed .
the connectors shall be unmated and caps removed .
inspection shall indicate that water had been successfully prevented from reaching the contact areas of the connectors .
num .
exposure to deteriorating liquids the cable and connectors shall be dried at numf for one hour .
the samples shall then be immersed in astm reference oil no .
l and astm reference fuel c liquids for one hour .
the samples shall show no evidence of bubbling cracking or corrosion .
within one hour after being removed from the fluids the test samples shall satisfactorily pass the flammability test .
num high mast lighting .
num poles poles for high mast lighting shall be galvanized steel unless otherwise shown in the plans .
steel high mast poles shall be continuoustapered round or minimum of num sided poles and meet the requirements of the standard plans .
each pole shall include a galvanized steel wench plate of sufficient size to mount the winch portable drive unit mounting tube circuit breaker panel and surge arrestor .
num luminaires the luminaires shall meet the following requirements .
a .
a maximum correlated color temperature cct of numk meeting ansi cnuma numk plus or minus numk .
b .
the optical portion of the housing shall be sealed to provide an ip num rating .
the luminaire mounting assembly shall be a slip fitter type designed to accommodate a nominal num inch pipe size num inch o.d .
connection .
for qualification the manufacturer must have a fixture with a type v iesna light distribution curve ies lmnum by an epa recognized laboratory capable of providing photometrics similar to a num w hps fixture when mounted on num to num foot poles .
num surge protective devices for surge protection at poles surge protective devices spd shall be type num or type num .
ul or nrtl listed to ul num third edition .
surge current rating on a per phase basis shall be equal or exceed numka .
inominal rating shall be numka or numka .
modes of protection shall include lg and ng having ul num voltage protection ratings vprs of numv or lower .
num lowering system the lowering system may be either a top latch or bottom latch system .
the lowering system shall consist of the following .
num return to table of contents num head frame and covers the head frame unit shall rigidly mate the top of the pole to the head frame platform .
the platform with its associated sheaves shall be covered to prevent water from entering the top of the pole .
the head frame structure shall be stainless steel and attach to the pole by stainless steel bolts or by means of a galvanized steel slipfitter .
the head frame shall utilize two stainless steel cable sheaves for each lowering cable .
the cable sheaves shall be a minimum of num inches in diameter and grooved to the exact cable diameter for num cable bearing surface .
the power cord shall travel on sheaves or a combination of rollers providing a radius for the cord of num inches or larger .
each end of the sheaves or rollers shall have a keeper to prevent the cable from jumping out of the roller track or sheave cover that will act as a keeper .
bearings shall have permanent lubrication .
for top latch systems the head frame shall include latch mechanisms which support the luminaire ring in the latched position and prevent the luminaire ring from rotation .
for bottom latch systems the head frame shall include centering guides which center the luminaire ring and prevent the ring from rotation .
num luminaire ring the luminaire ring assembly shall consist of the luminaire ring hoisting cable terminator tubes and weather proof junction box .
the luminaire ring and the junction box shall be fabricated of stainless steel .
the ring shall be supplied with bolt on num inch stainless steel pipe tenons for the required number of luminaires .
two of the stainless steel tenons shall have a num inch half coupling welded to the tenon for the possible installation of federal aviation administration faa approved obstruction lights .
the inner portion of the ring shall be equipped with a pvc shock absorbing tubes or shall utilize roller contact springloaded centering arms which center the luminaire ring and protect the pole and luminaire ring during raising or lowering operations .
a num volt terminal block completely prewired shall be included in the junction box .
the luminaire ring shall be prewired with distribution wiring suitable for proper application and operation of the luminaires .
a male flanged receptacle shall be mounted on the luminaire ring to allow testing of the luminaire while in the lowered position .
the receptacle shall face away from the pole for easy access .
num lowering cables for bottom latch lowering systems a minimum of two cables shall be used to lower the luminaire ring .
lowering cables for bottom latch systems shall be stainless steel aircraft cables of num inch or greater diameter .
where the wire cables bend over sheaves or the winch drum the maximum working stress in the outer fibers of wire cable shall not exceed num of the cable manufactures rated ultimate stress .
the hoisting cable shall manually latch at the base of the pole and shall remove the load from the winch system .
each latch point shall be capable of supporting the entire weight of the luminaire ring assembly including luminaires .
all moving parts of the latch mechanism shall be within reach from the ground level .
for top latch lowering systems three stainless steel aircraft cables of num inches or greater diameter shall be provided .
the transition yoke hardware connecting the lowering cables to the transition yoke and hardware connecting the winch cable to the transition yoke shall be stainless steel .
where the wire cables bend over sheaves or the winch drum the maximum working stress in the outer fibers of wire cable shall not exceed num of the cable manufacturers rated ultimate stress .
all latching systems shall remove the load from the winch system .
each latch point shall be capable of supporting the entire weight of the luminaire ring assembly including luminaires .
num modular power cable system the modular cable system shall consist of cables with weathertight connectors .
all portions of the cable system shall be rated up num return to table of contents to and including num v. the plugs and connectors shall be ul or nrtl listed to ul num twist lock type devices with a nema lnumr configuration for numv line to neutral systems or for numv line to line systems .
the x designated prong shall be the hot leg for numv line to neutral systems .
the x and z designated prongs shall be the hot legs for numv line to line systems .
the z designated prong shall always be treated as a neutral leg .
the plugs and connectors shall be equipped with watertight safety shrouds meeting ul numx enclosure rating .
plugs and connectors when used on cord sets shall be equipped with ip num rated waterproof boots .
the power cable shall be a minimum of num soow cable that is wired from distribution cable in the pull box near the base of the pole to the line side of the circuit breaker panel .
the circuit breaker cable shall be an num foot length of num soow minimum cable that is connected to the load side of the circuit breaker panel and a female receptacle on the other end .
this female receptacle shall mate with the male plug on the pole cable the male flanged receptacle on the luminaire ring and the male plug on the portable step down transformer .
the pole cable shall be the length of the mounting height of the pole plus num feet .
the cable shall be a minimum of num soow with a male plug on one end that mates with the female receptacle on the circuit breaker cable .
the other end fits under the lugs in the junction box on the luminaire ring .
the power cable shall be attached to the luminaire ring with a stainless steel strain relief kellems grip capable of withstanding the pull of the weight of the cable .
all power cables should be attached to the stainless steel weathertight wiring chamber with weathertight cable connectors num winch drum the drum shall be constructed of stainless steel and be designed to provide a level wind of wire cable .
the winch shall be a reversible worm gear self locking type with an integral friction drag brake to prevent free spooling .
raising speed of the luminaire ring shall be a minimum of num feet per minute .
stainless steel num x num aircraft cables of num inch or greater diameter shall be supplied on the winch .
the winch drums shall be designed to provide smooth winding of the winch cables on the drum and to prevent cable slippage on the drum .
num external portable winch motor one per project the winch shall be designed for hand operation or for operation by means of a num inch heavy duty reversing electric drill motor or a portable reversible ac motor with a magnetic brake .
both portable power units shall be mounted to the winch by a stainless steel mounting bracket and shall be remote controlled to enable the operator to stand num feet from the pole .
one portable drill motor or portable motor power unit shall be provided for each project .
num portable stepdown transformer one per project a portable num kva dry type transformer shall be provided for each project .
the transformer shall stepdown the high mast distribution voltage to numv .
the transformer shall be mounted in a nema numr enclosure and have a male plug or receptacle which mates to circuit power cable .
the transformer shall also have a numv grounded receptacle for use by electric drill motor or portable motor power unit .
num sign lighting .
num luminaires the luminaires shall meet the following requirements .
num return to table of contents a .
a maximum correlated color temperature cct of numk meeting ansi cnuma numk plus or minus numk .
b .
the optical portion of the housing shall be sealed to provide an ip num rating .
the luminaire mounting assembly for a sign luminaire shall be a slipfitter type designed to accommodate a num inch schedule num steel pipe arm connection .
num underdeck lighting .
num luminaires the luminaires shall meet the following requirements .
a .
a maximum correlated color temperature cct of numk meeting ansi cnuma numk plus or minus numk .
b .
the optical portion of the housing shall be sealed to provide an ip num rating .
underdeck fixtures shall be wall mounted fixtures .
num conductors underdeck structure lighting conductors shall be type rhw or thw and shall not be smaller than no .
num awg .
num protection of light poles .
each metal pole shall be appropriately and adequately protected by tire wrapping with heavy paper or by some other effective means so that no chipping gouging or other significant surface damage will be incurred during transit or installation .
the poles when installed shall be clean and uniformly free from dark streaks and discoloration .
num return to table of contents section num object markers and delineators num object markers .
num general object markers shall meet the general requirements outlined in the manual of uniform traffic control devices mutcd .
for uniformity all type num markers shall be either omnum or omnum style markers all type num markers shall be either omnumv or omnumv style markers and all end of road markers shall be either omnum or omnum style markers .
num retroreflectors the reflectors shall be of acrylic plastic and shall be a minimum of num inches in diameter .
they shall be mounted in a heavyduty housing with a back plate .
the reflector shall consist of a clear and transparent plastic lens which shall be red or amber as specified and a plastic back of the same material fused to the lens under heat and pressure around the entire perimeter in such manner as to form a homogeneous unit permanently sealed against dust water and water vapor .
the lens shall consist of a smooth front surface free from projections or indentations other than for identification or orientation and a rear surface bearing a prismatic configuration such that it will effect total internal reflection of light .
the acrylic plastic shall be of a type meeting the requirements of federal specification lpnum type i class num and in order that the department can readily check the suitability of the raw material used the manufacturer shall stipulate the raw material and the particular molding compound to be furnished .
num durability tests for retroreflectors seal test the following test will be used to determine if a reflector is adequately sealed against dust and water .
submerge num samples in water bath at room temperature .
subject the submerged samples to a vacuum of num inches gauge for five minutes .
restore atmospheric pressure and leave samples submerged for five minutes then remove and examine the samples for water intake .
failure of more than two of the num samples tested shall be cause for tentative rejection of the lot .
num optical requirements the initial specific intensity of object markers shall be at least equal to the minimum values shown below .
failure to meet the required specific intensity shall constitute failure of the reflector being tested .
observation angle entrance angle specific intensity candelasfootcandle crystal yellow red num degree num degree num num num num degree num degree num num num the reflector to be tested shall be spun so as to have an average orientation effect and shall be placed at a distance of num feet from a single light source having an effective diameter of num inches .
the light source shall be operated at approximately normal efficiency .
the return light from the reflector shall be measured by means of a photoelectric photometer having a minimum sensitivity of num by num footcandles per mm scale division .
the num return to table of contents photometer shall have a receiving aperture of num inch diameter shielded to prevent the entry of stray light .
the distance from light source center to aperture center shall be num inches for the num degree observation angle .
if a test distance other than the stipulated num feet is used the source and the aperture dimensions and the distance between source and aperture shall be modified directly as the test distance .
num reflector housing the reflector shall be mounted in a housing fabricated of aluminum alloy no .
numh num or other alloy approved as equal for the purpose and having a thickness of num inches .
num retroreflective sheeting num retroreflective sheeting the retroreflective sheeting for object markers shall meet the requirements of section num sheeting types iv v or xi .
the retroreflective area shall be in accordance with the mutcd .
the retroreflective sheeting shall be permanently adhered to num inch sheet aluminum for type num markers and num inch sheet aluminum for type num num and end of the road markers .
aluminum shall be of numtnum astm bnum prepared in accordance with recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
num assembly type num and num markers shall be mounted directly to the post by two holes on the face of the marker .
the mounting holes shall be num inch square holes to receive num inch carriage bolts or other num inch bolts and shall be spaced to fit holes on the post spaced at num inch centers .
num posts the marker posts shall be of steel or aluminum as shown in the standard plans or the plans .
steel posts shall be num lbft .
flanged uchannel .
the uchannel posts shall meet the mechanical requirements of astm anum grade num .
provide uchannel posts that have been galvanized after fabrication in accordance with astm anum and have a smooth uniform finish free from defects affecting strength durability and appearance .
for each uchannel punch or drill num inch diameter holes on num inch centers through the center of the post starting approximately num inch from the top and extending the full length of the post .
punching or drilling operations shall be completed prior to galvanization .
the weight per foot of a manufacturers u channel size shall not vary more than plus or minus num of its specified weight per foot .
machinestraighten the uchannel to a tolerance of num of the length .
uchannel posts shall be listed on the apl .
round aluminum posts shall meet the requirements of standard plans index num .
use attachment hardware nuts bolts clamps brackets braces etc .
of aluminum or galvanized steel .
num delineators .
num general delineators shall be classified into five types flexible post delineators nonflexible post delineators high visibility median separator delineators high performance delineators and barrier delineators .
num flexible post delineators num dimensions the post shall have a minimum width of num inches facing traffic and of such length to generally provide a height of num inches above the pavement surface .
num color the post shall be opaque white .
the yellowness index shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with astm dnum or astm enum .
the daylight num degree num degree luminous directional reflectance shall be a minimum of num when tested in accordance with astm enum .
num return to table of contents num num retroreflective sheeting the reflective sheeting shall be types iv v or xi and meet the requirements of section num .
the reflective sheeting shall have a minimum width of num inches and have a minimum area of num square inches .
num impact performance posts shall be tested and evaluated according to the national testing product evaluation program ntpep project work plan for field evaluation of flexible surface mounted delineator posts .
a temperature of numf or greater may be used in lieu of the ntpep temperature requirements .
posts shall be capable of returning to a vertical position plus or minus num degrees with no delaminating and one post may list no more than num degrees .
no post shall split crack break or separate from base .
num nonflexible post delineators num posts the posts shall meet the requirements of num except the steel delineator post shall be num lbft .
num retroreflective sheeting the retroreflective sheeting shall be types iv v or xi sheeting and meet the requirements of section num .
the reflective sheeting shall have a minimum width of num inches and have a minimum area of num square inches .
the retroreflective sheeting shall be permanently adhered to num inch sheet aluminum .
num high visibility median separator delineators num dimensions the delineator shall have a minimum height of num inches above the surface of the separator .
num post base the base shall be manufactured to accommodate the replacement of the post .
the base shall be mechanically anchored to the separator and be capable of withstanding ten vehicle impacts without damage .
num color the plastic post shall be opaque white .
the yellowness index shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with astm dnum or astm enum .
the daylight num degree num degree luminous directional reflectance shall be a minimum of num when tested in accordance with astm enum or astm enum .
num retroreflective sheeting the reflective sheeting shall be types iv v or xi and meet the requirements of section num .
the reflective sheeting shall have a minimum width of num inches and have a minimum area of num square inches facing the approach to the separator .
the sheeting shall be yellow in color for both approaches .
num impact performance the post installed according to manufacturers recommendations shall be capable of returning to a vertical position plus or minus num degrees when tested according to national testing product evaluation program ntpep .
the ntpep requirement of onehalf of the hits at num f is waived .
all hits may be at num f or greater .
ntpep data or independent test lab data shall be submitted for product approval .
num high performance delineators num dimensions the delineator shall have a minimum height of num inches above the pavement surface and have a minimum dimension of num inches .
num post base the base shall be manufactured to accommodate the replacement of the post .
the base shall be mechanically anchored to the pavement and be capable of withstanding fifty vehicle impacts without damage .
num color the plastic post shall be opaque white .
the yellowness index shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with astm dnum or astm enum .
the daylight num degree num degree luminous directional reflectance shall be a minimum of num when tested in accordance with astm enum or astm enum .
num return to table of contents num retroreflective sheeting the reflective sheeting shall be type v abrasion resistant sheeting and meet the requirements of section num .
the reflective sheeting shall have a minimum omni directional area of num square inches .
num impact performance the post installed according to manufacturers recommendations shall be capable of returning to a vertical position plus or minus num degrees with no delaminating after receiving fifty vehicle impacts when tested according to national testing product evaluation program ntpep .
the ntpep requirement of onehalf of the hits at numf is waived .
all hits shall be at numf or greater .
ntpep data or independent test lab data shall be submitted for product approval .
for acceptance purposes there should be no post failures and no more than two posts may list between num and numafter receiving fifty vehicle impacts .
num barrier delineators num general barrier delineators shall consist of retroreflective sheeting permanently adhered to num inch minimum thick body .
the body shall have a flexible hinge which allows the reflector to fold down and spring back to an upright position after impact .
barrier delineators for guardrail shall be designed for mounting to the web of steel posts or designed for mounting to the top of wood posts .
barrier delineators for concrete barrier traffic railings and vehicular longitudinal channelizing devices lcds shall be designed for mounting to the top of each device .
num retroreflective sheeting the sheeting for barrier delineators shall be type iv or xi meeting the requirements of section num .
the sheeting shall be yellow or white depending on the locations of use for each .
the dimensions of the retroreflective sheeting shall be num inches wide by num inches high .
the sheeting shall be installed by the delineator manufacturer .
num product acceptance on the project .
acceptance will be made in accordance with the requirements of section num .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their product must submit an application in accordance with section num .
num return to table of contents section num retroreflective and nonreflective sheeting and sign panel fabrication num description .
num general this section specifies the requirements for retroreflective and nonreflective sheeting and sign panel materials and fabrication .
this includes the sign sheeting materials such as transparent and opaque process inks for retroreflective sheeting materials vinyl and transparent overlays .
num retroreflective and nonreflective sheeting systems .
num materials retroreflective sheeting material will be classified in accordance with and meet the requirements of astm dnum .
overlay materials include colored and colorless transparent overlays and vinyl .
num approved product list apl all sheeting process inks and overlay materials will be listed as a system on the departments approved product list apl .
sign sheeting systems will consist of base sheeting with ink andor overlay materials .
products with an astm classification of type xi or greater will not be accepted for qualification on the apl for fluorescent orange fluorescent yellow and fluorescent yellowgreen .
manufacturers seeking evaluation of their products need to submit product data sheets performance test reports from an independent laboratory showing the sign sheeting system meets the requirements of this section and a apl application in accordance with section num .
information on the apl application must include the individual materials comprising the sign sheeting system and identify colors astm base sheeting classification adhesive backing class availability of transparent andor opaque backing and availability of liner types .
submit an infrared identification curve num to num m for each color of ink .
num performance requirements .
num general sheeting process inks and overlay materials must be tested in accordance with and meet all the performance requirements of astm dnum including supplemental requirement snum reboundable sheeting requirements except as amended in this section .
for performance requirements that are color dependent each color included in the apl application must be tested and meet the requirements identified in astm dnum or this section as applicable .
all sign sheeting systems consisting of inks andor overlays will be tested as a system consisting of white base sheeting and each color of ink andor overlay .
panels for testing sheeting must be prepared in accordance with num for testing .
the inservice life for the sign sheeting system will equal the life of the reflective base sheeting of the system .
num retroreflective intensity the retroreflectivity of sheeting and sheeting systems must meet the minimum initial requirements as stated for all observation and entrance angles as identified in astm dnum .
the num and num degree observation angles with an entrance angle of minus num degrees per astm dnum will be used for inservice requirements .
rotational sensitivity shall be tested in accordance with aashto mnum .
rotationally sensitive sheeting will be noted on the apl .
num return to table of contents num clear overlay films clear overlay film must be compatible with the sign sheeting system and not delaminate or discolor for the inservice life of the system .
submit spectrophotometer analysis indicating the luminous transmittance across the wavelength range from num nm to num nm in accordance with astm dnum procedure b .
film shall filter less than num luminous transmittance for num nm to num nm .
num outdoor weathering outdoor weathering exposure of sign sheeting systems will be in accordance with and meet the requirements of astm dnum for each system color and classification .
all testing will be conducted at an exposure location meeting the tropical summer rain climate type miami florida or equivalent .
outdoor weathering is not required for type vi fluorescent pink .
num packaging and labeling packaging and labeling must meet the requirements of astm dnum .
num samples field samples will be obtained in accordance with the departments sampling testing and reporting guide schedule and on a random basis at the discretion of the engineer .
num sign panels .
num materials for aluminum sheets and plates for sign panels meet the requirements of astm b num aluminum association alloy numtnum numhnum or numhnum and those shown in the plans .
num preparation of sign blanks .
num degreasing and etching for aluminum sign blanks num general prior to the application of retroreflective sheeting use any of the methods shown below to degrease and etch the aluminum sign blanks .
num hand method under this method degrease and etch the blanks in one operation using steel wool medium grade with any of the following combinations of materials num .
an abrasive cleanser of a commercial grade kitchen scouring powder .
num .
acid and a suitable detergent solution .
num .
an alkaline solution .
thoroughly rinse the blanks with clean water following all hand degreasing operations .
num powerwasher method under this method degrease the blanks with an inhibited alkaline cleanser by spraying for num seconds with the solution between num and numf the exact temperature to be as recommended by the manufacturer of the cleanser .
after the spraying rinse the blanks with clean water .
then etch the blanks by immersing them in a num to num solution of phosphoric acid at a temperature of num to numf for num seconds .
after immersion rinse the blanks in clean water .
num immersion method under this method degrease the blanks by immersing them in a solution of inhibited alkaline cleanser at a temperature between num and numf for three to five minutes and then rinsing with clean water .
then etch blanks by immersing them in a num to num solution of phosphoric acid at a temperature of numf for three minutes .
after immersion rinse the blanks in clean water .
num return to table of contents num vapor degreasing method under this method degrease the blanks by totally immersing them in a saturated vapor of trichloroethylene .
remove trademark printing with lacquer thinner or a controlled alkaline cleaning system .
num alkaline degreasing method degrease the blanks by totally immersing them in a tank containing an alkaline solution controlled and titrated in accordance with the solution manufacturers directions .
adapt immersion time to the amount of soil present and the thickness of the metal .
after immersion thoroughly rinse the blanks with running water .
num etching method when degreasing is separate operation if using either of the degreasing methods described in this section accomplish etching by one of the following alternate methods num .
acid etch etch well in a num to num phosphoric acid solution at numf or in a proprietary acid etching solution .
rinse thoroughly with running cold water which may be followed by a hot water rinse .
num .
alkaline etch etch aluminum surfaces in an alkaline etching material that is controlled by titration .
meet the time temperature and concentration requirements specified by the solution manufacturer .
after completing etching is complete rinse the panel thoroughly .
num chromate coating before applying retroreflective sheeting to the aluminum treat the aluminum sign surfaces with chromate conversion coating .
coating may consist of an organic or inorganic chromate material .
coatings shall be applied according to the manufacturers instructions and shall conform to astm bnum class num .
num drying dry the panels using a forcedair drier .
use a device or clean canvas gloves to handle the material between all cleaning and etching operations and the application of retroreflective sheeting .
do not allow the metal to come in contact with greases oils or other contaminants prior to the application of retroreflective sheeting .
num fabrication of sign blanks fabricate all metal parts to ensure a proper fit of all sign components .
complete all fabrication with the exception of cutting and punching of holes prior to metal degreasing and applying the retroreflective sheeting .
cut metal panels to size and shape and keep free of buckles warp dents burrs and defects resulting from fabrication .
use aluminum sheets with increments of num feet in width except for sign widths that are not multiples of num feet .
a maximum of two panels may be cut to less than num feet and no panel may be cut to less than one foot .
mount aluminum sheets vertically and provide backing strips at vertical joints to keep the abutting sheets in proper alignment .
ship all multipanel signs to the project intact completely assembled and ready to be installed .
fabricate signs taller than num feet as two separate signs with a horizontal splice ready to be spliced and installed .
num fabrication of retroreflective sign faces .
num general fabricate signs with sign sheeting systems listed on the apl meeting the requirements in section num the standard plans and the plans .
num application of sheeting apply retroreflective sheeting to the base panels with mechanical equipment in a manner specified for the manufacture of traffic control signs by the sheeting manufacturer .
for sheeting that has been identified as rotationally sensitive apply white sheeting for cutout legends symbols borders and route marker attachments within the parent sign face at the optimum rotation angle according to the identification markings .
num return to table of contents apply all background sheeting at a uniform rotational angle .
the retroreflective sheeting for each sign will be from the same roll or lot number .
apply consecutively alternate successive width sections of either sheeting or panels to ensure that corresponding edges of sheeting lie adjacent on the finished sign .
if the sign can not be constructed from retroreflective sheeting from the same roll or lot number the fabricator may color match from a different lot the color between the rolls can not exceed three es using test method astm d num .
the engineer will not accept nonconformance that may result in nonuniform shading and an undesirable contrast between adjacent widths of applied sheeting or non optimum retroreflectivity in the finished sign and installation .
sheeting is to be trimmed at num degree angle from the edge of each panel .
finish signs by sealing sheeting splices and sign edges according to sign manufacturer recommendations .
num direct and reverse screen processing screen message and borders on retroreflective sheeting in accordance with the recommendations of the ink or overlay manufacturer .
process messages either before or after applying the sheeting to the base panels .
the transparent and opaque process inks furnished for direct and reverse screen processing shall be of a type and quality formulated for retroreflective sheeting materials as listed on the apl and applied in accordance with the manufacturers instruction .
screen processing in accordance with the techniques and procedures recommended by the manufacturer must produce a uniform legend of continuous stroke width of either transparent or opaque ink with sharply defined edges and without blemishes on the sign background that will affect the intended sign use .
num finished sign face provide finished signs with properly aligned clean cut and sharp messages and borders .
fabricated signs must be free of wrinkles bubbles foreign matter scratches free of patches or other visually identifiable defects .
ensure that finished background panels are essentially a plane surface .
num packaging and labeling for permanent roadway signs label the back of all finished panels at the bottom edge with fdot the date of fabrication sign sheeting system manufacturer type and the fabricators initials .
for type vi nonreflective vinyl work zone signs label the back of all finished panels at the bottom edge with daytime use only .
make the labels unobtrusive but legible enough to be easily read by an observer on the ground when the sign is in its final position .
apply the label in a manner that is at least as durable as the sign face .
properly package signs to protect them during storage shipment and handling to prevent damage to the sign face and panel .
num return to table of contents
