arizona department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction num arizona department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction num num copies of the standard specifications for road and bridge construction may be purchased by contacting arizona department of transportation engineering records num w . jackson room numf phoenix az num telephone num num introductory revision marks vertical lines in the right margin have been added to these specifications to highlight areas where changes have occurred since the num edition .
revision marks appearing in the space between two paragraphs are indicative of a deletion of a paragraph from the num edition .
the revision marks are intended to facilitate location of new material but provide no guarantee explicit or implicit that text not highlighted has appeared in prior editions of these specifications .
ii num blank num num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num num asphaltrubber stressabsorbing membrane num num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num num pavement fabric interlayer num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber end product num num asphaltic concrete end product num num asphaltic concrete end product shrp volumetric mix num division v drainage facilities num pipe culvert and storm drains num num structural plate pipe pipe arches and arches num num concrete catch basins num num standpipes num num manholes num num underdrains num num edge drains num division vi structures num concrete structures num num prestressing concrete num num piling num num steel structures num num steel reinforcement num num overhead sign structures num num roadside sign supports num num sign panels num num drilled shaft foundations num num painting num division vii traffic control facilities num maintenance and protection of traffic num num attenuation devices num num delineators and markers num num thermoplastic pavement markings num num preformed plastic pavement marking num num raised pavement markers num num tubular marker flexible num num permanent pavement markings num num dual component pavement markings num num blank num iii num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems num num structural supports and foundations for traffic signal and highway lighting num num electrical underground material num num signal indications and mounting assemblies num num traffic controller assembly num num detectors num num highway and sign lighting num num incidental electrical w ork num division viii roadside development num landscape excavation num num landscape grading num num landscape plating materials num num topsoil num num seeding num num trees shrubs and plants num num landscaping establishment num num w ater distribution num num sewerage system num num erosion control and pollution prevention num division ix incidentals num mobilization num num chain link fence num num w ire fence num num chain link cable barrier num num guardrail num num cattle guards num num dampproofing and w aterproofing concrete surfaces num num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks and driveways num num survey monuments num num concrete barriers num num rightofw ay markers num num shotcrete num num bank protection num num w alls and miscellaneous structures num num temporary silt fence num num embankment curb num num embankment spillways embankment downdrains inlets and outlets num num turnout construction num num concrete gore paving num num blank num iv num utility concrete for miscellaneous construction num num blank num num construction surveying and layout num num engineers field office num num engineers field laboratory num num groundin rumble strip num division x materials num material sources num num paint num num reinforcing steel num num structural metals num num bituminous materials for surfacing num num portland cement concrete num num retroreflective sheeting num num prismatic reflectors num num asphaltrubber material num num drainage pipe num num joint materials num num guardrail materials num num bearing pads num num geosynthetics num num epoxy materials num num packaged dry concrete and mortar materials num num nonshrink grout materials num index num section num num section num general titles and headings are for convenience of reference and have no bearing on the interpretation of these specifications .
w hen a publication is specified it refers to the most recent date of issue including interim publications before the bid opening date for the project unless a specific date or year of issue is provided .
in the contract the words or equal referring to a product material or process mean equal as determined by the department .
in the contract the words as indicated or indicated mean as indicated or indicated on the contract plans .
section num definitions and terms num abbreviations w herever the following abbreviations are used in these specifications or in other contract documents they are to be construed the same as the respective expressions represented aaa aluminum alloy association aama architectural aluminum manufacturers association aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute adeq arizona department of environmental quality adot arizona department of transportation aec arizona electric code afpa american forest paper association aga american gas association agc associated general contractors of america aia american institute of architects aiee american institute of electrical engineers section num num aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute aitc american institute of timber construction als american lumber standards ansi american national standards institute apa american plywood association ara american railway association area american railway engineering association ars arizona revised statutes artba american road and transportation builders association asa american standards association asce american society of civil engineers ashrae american society of heating refrigeration and air conditioning engineers ashve american society of heating and ventilating engineers asla american society of landscape architects asld arizona state land department asme american society of mechanical engineers asre american society of refrigerating engineers asse american society of sanitary engineering astm american society for testing and materials atti arizona technical testing institute ave arithmetic mean aw g american w ire gauge aw i architectural w oodwork institute aw pa american w ood preservers association section num num aw pi american w ood preservers institute aw s american w elding society aw w a american w ater w orks association azi american zinc institute cispi cast iron soil pipe institute cfr code of federal regulations cpi clay pipe institute cra california redwood association crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute cs commercial standards dbe disadvantaged business enterprise eia electronic industries association fcc federal communications commission fgja flat glass jobbers association fhw a federal highway administration fm factory mutual fss federal specifications and standards general services administration ial independent approved laboratory iapmo international association of plumbing and mechanical officials ies illuminating engineering society imsa international municipal signal association ipcea insulated power cable engineers association ite institute of transportation engineers mag maricopa association of governments mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices section num num naamm national association of architectural metal manufacturers nbfu national board of fire underwriters nbs national bureau of standards ncma national concrete masonry association ncpi national clay pipe institute ncprc national clay pipe research corporation nesc national electrical safety code nema national electrical manufacturers association nfpa national fire protection association nist national institute for standards and technology u.s. department of commerce nlma national lumber manufacturers association nsf national sanitation foundation osha occupational safety and health administrationact pca portland cement association pci precastprestressed concrete institute plp plastic laminate producers ps product standard product standard section u.s. department of commerce pti posttensioning institute puesr pacific utilities electrical service requirements rma radio manufacturers association sae society of automotive engineers sspc steel structures painting council tca tile council of america ubc uniform building code ul underwriters laboratories inc .
section num num upc uniform plumbing code uss united states standard w cla w est coast lumbermans association w clib w est coast lumber inspection bureau w ia w oodwork institute of arizona w w pa w estern w ood products association num definitions w herever in the contract the following are used the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows acceptance activities performed by the department or its designated representative to determine the quality and acceptability of the materials and workmanship incorporated in a project .
addendum a revision to the contract made available to the bidders after advertisement for bids and before opening of proposals .
advertisement for bids the public announcement inviting bids for the work .
aggregate inert material such as sand gravel broken stone crushed stone or a combination thereof .
average value ave the arithmetic mean of a set of values which is defined as the sum of all of the values divided by the number of values .
award the acceptance by the transportation board of a proposal to perform the work .
backfill material placed in an excavated space to fill such space .
bidder section num num an individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof or joint venture submitting a proposal .
bid documentation bid documentation shall consist of all writings working papers computer printouts charts and data compilations that contain or reflect information data or calculations used by the bidder to determine the estimated costs resources andor time to be devoted to the work and all documents used to prepare the bid or proposal including material relating to the determination and application of equipment rates overhead rates time schedules labor rates efficiency or productivity rates arithmetic extensions subcontractor and material supplier quotations any manuals standard to the industry used by the bidder in determining the bid proposal are also considered bid documentation .
these manuals may be included in the bid documentation by reference and shall show the name and date of the publication and the publisher .
the term bid documentation does not include documents provided by the department for the bidders use in the preparation of the bid proposal .
bidding schedule the prepared schedule included as a part of the proposal pamphlet containing the estimated quantities of the pay items for which unit bid prices are invited .
bridge a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction as water highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than num feet between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
a bridge length the greater dimension of a structure measured along the center of the roadway between the backs of abutment backwalls or between ends of bridge floor .
b bridge roadway w idth the clear width of structure measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the bottom of curbs or if curbs are not used between the inner faces of parapet or railing .
section num num c substructure all that part of a structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and top of footings of rigid frames including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
d superstructure all that part of a structure above the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and top of footings of rigid frames excluding backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
calendar day any day shown on the calendar beginning at midnight extending for a twentyfour hour period and ending at midnight .
channel a natural or artificial watercourse .
characteristic a measurable property of a material product or item of construction .
city county township or town a subdivision of the state used to designate or identify the location of the proposed work .
compensable delay see delay .
complete in place complete in place means that payment will be full compensation for all work necessary to complete that portion of the contract in its entirety to the satisfaction of the engineer in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
w hen the basis of payment states the work will be paid for complete in place it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine the elements necessary to complete the work .
w hen the basis of payment includes a list of elements associated with the complete in place work the list shall not be construed to limit the work to the listed elements .
conduit a pipe used for receiving and protecting wires or cable .
construction easement a right to use or control property outside of the established rightofway limits for a designated project .
section num num contract the written agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligation of the parties including the performance of the work the furnishing of labor and materials and the basis of payment .
the contract includes the advertisement for bids proposal bidding schedule contract agreement and contract bonds certificates of insurance standard specifications special provisions project plans standard drawings documents incorporated by reference and any supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized time extensions all of which constitute one instrument .
contract bonds performance bond and payment bond the approved forms of security furnished by the contractor and the contractors surety or sureties guaranteeing the full and complete performance of the contract and all supplemental agreements and the payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the project .
contract time the number of working days or calendar days allowed for completion of the contract including authorized time extensions .
if a completion date is specified in the contract the contract time expires on that date .
contractor the individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof or joint venture contracting with the department for performance of the work .
controlling item a work activity in which any delay in its completion will result in a delay in the completion of the contract .
culvert any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under the roadway .
day a calendar day .
deficiency departure from or noncompliance with specified criteria .
section num num delay any event action force or factor that causes the length of time needed to perform the work to increase .
a compensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to additional compensation .
b excusable delay .
a delay to the contract or a milestone completion date which was unforeseeable and beyond the contractors control for which a time extension may be granted .
c noncompensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to an extension of time without additional compensation .
d nonexcusable delay .
a delay to the contract or milestone completion date that was reasonably foreseeable or within the control of the contractor for which no compensation or time extension will be granted .
department the arizona department of transportation as constituted under the laws of the state of arizona .
design purpose the set of design criteria for the finished project or any part thereof including strength service life economy of construction ease of maintenance appearance and safety .
director the arizona department of transportation director acting by and under the authority of the laws of the state of arizona .
engineer the state engineer acting by and under the authority of the laws of the state of arizona or the state engineers representative in matters relating to contract development administration and construction activities .
the use of the word engineer in these specifications relates to the state engineer district engineer resident engineer project supervisor or inspectors within the limits of their authority .
equipment all machinery equipment tools and apparatus together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
section num num equitable adjustment adjustment contract adjustment an increase or decrease in the contract price or time made by supplemental agreement in accordance with subsections num and num .
excusable delay see delay .
extra work w ork to be performed by the contractor not provided for in the contract but found essential for the satisfactory completion of the project .
highway street or road a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
holidays those days defined as legal holidays in arizona revised statutes section num on the date of the bid opening .
independent approved laboratory a testing laboratory which has been approved by the engineer to perform testing and which has been determined by the engineer to be free from any conflict of interest .
inspector the engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of contract performance .
item pay item a detail of work for which payment is made under the contract .
laboratory the testing laboratory of the department or any other testing laboratory which is certified or approved by the department .
liquidated damages a specified amount set forth in the contract as a reasonable estimate of the departments damages caused by the contractors failure to substantially complete the contract within the contract time .
lot section num num a designated or measured amount of construction or quantity of material assumed to be produced by the same process .
lump sum the price bid by a contractor as a single amount for a complete contract item as defined by the specifications or a price proposed by a contractor as a single amount for the performance of extra work .
major items a major item is an item whose total cost determined by multiplying the bidding schedule quantity and the contract unit price is equal to or greater than the amount indicated below .
a major item will remain a major item unless it is completely eliminated .
when the original total contract dollar amount is equal to or but less than greater than a major item shall be equal to or greater than the following amount in dollars num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num materials substances used in the construction of the project .
section num num median the untraveled portion of the highway street or road which separates the traveled roadway from traffic flowing in opposite directions .
minor item any item which is not a major item .
noncompensable delay see delay .
nonexcusable delay see delay .
notice of award w ritten notice to the contractor stating that its proposal has been accepted by the transportation board .
pavement structure the combination of subbase base course andor surface course placed to support the traffic load .
a subbase course one or more layers of specified or selected materials of designed thickness placed on the subgrade to support a base course .
b base course one or more layers of specified materials of designed thickness placed on a subbase course or a subgrade to support a surface course .
c surface course one or more layers of specified materials designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
the top layer is sometimes called a wearing course .
plans the project plans standard drawings working drawings and supplemental drawings or reproductions thereof approved by the engineer which show the location character dimensions and details of the work to be performed .
all such documents are to be considered as a part of the plans whether or not they are reproduced in the proposal pamphlet .
a standard drawings section num num drawings approved by the department for repetitive use showing details to be used where appropriate .
all standard drawings approved by the department plus subsequent revisions and additions are listed on the project plans along with the latest current revision dates .
standard drawings are available for purchase from records administration section engineering records arizona department of transportation num w est jackson room numf phoenix arizona num num num b project plans specific details and dimensions peculiar to the work which are supplemented by the standard drawings insofar as applicable .
c working drawings and supplemental drawings supplemental design sheets shop drawings or similar data which the contractor is required to submit to the engineer such as stress sheets erection plans falsework plans forming plans for castinplace bridge girders framework plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel computations or any other supplementary data required of the contractor .
professional engineer a person who has been granted registration in one or more branches of engineering by the arizona state board of technical registration and is authorized to practice professionally in the state of arizona .
if a branch of engineering is included in the title such as professional civil engineer registration in that branch shall be required .
profile grade the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal center line of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
project the specific section of the highway on which construction is to be performed as described in the contract .
proposal bid bid proposal the offer of a bidder on the prescribed forms to perform the work at the prices quoted and within the time specified .
section num num proposal form the prescribed form on which the bidders offer is submitted .
proposal guaranty surety bid bond the security furnished with a bid to guarantee that the bidder will enter into the contract if its proposal is accepted .
quality control contractor or supplier techniques and activities that are performed or conducted to fulfill the contract requirements .
random sampling sampling performed so that each increment in the lot has an equal chance of being chosen with sampling frequency determined by the use of random numbers .
range specified limits of acceptability for a measured characteristic .
reasonably close conformity w here working tolerances are specified reasonably close conformity means compliance with such working tolerances .
w here working tolerances are not specified reasonably close conformity means compliance with reasonable and customary manufacturing and construction tolerances .
registered engineer see professional engineer .
registered land surveyor a person who has been granted registration in land surveying by the arizona state board of technical registration for architects assayers engineers geologists landscape architects and land surveyors and who is authorized to practice professionally in the state of arizona .
responsive bid a bid which meets all requirements of the proposal pamphlet .
responsible bidder a bidder that is a responsible contractor .
responsible contractor section num num a contractor that has the requisite skill resources desire and integrity to complete the work in conformance with the provisions of the contract .
rightofway a general term denoting land or an interest therein as acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes .
roadbed the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
roadside a general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
roadside development items which provide for the preservation of landscape materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers and such planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
roadway that portion of the rightofway required for construction limited by the outside edges of slopes including ditches channels and all structures pertaining to the work .
section when referring to the specifications a numbered article or group of related articles forming a part of the specifications and applying to or controlling the procedure of an operation or regulation .
shoulder the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
section num num specifications the compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of prescribed work including a standard specifications this book of specifications which is approved for general application and repetitive use .
b special provisions additions and revisions to the standard specifications covering conditions and requirements peculiar to an individual project .
standard deviation s a measure of variability that can be calculated from the differences between individual measurements in a group and their average .
unless otherwise specified standard deviation is calculated as follows s n num num i x a v e where s standard deviation xi individual value ave average value n number of values state the state of arizona acting through its authorized representatives in the arizona department of transportation .
structures bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes under drains foundation drains and other features which may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classified .
subcontractor an individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof or joint venture to which the contractor sublets a part of the contract with the approval of the department .
subgrade the roadbed materials beneath the pavement structure .
the top prepared surface of the subgrade is called finished subgrade elevation .
superintendent section num num the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
supplemental agreement a written agreement between the department and the contractor covering work not otherwise provided for in the contract for extensions or reductions of contract time or revisions in or amendments to the terms of the contract .
a supplemental agreement becomes a part of the contract when signed by the contractor and the department .
supplier one who fabricates or processes an item off the project site and who may or may not deliver this item to the project .
for purposes of this definition a supplier shall not include one who establishes a fabricating process or facility expressly for use of the project whether on or off the project site or one who performs work on the project site that is incorporated into the project .
surety the corporate body or bodies bound with and for the contractor for the full and complete performance of the contract and for payment of all debts pertaining to the work .
transportation board the transportation board acting under authority of the laws of the state of arizona .
traveled way the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders .
unbalanced bid materially a bid that generates a reasonable doubt that award to the bidder submitting a mathematically unbalanced bid will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department .
unbalanced bid mathematically a bid containing lump sum or unit bid prices that do not reflect reasonably anticipated actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
unit price the price bid by the contractor for one unit of work as defined by the specifications .
section num num work w ork shall mean the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all the duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
working day a day exclusive of saturdays sundays and staterecognized holidays on which weather and other conditions not under the control of the contractor permit construction operations to proceed for the major part of the day with the normal working force engaged in performing the controlling item or items of work which would be in progress at that time .
section num bidding requirements and conditions num advertisements for bids the advertisement for bids may contain the following information project number and name of highway route number and mileposts or reference markers .
date time and place of public opening of bids location and length of project general description of work principal items and approximate quantities specified contract time working days calendar days or fixed dates for completion of contract work statement of proposal requirements manner in which project plans and specifications may be obtained and the cost of same .
type and amount of proposal guaranty .
num prequalification of bidders prior to submitting a bid the bidder will unless waived by the department be required to be prequalified with the department to bid on the project .
the submission of prequalification information and determination of prequalification shall be in accordance with the requirements of the rules for prequalification of contractors as approved and adopted by the department .
num suspension from bidding the department may suspend any person and any subsidiary or affiliate of any person from further bidding to the department and from being a subcontractor or a supplier or otherwise participating in the work section num num a if that person or any officer director employee or agent of that person is convicted in this state or any other jurisdiction of a crime involving any of the following elements or actions num entering into any contract combination conspiracy or other unlawful act in restraint of trade or commerce num knowingly and willfully falsifying concealing or covering up a material fact by trick scheme or device num making false fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations num making or using a false writing or document knowing it to contain a false fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry num misrepresentation or false statement on any application for bonding num misrepresentation or false statement on any application for prequalification or b if the department makes a finding of any of the above or finds that the contractor is not a responsible bidder or a responsible contractor .
under this subsection a person means any individual partnership joint venture corporation association or other entity formed for the purpose of doing business as a contractor subcontractor or supplier .
num contents of proposal pamphlet upon request the department will furnish the prospective bidder a proposal pamphlet .
this pamphlet will state the location and description of the contemplated construction and will show the approximate estimate of the various quantities and kinds of work to be performed or materials to be furnished and will have a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited .
the proposal pamphlet will state the time in which the work must be completed the type and amount of the proposal guaranty and the date time and place of the opening of proposals .
the pamphlet will also include any special provisions or requirements which vary from or are not included in the standard specifications .
additional contract documents applicable to the specific project are listed in the special provisions .
all papers bound with or attached to the proposal pamphlet are considered a part thereof .
the project plans specifications standard drawings and other documents designated in the proposal pamphlet will be considered a part of the proposal whether attached or not .
section num num the project plans and proposal pamphlets are available at the price per set indicated in the advertisement for bids .
num issuance of proposals the department reserves the right to refuse to issue a proposal pamphlet for any of the following reasons a lack of competency or adequate machinery plant and other equipment as revealed by the financial statement and experience questionnaires required under subsection num .
b incomplete work which in the judgment of the department might hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work if awarded .
c failure to pay or settle satisfactorily all bills due for work on former contracts in force at the time of issuance of a proposal pamphlet .
d failure to comply with any qualification regulations of the department .
e default under previous contracts .
f unsatisfactory performance on previous work .
g entering into any contract combination conspiracy or other unlawful act in restraint of trade or commerce .
h knowingly and willfully falsifying concealing or covering up a material fact by trick scheme or device .
i making false fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations .
j making or using a false writing or document knowing it to contain a false fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry .
k misrepresentation or false statement on any application for bonding .
l misrepresentation or false statement on any application for prequalification .
m lack of sufficient ability or integrity to complete the contract .
num interpretation of quantities in bidding schedule the quantities appearing in the bidding schedule except as provided elsewhere are approximate only and are prepared for the comparison section num num of bids .
payment to the contractor will be made only for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
the scheduled quantities of work to be done and materials to be furnished may each be increased decreased or omitted as hereinafter provided in subsection num .
num examination of plans specifications and site of work the bidder shall examine the site of the proposed work and the contract before submitting a proposal .
if no site investigation is performed the bidder is responsible for all site conditions that should have been discovered had a reasonable site investigation been performed .
the submission of a proposal will be considered conclusive evidence that the bidder is satisfied with the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and as to the requirements of the proposed contract .
a set of plans earthwork calculations and plotted cross sections and other material if available will be on file with contracts and specifications num w . jackson room numf phoenix for contractors to review in the process of preparing bids for projects containing earthwork .
a copy of the calculations and crosssections may also be purchased for a nominal fee but must be requested not less than five working days in advance of the bid opening .
the bidder shall take no advantage of any apparent error or omission in the plans bid schedule items estimated quantities specifications or other contract documents .
in the event the bidder discovers such an error or omission the bidder shall immediately notify the engineer .
the engineer will then make such corrections and interpretations as may be deemed necessary .
any request for explanation of the meaning or interpretations of the contract shall be submitted in adequate time to allow a reply to reach all bidders before submission of their bid proposal .
if the department determines interpretations or explanations are warranted the response will be issued as an addendum to the proposal form and will be furnished to all prospective bidders before the time set for opening of proposals .
the department will not be bound by any statement or representation concerning conditions or description of the work unless they are included in the contract .
oral explanations interpretations or instructions given before the award of the contract by department employees or agents are not binding .
num preparation of proposal a general section num num the bidder shall prepare and submit its proposal on either the paper forms furnished by the department in the proposal pamphlet or when electronic bidding is available using departmentfurnished bid preparation software .
proposals shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the requirements of subsection numb or numc .
the bidder shall submit its proposal exclusively on either the paper proposal pamphlet forms or using the electronic bid process described herein .
w hen an item in the proposal contains a choice to be made by the bidder the bidder shall indicate a choice in accordance with the specifications for that particular item and after the bid opening no further choice will be permitted .
b proposal pamphlet paper submittal proposals submitted using the paper format shall be only upon the forms furnished by the department .
no consideration will be given to any purported proposals on other forms or to any request to modify or change a proposal .
the bidder shall complete and fully execute all required forms listed under bid submission in the special provisions .
proposal pamphlets are not transferable .
the bidder shall specify a unit price in figures for each pay item for which a quantity is given in the bidding schedule and shall also show the amount extended as the product of the quantity given and the unit price indicated for each bid item in the column provided for that purpose .
the total amount of the bid shall be obtained by adding the amounts of the several items .
in the event that more than two decimal places are used in representing a unit price all digits beyond the second decimal place will be truncated and the extended amount for the affected items and the total bid will be recomputed accordingly .
an individual bidder shall clearly show hisher name post office address and signature .
a general partnership bidder shall clearly show the name and post office address of each member of the partnership and the signature of one or more members of the partnership .
a limited partnership bidder shall clearly show the name and post office address of each member of the partnership and the signature of one or more general partners .
a joint venture bidder shall clearly show the name and post office address of each member or officer of the firms and the signature of one section num num or more members or officers of each firm represented by the joint venture .
a corporate bidder shall clearly show the names titles and business addresses of the president vice president secretary and treasurer the name of the corporation the state in which the corporation was incorporated and the signatures of one or more officers of the corporation or by a legally qualified agent of the corporation acceptable to the department .
evidence of authority of the signing officers to submit a proposal on behalf of the corporation shall either be attached thereto or be on file with the department .
if the corporation is incorporated in any state other than the state of arizona the corporation shall submit to the department prior to the award of contract proof from the arizona corporation commission that it has been granted authority to do business in the state of arizona .
c electronic submittal num general projects eligible for electronic bidding will be identified in the advertisement for bids .
eligible projects can also be identified on adots website at www.azdot.govhighwayscnsphone_sheet.asp .
projects with electronic files available ebs files will be highlighted .
in order to submit a bid electronically a firm must have obtained a bidder identification number from the department at the office of contracts and specifications num w . jackson street room numf phoenix az num phone num num .
in addition bidders must subscribe to bid express an online bidding service and obtain a digital signature .
bid express can be reached at www.bidx.com phone num num .
the bidder shall also download and install a copy of the aashto trnsport expedite bid software from the internet at the bid express website by selecting arizona from the map displayed on the bid express homepage .
the version of the software currently used by adot can then be located by selecting the utilities tab and choosing the expedite utility .
in order to obtain a digital signature bidders shall be required to name at least one responsible person who shall be authorized to commit the firm to the terms and conditions specified in the proposal and the contract documents .
the bidder shall download the electronic copy of the project ebs file listed as an expedite data file on the bid express website .
the file includes a schedule of items folder containing the bid schedule and a miscellaneous folder containing the proposal and attachments .
the bidder shall review the proposal and complete the bidding schedule as specified herein and the attachments .
the bidder shall specify a unit price for each pay item for which a quantity is given in the bidding schedule .
the software will section num num automatically produce the extended amount as the product of the quantity given and the specified unit price .
unit prices shall be stated in whole cents .
the bidder shall also download all addenda issued and update the project file accordingly .
the bidder shall be responsible to verify that all addenda issued prior to the bid opening have been included in its submittal .
the bidder shall be responsible for the successful submission of its electronic bid prior to the time specified for submission of bids .
bids submitted after the specified time will not be accepted .
the bidder agrees that the department bears no liability resulting from the bidders failure to successfully submit an electronic bid .
num procedure for missing bids if a bidder believes that its electronically submitted bid should have been read at the bid opening but was not read the bidder shall notify the department of the apparent irregularity and provide its bid receipt for the bid in question no later than three hours after the time specified for submission of bids .
upon proper notification of a missing bid by a bidder the department will notify all bidders that a missing bid has been reported .
the department will begin an investigation to determine the status of the bid and will review all electronic bids received from bid express .
the department will direct bid express to review their records and determine whether the missing bid was submitted .
bid express will make a determination about receipt of the bidders missing bid .
if necessary bid express will attempt to retrieve a copy of the encrypted bid from the bidders computer .
the department will authorize bid express to send the department a program which will enable the encrypted bid to be opened and processed .
if the department determines that a bid can not be recovered the department will notify all bidders of its determination .
if a missing bid is recovered the department will determine the validity of the bid and may award the contract to the bidder submitting the missing bid if appropriate .
the department will notify all bidders .
num noncollusion certification bidders making their submittal using paper forms in the proposal pamphlet shall complete the noncollusion certificate included with the proposal form .
this form shall be executed by or on behalf of the person firm association or corporation submitting the bid in the following form section num num the bidder certifies that pursuant to subsection numc of title num united states code and title num chapter num article num of the arizona revised statutes neither it nor anyone associated with the company firm corporation or individual has either directly or indirectly entered into any agreement participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of full competitive bidding in connection with the above referenced project .
by submission of its bid electronically the bidder makes the certification stated in the previous paragraph binding as if it had been signed by the bidder .
num irregular proposals a proposals may be considered irregular and may be rejected for any of the following reasons num if any of the proposal documents show unauthorized alterations of any kind .
num if the proposal contains conditional or uncalledfor alternate bids .
num if the proposal documents contain erasures not initialed by the person or persons signing the proposal .
num if there is a submission of any kind which may tend to make the proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous as to its meaning .
num if the bid is mathematically unbalanced .
num if the bid is materially unbalanced .
num if the bidder fails to sign the noncollusion certificate when submitting a bid in the paper format .
b proposals will be considered irregular and will be rejected for any of the following reasons num if the proposal bid bond or bidding schedule is on a form other than that furnished by the department .
num if the bidder or surety fails to provide a proposal guaranty as specified in subsection num .
num if the bidder fails to sign the proposal when submitting a bid in the paper format .
section num num num if the bidding schedule does not contain a unit price for each pay item listed except in the case of authorized alternate pay items .
num if the bidder fails to meet the required goal for disadvantaged business enterprises dbe established in the special provisions or show good faith effort as determined by the department .
num if the bidder submits a proposal in both the electronic format and in the paper format .
num delivery of proposals for submittals made in accordance with numb each proposal together with the required proposal guaranty shall be placed in the special envelope furnished by the department for this purpose and the envelope shall be sealed .
all proposals shall be submitted prior to the time specified for submission of bids and at the place specified in the advertisement for bids .
proposals received after the time set for opening the bids will be returned to the bidder unopened .
electronic submittals shall be made in accordance with subsection numc .
num proposal guaranty a general the bidder shall provide a proposal guaranty payable to the arizona department of transportation for num percent of the amount of the bid .
the surety bid bond shall be executed by the bidder and a surety company or companies holding a certificate of authority to transact surety business in this state issued by the director of the department of insurance .
the agent for the surety shall be licensed to act as an insurance agent in arizona .
bidders submitting paper proposals in accordance with subsection numb shall provide a proposal guaranty as specified in numb and shall include the guaranty with the proposal at the time of submittal .
bidders submitting proposals electronically in accordance with subsection numc shall provide either a paper proposal guaranty in accordance with subsection numb or an electronic proposal guaranty in accordance with subsection numc .
if the bidder elects to submit the guaranty in paper format it shall be submitted prior to the time specified for submission of bids .
the paper guaranty shall be placed in the special envelope furnished by the department for submittal of bids and shall be sealed .
the bidder shall write proposal guaranty only on the envelope .
if the bidder elects to section num num submit the guaranty in electronic format it shall be included as part of the proposal at the time of the submittal .
b paper submittal of proposal guaranty the paper proposal guaranty shall be in the form of either a certified or a cashiers check made payable to the arizona department of transportation for num percent of the amount of the bid or in the form of a surety bid bond for num percent of the amount of the bid .
the surety bid bond will be accepted only on the form provided by the department .
the surety shall provide a current power of attorney attached to the surety bond .
paper proposal guarantees shall be delivered to the department at the office of contracts and specifications num w . jackson street room numf phoenix az phone num num .
c electronic submittal of proposal guaranty two companies have established webbased surety processing procedures with bid express surety num www.suretynum.com and sure path network www.insurevision.com .
bidders interested in providing an electronic proposal guaranty may contact these companies for additional information and requirements .
num withdrawal of proposals a general the bidder may withdraw its bid prior to the time scheduled for submission of bids .
for paper submittals made in accordance with subsection numb a bidder may withdraw its proposal unopened after it has been submitted to the department provided its request in writing is received by the department prior to the time specified for submission of bids .
for electronic submittals in accordance with subsection numc a bidder may withdraw its submittal at any time prior to the time specified for submission of bids provided that the bidder withdraws such bid electronically .
b conditional withdrawal w hen proposals for more than one contract are to be publicly read on any one date a bidder may request that in the event it is the apparent low bidder on a given contract or contracts one or more subsequent bids are withdrawn .
section num num the bidder shall submit a written request for conditional withdrawal separate from the proposal submittals and signed by a responsible person prior to the time specified for submission of bids .
bids withdrawn will be retained by the department and will not be read .
no requests for conditional withdrawals will be accepted after the time specified for submission of bids .
num combination or conditional proposals if the department so elects proposals may be issued for projects in combination or separately so that bids may be submitted either on the combination or on separate units of combination .
the department reserves the right to make awards on combination bids or separate bids to the best advantage of the department .
no combination bids other than those specifically set up in the proposal by the department will be considered .
conditional proposals will be considered when so stated in the special provisions .
num public opening of proposals proposals will be opened and read aloud at the time and place indicated in the advertisement for bids .
bidders their authorized agents and other interested parties are invited to be present .
num licensing it is the responsibility of the bidder to determine whether it has the appropriate contracting licenses to perform the work .
the department will make the award if any to the lowest responsible bidder who has the proper licenses .
for all projects except federalaid funded projects the bidder must have the proper licenses at the time the bid is submitted to the department .
on federalaid funded projects the bidder is not required to have the licenses at the time of bidding but it must procure the licenses before award can be made and no later than num days after the date bids are opened .
licensing information is available from the arizona registrar of contractors .
section num award and execution of contract num consideration of proposals after the proposals are opened and read aloud they will be compared on the basis of the summation of the products of the quantities shown in the bidding schedule by the unit bid prices shown .
the results of such comparisons will be available to the public .
the right is reserved to reject any or all proposals to waive technicalities or to advertise for new proposals if in the judgment of section num num the department the best interests of the department will be promoted thereby .
num interpretation of proposals the department will consider the following in interpreting proposals a in the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extension the unit bid price shall govern .
b unit prices may show up to two decimal places .
decimal places beyond two will be truncated .
for example if the stated unit bid price is num per unit the department will interpret the unit bid price as num per unit .
the extended amount for the affected items and the total bid will be computed accordingly .
c the department will not correct errors in unit bid prices even if it is demonstrated that the error was a clerical error .
num responsibility the department will decline to award the contract to any bidder who the department finds is not a responsible bidder for the particular contract .
a person who has been convicted of a violation of arizona revised statutes section num is not eligible to enter into any contract with the department for a period of up to three years from date of conviction as determined by the court .
a person means any individual partnership corporation association or other entity formed for the purpose of doing business as a contractor .
nonresponsibility may also be found for any of the following reasons a anticompetitive acts b lack of competency and adequate machinery plant and other equipment as revealed by the financial statement and experience questionnaires required under subsection num c incomplete work which in the judgment of the department might hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work if awarded d failure to pay or settle satisfactorily all bills due for labor and material on former contracts in force at the time of issuance of a proposal pamphlet e failure to comply with any qualification regulations of the department f default under previous contracts section num num g unsatisfactory performance on previous work h knowingly and willfully falsifying concealing or covering up a material fact by trick scheme or device i making false fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations j making or using a false writing or document knowing it to contain a false fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry k lack of a proper contractors license or l lack of sufficient ability or integrity to complete the contract .
num award of contract the transportation board will consider proposals for award within num calendar days after the opening of proposals .
the transportation board reserves the right to postpone action relative to the award of contract until a future board meeting .
in any case the transportation board will act on proposals no later than num calendar days after the opening of proposals .
no adjustment in proposed prices will be allowed as a result of any delay caused by the transportation board or the award process .
the award of contract if awarded will be made by the transportation board to the lowest responsible bidder whose proposal complies with all the requirements prescribed .
if there are two or more low responsive bids that are identical in price award will be made by drawing lots .
the successful bidder will be notified by certified letter mailed to the address shown in the bidders proposal that its bid has been accepted and that it has been awarded the contract .
at any time after completion of the numday period set forth above for award of contract the successful bidder may by letter notify the state engineer of the departments failure to issue a notice of award letter .
if the notice of award letter has not been issued within five days from the date that the successful bidders letter is received by the state engineer the successful bidder shall have the right to withdraw its bid without forfeiture of the bidders proposal guaranty .
num cancellation of award the transportation board reserves the right to cancel the award of any contract at any time before the execution of said contract by all parties without any liability against the transportation board or the department .
num return of proposal guaranty section num num proposal guaranties will be returned immediately following the opening and checking of proposals except that of the lowest qualified bidder however the department at its discretion may also retain the proposal guaranty of the second lowest qualified bidder .
proposal guaranties that have been retained will be returned promptly upon completion of both of the following actions execution of the contract .
the execution and filing with the department of satisfactory bonds and contract forms .
num requirement of contract bonds the successful bidder shall furnish the department the following surety bonds which shall become binding upon the execution of the contract a a performance bond in the amount of num percent of the total contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in accordance with the plans specifications and conditions thereof .
such bond shall be solely for the protection of the department .
b a payment bond in the amount of num percent of the total contract amount solely for the protection of claimants supplying labor or materials to the contractor or its subcontractors in the prosecution of the work and the payment of all workmans compensation occupational disease and unemployment compensation premiums .
the bonds shall be written or countersigned by an authorized representative of the surety .
the authorized representative must be either a resident of the state of arizona or must maintain its principal office in this state .
the authorized representative for the surety must be licensed to act as an insurance agent in arizona .
surety bonds shall be signed by the bidder and by the surety .
the surety shall provide a current power of attorney attached to the surety bond .
the forms of the bonds will be provided by the department and will conform to arizona revised statute sections num through num .
each bond shall be executed solely by a surety company or companies holding a certificate of authority to transact surety business in this state issued by the director of the department of insurance .
num execution of contract the contractor shall return the signed contract and bonds so as to be received by the department no later than num calendar days after the date of the notice of award letter .
contracts and bonds should be addressed as follows section num num arizona department of transportation contracts and specifications services num w est jackson street room numf phoenix arizona num the department will execute the contract within num calendar days after the date of the notice of award letter .
no contract shall be considered as effective until it has been fully executed by the parties .
num failure to execute contract failure to execute the contract and file satisfactory contract bonds as provided herein within num calendar days after the date of the notice of award letter shall be just cause for the cancellation of the award and forfeiture of the proposal guaranty to the department not as a penalty but in liquidation of damages sustained .
award may then be made to the next lowest responsible bidder or the work may be readvertised as the department may decide .
num bid disputes any interested party may protest the prospective award of the contract to the apparent lowest responsible bidder or the refusal of the department to award the contract to a firm which claims it is the lowest responsible bidder .
a protest must be in writing and personally delivered or sent by certified mail return receipt requested to the state engineer .
the protest must be received by the state engineer no later than seven calendar days after the opening of bids except in the case of a protest concerning compliance with disadvantaged business enterprise provisions .
any protests concerning compliance with disadvantaged business enterprise provisions must be received by the state engineer no later than seven calendar days after the date required for submittal of the disadvantaged business enterprise affidavit by the apparent low bidder .
the protest must include facts supporting the protest any pertinent contractual provisions law rules or regulations and other legal authorities supporting the protest and a requested action .
copies of the protest shall be sent by the protestant to every bidder at the same time the protest is submitted to the state engineer .
any interested party or the department may submit a response to the protest .
the response will include a statement of the requested action a rebuttal of any of the factual matters in the protest facts supporting the response and any contractual provisions laws rules or regulations or other authority supporting the response .
the response must be received by the state engineer no later than seven calendar days after the protest is filed .
statutes contractual provisions rules or regulations of the federal government or the state government need not be quoted in full in a section num num protest or response so long as sufficient citation is given so that the matter cited may be conveniently referenced .
the state engineer will make a recommendation in writing to the transportation board with copies to the protestant and all parties upon whom service of the protest or response has been made within seven calendar days after receipt of the response .
the transportation board may hear arguments concerning the protest or at its discretion may direct the state engineer to hold a hearing or other appropriate procedure to evaluate the protest .
if the matter is referred to the state engineer the state engineers recommendation will be made to the board within num days .
the transportation board will make the final decision as to award or the rejection of bids .
notwithstanding the provisions of subsection num in case of any bid protest the award if any must be made by the transportation board no later than num calendar days after the opening of proposals unless otherwise agreed by the parties .
the times specified in this subsection may be changed by the engineer with the written agreement of both the apparent low bidder and second low bidder .
the times prescribed in this subsection may also be varied in the special provisions .
num escrow of bid documentation w hen required by the special provisions each bidder shall submit its bid documentation in a separate envelope from the bid .
the bid documents will remain unopened during the bid opening period .
the documentation of the successful bidder will be placed in escrow with a banking institution or other bonded document storage facility and preserved by that institution or facility as specified in the following subsections .
the bid documentation for all unsuccessful bidders will be returned .
a submittal of bid documentation the bidder shall submit the bid documentation in a sealed container .
the container shall be clearly marked bid documentation and show on the face of the container the bidders name and address the date of submittal the project number and the contract number .
b affidavit in addition to the bid documentation the bidder shall submit an affidavit signed under oath by a representative of the bidder authorized to execute bid proposals listing each bid document submitted by author date nature and subject matter .
the affidavit shall attest num that the affiant has personally examined the bid documentation num that the affidavit lists all of the documents relied upon by the bidder in section num num preparing the bid for the project and num that all bid documentation is included in the sealed container submitted in escrow .
c duration and use w ithin three days of award of the contract the department and the contractor will jointly deliver the sealed container and affidavit to a banking institution or other bonded document storage facility selected by the department for placement in a safety deposit box vault or other secure accommodation .
the document depository agreement shall reflect that the bid documentation and affidavit shall remain in escrow during the life of the contract or until the contractor requests that the department verify a request for additional compensation or an extension of time based on its bid or unless a court order provides the department permission to obtain the bid documentation .
in the absence of such action and provided the contractor signs the final standard release form the department will instruct the document depository to release the sealed container to the contractor .
in accordance with the contractors representation that the sealed container placed in escrow contains all of the materials relied upon in preparing its bid the contractor agrees to waive the right to use any bid documentation other than that placed in escrow in disputes arising out of the contract .
d format and contents bidders may submit bid documents for escrow in the usual cost estimating format .
it is not the intention of this specification to cause the bidder extra work during the preparation of the proposal but to ensure that the escrow bid documents will be adequate to enable complete understanding and proper interpretation for their intended use .
the bid documents shall be written in the english language .
it is required that the bid documents clearly itemize the estimated costs of performing the work of each bid item contained in the bid schedule .
bid items are to be separated into subitems as required to present a completed and detailed cost estimate and allow a detailed cost review .
the bid documents shall include all quantity takeoffs crew equipment calculations of rates of production and progress copies of quotations from subcontractors and suppliers and memoranda narratives consultants reports adddeduct sheets and all other information included by the bidder to arrive at the prices contained in the bid proposal .
estimated costs shall be broken down into the bidders usual estimate categories such as direct labor repair labor equipment operation equipment ownership expendable materials permanent materials and subcontract cost as appropriate .
plant and equipment and indirect costs are to be detailed in the bidders usual format .
the contractors allocation of plant and equipment indirect costs contingencies markup and other items to each bid item shall be included .
section num num all costs shall be identified .
for bid items amounting to less than num estimated unit costs are acceptable without a detailed costs estimate providing that labor equipment materials and subcontracts as applicable are included and provided that indirect costs contingencies and markups as applicable are allocated .
if the bid documents were developed using computer generated software the contractor shall provide the documents in hard copy and shall identify the name and version of the computer software used .
bid documents provided by the department need not be included in the bid documents for escrow unless needed to comply with the requirements of this subsection .
e refusal or failure to provide bid documentation failure to provide bid documentation shall render the bid nonresponsive .
f confidentiality of bid documentation the bid documentation and affidavit in escrow are and shall remain the property of the contractor .
the department has no interest in or right to the bid documentation unless the contractor requests that the department verify its request for additional compensation or an extension of time based on its bid or unless a court order gives the department permission to obtain the bid documentation .
in the event of such requests or court orders the bid documentation and affidavit will become the property of the department until complete resolution of the reason for the request or court order is achieved .
these materials and all copies made by the department will be returned to the contractor at the conclusion of litigation or final resolution of all outstanding claims upon execution of a final release .
the department will make every reasonable effort to ensure that the bid documentation remains confidential within the department except that said documents may be used in court arbitration or other dispute resolution proceedings .
otherwise said documents will not be made available to anyone outside the department .
g cost and escrow instructions the cost of the escrow documentation depository storage facility will be borne by the department .
the department will provide escrow instructions to the document depository consistent with this subsection .
h payment there will be no separate payment for compilation of the data providing the container or the cost of verification of the bid documentation .
all costs shall be included in the overall contract bid price .
section num num section num scope of work num intent of contract the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion of the work to the satisfaction of the department .
the contractor shall furnish experienced supervision and labor and all materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the plans specifications and terms of the contract .
a covenant of good faith and fair dealing this contract imposes an obligation of good faith and fair dealing in its performance and enforcement .
the contractor and the department with a positive commitment to honesty and integrity agree to the following mutual duties num each will function within the laws and statutes applicable to their duties and responsibilities .
num each will avoid hindering the others performance .
num each will proceed to fulfill its obligations diligently .
num each will cooperate in the common endeavor of the contract .
b partnering the department encourages the foundation of a cohesive partnering with the contractor and its principal subcontractors and suppliers .
this partnering is not a legal partnership as defined by arizona law .
partnering will be structured to draw on the strengths of each organization to identify and achieve reciprocal goals .
the objectives are effective and efficient contract performance and completion within budget on schedule and in accordance with the contract .
the establishment of a partnering charter on a project will not change the legal relationship of the parties to the contract nor relieve either party from any of the terms of the contract .
any cost associated with effectuating partnering will be agreed to by the department and the contractor and will be shared equally between them .
to implement this partnering initiative prior to starting of work in accordance with the requirements of subsection num and prior to the preconstruction conference the contractors management personnel and the district engineer will initiate a partnering development seminarteam building workshop .
the department and the contractor will make arrangements to determine attendees at the workshop the section num num agenda of the workshop its duration and its location .
persons required to be in attendance will be the departments construction supervisor and key project personnel the contractors onsite project manager and key project supervision personnel of both the prime and principal subcontractors and suppliers .
the project design engineers fhw a and key local government personnel will also be invited to attend as necessary .
the contractors and the department will also be required to have regionaldistrict and corporatestate level managers on the project team .
followup workshops may be held periodically throughout the duration of the contract as agreed by the contractor and the department .
num revisions to the contract the department reserves the right to revise the contract at any time .
such revisions shall neither invalidate the contract nor release the surety .
the contractor agrees to complete the contract as revised .
the contractor shall not proceed with work for which a revision to the contract is required without prior approval from the engineer .
once approval is received the contractor shall proceed with such direction immediately whether the engineer considers that the contract has been revised or not .
it is the contractors obligation to notify the engineer in writing that a revision to the contract is necessary and provide such notification in accordance with subsection num .
w henever the words notice notification request or notify are used in this subsection such notice or request shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the contract may only be revised by supplemental agreement .
supplemental agreements will be issued for the following reasons only a to accomplish extra work as defined in subsection num .
b if a differing site condition is encountered as described below num during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
num upon written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions section num num materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
num no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
num no contract adjustment will be allowed under this section for any effects caused on unchanged work .
c if the work is suspended by order of the engineer as provided below num if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation andor contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
num upon receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the contractor will be notified of the engineers determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
num no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
num no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
section num num d if there are significant changes in the character of work as provided below num the engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety .
the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
num if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profit will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
num if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided in the contract .
num the term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances a w hen the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or b w hen a major item of work as defined elsewhere in the contract is increased in excess of num percent or decreased below num percent of the original contract quantity .
any adjusted unit price for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of num percent of original contract item quantity .
any adjustment in contract unit price for a decrease in quantity below num percent shall apply only to the actual amount of work performed except that the product of the adjusted unit price and the reduced quantity of work performed shall in no case exceed the product of the original contract unit price and num percent of the bid schedule quantity .
e to revise the contract time in accordance with subsection num .
section num num if the supplemental agreement is to provide for an increase or decrease in the contract price or time such increases or decreases will be determined in accordance with subsections num and num .
num notification a as required by these specifications or any time the contractor believes that the action of the department lack of action by the department or for some other reason will result in or necessitate the revision of the contract the engineer must be notified immediately .
if within two working days the identified issue has not been resolved between the department and the contractor the contractor shall provide a written notice .
at a minimum the written notice shall provide a description of the nature of the issue the time and date the problem was discovered and if appropriate the location of the issue .
after initial written notice has been provided the engineer will proceed in accordance with subsection num .
in addition to proceeding in accordance with subsection num the department and the contractor must make every effort to resolve the issue identified in the initial notice through the partnering process .
only if the issue can not be quickly resolved by the partnering process will it be necessary for the contractor to proceed to the next step in this subsection .
b once the partnering issue resolution process has been exhausted or within seven calendar days of the date of the initial written notice whichever is sooner the contractor shall provide in writing the following information to the engineer num the date of occurrence and the nature and circumstances of the issue for which initial notice was given .
num name title and activity of each department representative knowledgeable of the issue .
num identity of any documents and the substance of any oral communication related to the issue .
num basis for an assertion that work required is a change from the original contract work or schedule .
num identity of particular elements of contract performance for which additional compensation may be sought including a pay items that has been or may be affected by the issue section num num b labor or materials or both that will be added deleted or wasted by the problem and what equipment will be idled or required c delay and disruption in the manner and sequence of performance that has been or will be caused d adjustments to contract prices delivery schedules staging and contract time estimated due to the issue and e estimate of the time within which the department must respond to the notice to minimize cost delay or disruption of issue .
num the contractors written certification under oath attesting to the following a the request is made in good faith .
b supportive data is accurate and complete to the contractors best knowledge and belief .
c the amount requested accurately reflects the contractors actual cost incurred .
in complying with this request the contractor shall use the departments certification form .
c the failure of the contractor to comply with the requirements of this subsection constitutes a waiver of entitlement to additional compensation or a time extension .
d w ithin num calendar days after the contractors submission in accordance with subparagraph b the engineer will respond in writing to the contractor to num confirm that a supplemental agreement is necessary and when necessary give appropriate direction for further performance or num deny that the contract has been revised and when necessary direct the contractor to proceed with the contract work or num advise the contractor that adequate information has not been submitted to decide whether num or num applies and indicate the needed information and date it is to be received by the engineer for further review .
the department will respond to such additional information within num calendar days of receipt from the contractor .
section num num num maintenance of traffic unless otherwise provided the road while being improved shall be kept open to all traffic by the contractor .
w hen requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer the contractor may bypass traffic over an approved detour route .
regardless of whether it is through or local traffic the contractor shall keep the portion of the project being used by traffic in such condition that traffic will be adequately accommodated .
the contractor shall assume maintenance responsibility through the project at the time its operations begin using the highway or interrupt normal traffic operations .
the contractor shall also provide and maintain in a safe condition temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages and farms but the contractor will not be required to remove snow .
before any detour is opened to traffic the engineer shall have been satisfied that traffic is able to proceed in a safe manner .
a detours w hen the contract provides for the construction of detours such detours including any temporary drainage structures base and surfacing materials and accessory features shall be constructed to the lines and grades established .
w hen the use of detours is no longer required any temporary structures and accessory features shall be removed and disposed of and the detour roadways shall be removed and the ground shall be restored as nearly as practicable to the condition existing prior to the construction of the detour .
payment for the construction of detours their maintenance and their removal will be as specified in the special provisions .
b maintenance of traffic during suspension of work for the winter season it is the responsibility of the contractor to request a suspension of the construction work for the winter season .
the request shall be in writing .
prior to or during any suspension of the construction work for the winter season the contractor shall make passable place in a maintainable condition and shall open to traffic such portions of the project and temporary roadways or portions thereof as may be agreed upon between the contractor and the engineer for the temporary accommodation of traffic during the anticipated period of suspension .
thereafter and until an order has been issued for the resumption of construction the maintenance of the temporary route or line of travel agreed upon and all signs will be by and at the expense of the department .
w hen construction is resumed the contractor shall replace or renew any work or materials lost or damaged because of such temporary use shall remove to the extent ordered any work or materials necessary for the temporary maintenance by the department section num num and shall complete the work in every respect as though its prosecution has been continuous and without interferences .
such work and any additional work caused by such suspension for reasons beyond the control of the contractor will be paid for under the respective pay items or in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
c maintenance directed by the engineer the engineer may determine that work is required to insure the safety of the traveling public through the project site .
if the engineer orders maintenance for the benefit of the traveling public the contractor will be paid for such maintenance under the respective pay items or in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w ork considered under this specification includes but is not limited to sweeping roadway and subgrade repair safety feature repair debris removal repair of pedestrian features and other work necessary to provide a smooth and safe traveled way .
this work will be only that accomplished on portions of the roadway being used by the traveling public prior to construction improvements or after acceptance of a completed portion of the work .
however the contractor shall repair any damage caused by its operations at no additional cost to the department .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work the contractor with the approval of the engineer may use on the project such stone gravel sand or other material determined suitable by the engineer as may be found in the excavation .
the contractor will be paid both for the excavation of such materials at the corresponding contract unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used .
the contractor shall replace all of that portion of the excavation material so removed and used which was needed for use in the embankments backfills approaches etc .
with material acceptable to the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
no charge for the materials so used will be made against the contractor .
the contractor shall not excavate or remove any material from within the highway location which is not within the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines without written authorization from the engineer .
unless otherwise provided the material from any existing structure may be used temporarily by the contractor in the erection of the new structure .
such material shall not be cut or otherwise damaged except with the approval of the engineer .
num restoration of surfaces opened by permit the right to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street or to grant permits for same at any time is hereby expressly reserved by the department for the proper authorities of the municipality in which the work is done .
section num num any individual firm or corporation wishing to make an opening in the highway shall secure a permit from the department .
the contractor shall allow parties bearing such permits and only those parties to make openings in the highway .
w hen ordered by the engineer the contractor shall make in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings and such necessary work will be paid for as extra work or as provided in these specifications and will be subject to the same conditions as original work performed .
num railwayhighway provisions if the contractor elects to use crossings other than those shown on the project plans or described in the special provisions the contractor shall make arrangements for the use of such crossings .
all work to be performed by the contractor within the railroad rightofway shall be performed at such times and in such a manner as not to interfere unnecessarily with the movement of trains or traffic upon the track of the railway company .
the contractor shall use all care and precaution in order to avoid accidents damage or unnecessary delay or interference with the railway companys trains or other property .
num prevention of air and noise pollution the contractor shall control reduce remove or prevent air pollution in all its forms including air contaminants in the performance of the contractors work .
the contractor shall comply with the applicable requirements of arizona revised statutes section num et seq .
air quality and with the arizona administrative code title num chapter num air pollution control .
the contractor shall comply with all local sound control and noise level rules regulations and ordinances which apply to any work performed pursuant to the contract .
each internal combustion engine used for any purpose on the work or related to the work shall be equipped with a muffler of a type recommended by the manufacturer .
no internal combustion engine shall be operated on the work without its muffler being in good working condition .
num prevention of landscape defacement protection of streams lakes and reservoirs the contractor shall give special attention to the effect of its operations upon the landscape and shall take special care to maintain natural surroundings undamaged .
the contractor shall take sufficient precautions considering various conditions to prevent pollution of streams lakes and reservoirs with fuels oil bitumens calcium chloride fresh portland cement fresh section num num portland cement concrete raw sewage muddy water chemicals or other harmful materials .
none of these materials shall be discharged into any channels leading to such streams lakes or reservoirs .
w here the contractors working area encroaches on a running or an intermittent stream barriers shall be constructed and maintained between the working areas and the stream or stream bed adequate to prevent the discharge of any contaminants into the stream or stream bed .
frequent fording of running streams with construction equipment will not be permitted therefore temporary bridges or other structures shall be used whenever an appreciable number of crossings is necessary .
unless approved in writing by the engineer mechanical equipment shall not be operated in running streams .
streams lakes and reservoirs shall be promptly cleared of all falsework piling debris or other obstructions placed thereby or resulting from construction operations .
at the time of the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit for the engineers approval a program which includes all the measures which the contractor proposes to take for the construction of permanent erosion control work specified in the contract and all the temporary control measures to prevent erosion and pollution of streams lakes and reservoirs .
permanent erosion control work and pollution prevention measures shall be performed at the earliest practicable time consistent with good construction practices .
temporary work and measures are not meant to be performed in lieu of permanent work specified in the contract .
construction of drainage facilities as well as the performance of other contract work which will contribute to the control of erosion and sedimentation shall be carried out in conjunction with earthwork operations or as soon thereafter as possible .
except for that approved in writing by the engineer the contractor shall perform no clearing and grubbing or earthwork until the contractors program has been approved .
if in the opinion of the engineer clearing and grubbing excavation or other construction operations are likely to create an erosion problem because of the exposure of erodible earth material the engineer may limit the surface area to be disturbed until satisfactory control measures have been accomplished .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer the contractor shall not expose an area of erodible earth material greater than num square feet at any one location .
the engineer may order the contractor to provide immediate measures to control erosion and prevent pollution .
such measures may involve the construction of temporary berms dikes dams sediment basins and section num num slope drains the use of temporary mulches mats and seeds and the use of other devices methods items etc .
as necessary .
at any time the contractor proposes to change its schedule of operations the contractor shall review and update its erosion and pollution control program and submit it to the engineer for approval .
the contractor shall not be entitled to additional compensation or an extension of contract time for any delays to the work because of the contractors failure to submit an acceptable erosion and pollution control program .
erosion control and pollution prevention work specified in the contract which is to be accomplished under any of the various contract items will be paid for as specified under those items .
the cost of any erosion control and pollution prevention work which may be proposed by the contractor in its program in addition to that specified in the contract will be considered as included in the prices bid for contract items .
num contractors responsibility for work the contractor shall develop a stormwater management plan for submission to the engineer outlining the procedures the contractor proposes to use in the control and disposal of storm water that falls on or flows into the work site .
the plan shall include measures to prevent damage to surrounding properties .
the contractor shall submit the plan within num calendar days after the preconstruction conference .
until final written acceptance of the project by the engineer the contractor shall have the charge and care thereof and shall take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof except damage to the work as specified in subsection num .
except as specifically provided under subsection numb in case of suspension of work from any cause whatever the contractor shall be responsible for the project and shall take such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the project provide for normal drainage and shall erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at no additional cost to the department .
during such period of suspension of work the contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under its contract and shall take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
section num num num damage by storm flood or earthquake attention is directed to subsection num contractors responsibility for w ork .
in the event damage to the work is caused by a storm flood or earthquake which constitutes an occurrence as hereinafter defined the provisions of this subsection shall be applicable and the contractor may apply in writing to the engineer for the state to pay or participate in the cost of repairing damage to the work from such cause or in lieu thereof and at the sole discretion of the department terminate the contract and relieve the contractor of further obligation to perform the work subject to the following a occurrence occurrence shall include num tornadoes num earthquakes in excess of a magnitude of num on the richter scale at the project site num storms and floods for which the governor has proclaimed a state of emergency when the damaged work is located within the territorial limits to which such proclamation is applicable or num events which constitute catastrophic unusual sudden and unforeseeable manifestation of the forces of nature the effect of which could not have been prevented or minimized by reasonable human foresight and effort .
b application by contractor the contractor shall immediately begin performing emergency work necessary to provide for the safety and passage of public traffic and such other emergency work necessary to mitigate damages to the facilities .
the contractors written request for the state to pay or to participate in the cost of rebuilding repairing restoring or otherwise remedying the damage to the work caused by the occurrence shall be submitted to the engineer .
the repair work may begin prior to authorization by the engineer but the contractor shall keep accurate cost records of all such work performed .
c repair work repair of damaged work under the provisions of this subsection shall be pursuant to a supplemental agreement specifying the repair work to be performed on the damaged facility .
repair work shall consist of restoring the inplace construction for the purposes of this subsection erected falsework and formwork shall be considered inplace construction to the same state of completion to which such work had advanced prior to the occurrence .
emergency work which the engineer determines would have been part of the repair work if it had not section num num previously been performed will be considered to be part of said repair work .
the department reserves the right to make changes in the plans and specifications applicable to the portions of the work to be repaired and if such changes will increase the cost of repairing the damage over the engineers estimate of the cost of repair without the changes the contractor will be paid for such increased costs in accordance with subsection nume .
nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve the contractor of full responsibility for the risk or injury loss or damage to materials not yet incorporated in the work and to materials tools and equipment except erected falsework and formwork used to perform the work nor to relieve the contractor of its responsibility under subsection num responsibility for damage claims .
the department will only be responsible for any portion of the work accepted by the engineer in accordance with subsection num .
d idled equipment and remobilization unless otherwise agreed between the engineer and the contractor the cost of the work performed pursuant to this subsection will be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection num adjustments in the contract price .
the cost of documented direct project costs including idled equipment at standby rates remobilization costs and direct project office overhead shall be included in the cost of emergency work .
the contractor and engineer will agree on equipment which is idle inaccessible unusable or can not be relocated to other projects .
no profit or overhead will be paid for work covered by this paragraph .
e payment for repair work the state will pay the cost of the repair work as determined in subsection num .
f termination of contract if the department elects to terminate the contract the termination and the determination of the total compensation payable to the contractor shall be governed by the provisions of subsection num termination of contract for convenience of the department .
num environmental analysis the contractor shall prepare an environmental analysis for approval by the engineer under the following conditions a if the contractor elects to provide material from a contractorfurnished source b if the contractor elects to utilize any site to set up a plant for the crushing and processing of base and surfacing materials or processing base surfacing or concrete section num num materials which is not located on a site furnished by the department or the site of a commercial operation or c if the contractor requests that the engineer approve access to a controlled access highway at points other than legally established access points .
the contractor shall promptly advise the engineer that it is preparing the analysis and shall submit it upon completion .
the contractor should anticipate needing a minimum of num days to coordinate with the necessary jurisdictions or agencies and to prepare the analysis .
the analysis will be reviewed by the department and the contractor will be advised whether or not the analysis is acceptable as soon as the necessary determinations have been made .
the contractor shall allow num days for the departments review .
if the preparation and approval of the environmental analysis causes a delay to a controlling activity of the project the contractor may seek and the engineer may grant an extension of time for the preparation of the analysis in accordance with the terms of subsection num .
the time extension shall not exceed num working days .
an environmental analysis shall address itself to all environmental effects including but not limited to the following a the location of the proposed source and haul road and the distance from the source to either an existing highway or an established alignment of a proposed federal state or county highway along with vicinity maps sketches or aerial photographs .
b the ownership of the land .
c the identity and location of nearby lakes streams parks wildlife refuges or other similar protected areas .
d the former use if known of the source and haul road and their existing condition .
e the identification of present and planned future land use zoning etc .
and an analysis of the compatibility of the removal of materials with such use .
f the anticipated volume of material to be removed the width length and depth of the excavation the length and width of the haul road and other pertinent features and the final condition in which the excavated area and haul road will be left such as sloped sides topsoil replaced the area seeded etc .
g the archaeological survey of the proposed source prepared by a person with acknowledged credentials which credentials shall be attached to the survey .
the survey section num num shall be prepared in a state historic preservation office standardized format .
the survey shall identify cultural resources within the potential impact area of the materials source processing area and haul road .
additionally the survey report shall identify historic or archaeological sites in the vicinity .
h if the proposed source and haul road will utilize prime and unique farm land or farm land of statewide importance a description of such remaining land in the vicinity and an evaluation whether such use will precipitate a land use change .
i a description of the visual surroundings and the impact of the removal of materials on the visual setting .
j the effect and mitigation of such effects on access public facilities and adjacent properties .
k the relocation of business or residences .
l procedures to minimize dust in pits and on haul roads and to mitigate the effects of such dust .
m a description of noise receptors and procedures to minimize impacts on these receptors .
n a description of the impact on the quality and quantity of water resulting from the materials operation shall be provided .
the potential to introduce pollutants or turbidity to live streams andor nearby water bodies shall be addressed .
measures to mitigate potential water quality impacts shall be coordinated through the arizona department of environmental quality .
o a description of the impact on endangered or threatened wildlife and plants and their habitat .
the analysis of potential impact to plants and wildlife shall be coordinated through the arizona game and fish department and us fish and w ildlife service .
compliance with the arizona native plant law shall be coordinated through the arizona commission of agriculture and horticulture .
p a discussion of the effects of hauling activities upon local traffic and mitigating measures planned where problems are expected .
q a description of the permits required such as zoning health mining land use flood plains see section num of the clean w ater act etc .
r the effect of removing material andor stockpiling material on stream flow conditions and the potential for adverse section num num impacts on existing or proposed improvements within the flood plain which could result from these activities .
guidance in preparing the environmental analysis is available from adots environmental planning section num south numth avenue room nume phoenix az num phone num num .
num value engineering proposals by the contractor proposals may be submitted to the engineer for modifying the plans specifications or other requirements of the contract for the sole purpose of reducing the total costs of construction without impairing in any manner the essential functions or characteristics of the project including service life economy of operations ease of maintenance benefits to the traveling public desired appearance or design and safety standards .
after execution of the contract an initiative may be recommended by the contractor .
the initiative must be identified as a value engineering proposal vep and may include modifications to the plans or specifications construction phasing or procedures or other contract requirements .
any cost savings generated to the contract as a result of vep offered by the contractor and approved by the department will be shared equally between the contractor and the department as specified in subsection numd .
bid prices are not to be based on the anticipated approval of a vep .
if a vep is rejected the contract shall be completed in accordance with the original terms of the contract or as otherwise modified .
any decision whether to approve or accept a vep shall be within the sole discretion of the department .
the department will bear no liability for any delay in considering a vep the refusal to accept or approve such a proposal or any other matter connected with a vep .
a submittal and review of vep concept or idea num the contractor shall initially submit a brief letter proposal with graphics to the department to illustrate the concept or idea .
the contractor shall indicate whether adequate time is available in its schedule for formal submittal and review prior to vep implementation .
num the department will review the concept or idea and within num days of the contractors initial submittal and inform the contractor in writing whether the concept or idea has merit and should be submitted as a formal vep .
section num num num if the department determines that the time for response indicated in the contractors letter proposal is insufficient for review the department may choose to evaluate the need for a noncompensable time extension to the contract .
its evaluation will be based on the additional time needed by the department for its review and the effect on the contractors schedule occasioned by the added time .
the need for such a time extension will be evaluated in accordance with subsection num b formal submittal of the vep w ithin num days after the department has determined the vep concept or idea has merit the contractor shall formally submit a proposal .
the proposal shall include sufficient data for the department to make an informed decision regarding the proposal and shall include at a minimum the following information num a statement that the proposal is submitted as a vep .
num a description of the difference between the existing contract and the proposed change and the advantages and disadvantages of each including effects on service life economy of operations ease of maintenance benefits to the traveling public desired appearance and safety .
num a complete set of plans and specifications showing the proposed revisions relative to the original contract features and requirements supported by design computations as necessary for a thorough and expeditious evaluation .
num a complete analysis indicating the final estimated costs and quantities to be replaced by the vep compared to the new costs and quantities generated by the vep .
num a statement specifying the date by which a supplemental agreement adopting the vep must be executed to obtain the maximum cost reduction .
num a statement detailing the effect the vep will have on the time for completing the contract .
num a description of any previous use or testing of the vep and the conditions and results .
if the vep was previously submitted on another department project indicate the date contract number and the action taken by the department .
num a detailed statement indicating the costs for developing the changes along with the costs for preparing the value engineering joint proposal .
section num num c conditions value engineering proposals will be considered only when all of the following conditions are met num a vep approved or not approved by the department applies only to the contract on which it is submitted .
a submitted vep becomes the property of the department .
the vep shall contain no restrictions imposed by the contractor on its use or disclosure .
the department has the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in part any data necessary for the utilization of the proposal .
the department retains the right to use any accepted vep or part thereof on other projects without obligation to the contractor .
this provision is not intended to deny rights provided by law with respect to patented materials or processes .
num if the department is already considering certain revisions to the contract or has considered or approved changes in the contract of a like nature on other contracts which are subsequently incorporated in a vep the department may reject the vep and may change the contract without obligation to the contractor .
num the contractor shall have no claim for additional costs or delays resulting from the rejection of a vep including development costs loss of anticipated profits increased material or labor costs except as allowed in subsection numd .
num the department will determine if a vep qualifies for consideration and evaluation .
it may reject any vep that requires excessive time or costs for review evaluation or investigation or that is not consistent with the departments design policies and criteria for the project .
num the engineer will reject all or any portion of work performed under an approved vep if unsatisfactory results are obtained .
the engineer will direct the removal of rejected work and require construction to proceed under the original contract requirements without reimbursement for rejected work performed under the vep or for its removal .
w here modifications to the vep are approved to adjust to field or other conditions reimbursement will be limited to the total amount payable for the work at the contract bid prices as if it were constructed under the original contract requirements .
the rejection or limitation of reimbursement shall not constitute the basis of any section num num claim against the department for delay or for other costs .
num the proposed work shall not contain experimental features but shall contain features that have been used under similar or acceptable conditions on other projects or locations acceptable to the department .
num veps will not be considered if equivalent options are already provided in the contract .
num the savings generated by the vep must be sufficient to warrant a review and processing .
a savings resulting solely from the elimination or reduction in quantity of a single bid item will not be considered as a vep .
a savings resulting from the elimination or reduction in quantity of a bid item specified as part of a vep will be considered .
num a vep changing the type of the pavement structure or the type or basic design of a bridge structure will not be considered .
changes in the pavement structural section or in structure design details may be considered with prior approval by the materials or state bridge engineer .
changes to contingency items such as traffic control and dust palliative will not be considered if they are part of predetermined lump sum contract amounts .
contingency items such as traffic control and dust palliative may be considered when they are reduced as part of a vep to change scope method or procedure provided they are specified as individual contract bid items .
num additional information needed to evaluate veps shall be provided in a timely manner .
untimely submittals of additional information will result in rejection of the vep .
w here design changes are proposed the additional information could include results of field investigations and surveys design computations and field change sheets .
num the contractor may submit veps for an approved subcontractor .
reimbursement will be made to the contractor .
subcontractors may not submit a vep except through the contractor .
num the contractor shall ensure the vep is sealed by a registered engineer .
d acceptance rejection and payment w ithin num days of the contractors formal submission of the vep the department will accept or reject the vep .
section num num num the contractor will be notified in writing by the engineer as to whether the proposal has been accepted .
the decision by the department is final and shall not be subject to the provisions of subsection num .
num if the vep is rejected the department will share equally in the contractors costs for developing and presenting the proposal and the contractor will share equally in the cost to the department for investigating and evaluating the proposal .
a supplemental agreement will be executed to adjust the contract for the net increase or decrease in monies resulting from the contractors development costs as listed above in subsection numbnum and the departments evaluation costs .
the supplemental agreement will terminate the departments review of the vep .
num if the vep is accepted in whole or in part the necessary contract modifications and contract price adjustments will be made by the execution of a supplemental agreement which will specifically state that it is executed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection .
the department will be the sole judge of the acceptability of a vep and of the estimated net savings in construction costs from the adoption of all or any part of the vep .
num the contractor shall continue to perform the work in accordance with the requirements of the contract until a supplemental agreement incorporating the vep has been executed or until the contractor has been given written acceptance or rejection by the engineer .
num the executed supplemental agreement shall incorporate the changes in the plans specifications or other requirements of the contract which are necessary to permit the vep or such part of it which has been accepted to be put into effect and shall include any conditions upon which the departments approval thereof is based .
the executed supplemental agreement shall extend or decrease the contract time if required by the department .
num the executed supplemental agreement shall provide that the contractor be paid num percent of the net savings amount as reflected by the difference between the cost of the revised work and the cost of the related construction required by the original contract computed at contract bid prices .
the net savings will take into account the contractors cost of developing the vep and implementing the change and reducing this amount by the departments cost for investigating and evaluating section num num the vep including any ascertainable collateral costs to the department .
such collateral costs may include increased costs for maintenance operation related work items additional work items or elements of related or additional work items .
num the executed supplemental agreement shall also provide for the adjustment of contract prices .
contract prices shall be adjusted by subtracting the departments share of the accrued net savings .
num the amount specified to be paid to the contractor in the executed supplemental agreement shall constitute full compensation to the contractor for the vep and the performance of the work thereof pursuant to the said supplemental agreement .
num final clean up before final acceptance the highway borrow and local material sources and all areas occupied by the contractor in connection with the work shall be cleaned of all rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment and all parts of the work shall be left in a condition acceptable to the engineer .
num providing magnetic detection for underground facilities a general all new underground utility facilities including service connections placed within adot rightof w ay by the contractor must be magnetically detectable with standard locating instruments such as a metrotech model num or approved equal .
the contractor shall place continuous detectable tracer wire with all those underground utility facilities that lack a continuous and integral metallic component capable of detection by standard locating instruments .
tracer wire will not be required for power cables and wires telephonic or electronic communications or for landscape irrigation lines smaller than two inches in diameter .
for salt river project w ater users association s.r.v.w .u.a .
irrigation facilities no tracer wire will be required if salt river project provides their own tracer system .
tracer wire will be required for nonmetallic pipe such as high density polyethylene hdpe and vitrified clay pipe vcp and for polyvinyl chloride pipe pvc two inches in diameter and larger .
tracer wire will be required where the metallic component is encased within the pipe such as reinforced concrete pipe rcp and rgrcp and steel cylinder concrete pipe .
tracer wire will also be required for nonmetallic cable service connections and other utility lines fiber optic lines empty duct banks section num num and duct banks containing a utility that is not magnetically detectable either before or after backfilling and other facilities as determined by the engineer .
cast iron and ductile iron pipes may be nonconductive because of site specific soil conditions or construction configuration as a consequence all new installations of cast iron and ductile iron pipes shall also be made detectable with tracer wire .
for all other underground facilities should the magnetic characteristics be unknown the contractor shall perform sufficient tests with standard locating instruments to determine whether tracer wire will be necessary and provide the results to the engineer .
such tests shall be performed prior to construction .
the contractor shall also provide access points as specified below for all facilities that will receive tracer wire .
b materials tracer wire shall be a minimum num american w ire gauge aw g solid copper .
tracer wire shall be coated with a minimum num mil polyethylene jacket designed specifically for buried use .
tracer wire shall conform to the specifications of the nec ul and other applicable industry standards .
splices as required to promote continuity shall utilize sealed water tight connections .
new access boxes shall be concrete pull boxes in accordance with subsection num number num pull box traffic standard t.s .
num except that the cover shall be marked with the name of the utility or type of facility .
c construction requirements the contractor shall install tracer wire along the top of the entire length of the underground facilities .
the tracer wire shall be attached to the facility at minimum intervals of not more than num feet and shall be secured in such a manner that the wire remains firmly attached throughout the construction period .
tracer wire shall be made accessible along the facility through appropriate pull boxes or other means as approved by the engineer .
new or existing junction boxes or pull boxes included in the construction of conduit or other transmission facilities shall be utilized as access structures wherever possible .
for sanitary and storm sewer pipe tracer wire shall be constructed into the manhole at the pipe entry point secured to the inside wall along the full length and be accessible from above upon removal of the manhole cover .
for water lines requiring tracer wire the contractor shall provide access to the wire within the valve boxes .
the contractor shall provide and install new access boxes for all tracer wire which can not be terminated in a new or existing junction or pull box or new manhole or valve box .
section num num pull boxes shall be installed flush with the finished grade .
tracer wire shall be securely attached to the facility at each access point and extended vertically to the access box .
the tracer wire shall be terminated with a minimum of num inches of slack above the bottom of the pull box .
tracer wire installed for each segment of underground utility shall be terminated at each access point within the pull box junction box manhole or valve box .
the contractor shall make no connections or splices of tracer wire across access points .
new pull boxes installed exclusively for tracer wire shall be placed directly above the utility line in easily reachable areas .
for facilities that cross adot rightofway tracer wire shall be made accessible at the rightofway line at approved access points .
for facilities placed longitudinally in adot rightofway access points shall be located between the rightofway line and the outside edge of the shoulder or grader ditch or back of sidewalk or curb and gutter as applicable .
access boxes installed exclusively for tracer wire shall be provided at intervals no greater than num feet or as a minimum at the point each line crosses adot right of way .
if the utility line is placed outside the preferred location of the access box as described above the box shall be located in the preferred location and tracer wire shall be installed in a suitable conduit and brought up to the pull box .
for jacking and boring tracer wire shall be placed inside the jacked sleeve and attached to the utility facility empty conduits and duct banks shall have a tracer wire attached to the outside of the facility .
w hen sanitary sewer force mains are installed in adot rightofway tracer wire access shall be accomplished by attaching the wire to the outside of wet wells and terminating the wire in pull boxes number num traffic standard t.s .
num placed adjacent to the wet well .
d testing the contractor shall test all installed tracer wire and all those facilities determined to be magnetically detectable without tracer wire with standard locating instruments to verify conductivity both before and after backfilling and provide the results to the engineer .
the contractor shall install new tracer wire for those newly installed utilities that fail to be detectable at no additional cost to the department .
tracer wires that fail to test properly shall also be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
e payment section num num no measurement or direct payment will be made for furnishing and installing tracer wires and access boxes or for testing the installed wires or facilities .
such costs shall be considered as included in the cost of contract items .
section num control of work num authority and responsibility of the district engineer the district engineer is the state engineers direct representative in matters relating to construction activities within a defined area of the state .
the district engineer assigns a resident engineer to each of the projects within a district and is responsible to guide each resident engineer who administers a contract within the district .
the district engineer will assume the contractual responsibilities of the resident engineer if the position is vacated .
num authority and responsibility of the resident engineer the resident engineer is the state engineers direct representative in matters relating to construction activities and is responsible for the administration and satisfactory completion of the contract .
the resident engineer is authorized to determine the acceptability and quality of materials furnished and work performed .
the resident engineer is authorized to approve supplemental agreements to the contract .
after execution of the contract the resident engineer shall be contacted to resolve all questions pertaining to interpretation of the plans and specifications alterations of the contract and contractor compensation .
the resident engineer will have the authority to suspend the work in whole or in part due to failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workers or the general public failure to carry out provisions of the contract and failure to carry out orders .
the resident engineer may suspend the work due to adverse weather conditions conditions considered adverse to the prosecution of the work or any other condition or reason deemed to be in the public interest .
num plans and working drawings the plans will show details of all structures the lines grades typical cross sections of the roadway and the location and design of all structures .
the contractor shall keep one set of project plans available at the project site at all times .
the plans shall be supplemented by such working drawings as are necessary to control the work adequately .
w orking drawings shall be furnished by the contractor and shall include such detailed plans as section num num may be required to control the work adequately and are not included in the plans furnished by the department .
w orking drawings which consist of detailed plans diagrams etc .
shall not be prepared until the elevations lengths geometrics etc .
have been verified with the engineer .
w orking drawings which include drawings for falsework shoring soldier piles and other major temporary support structures shall be prepared by and bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer .
minor support structures as defined in subsection num are exempt from this requirement .
falsework submittals will not be required for single and multiple barrel concrete box culverts with a clear span of num feet or less .
this exemption does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for providing adequate and safe falsework systems for these structures .
the contractors schedule of work shall allow a sufficient period of time for the working drawing approval process as follows first submission num w orking days or one working day per drawing whichever is greater .
second submission num w orking days or num working day per drawing whichever is greater .
the time period as shown above shall be doubled for submittals involving falsework or posttensioning .
the contractor shall allow a minimum of three months for the review of any working drawing submitted for structures involving railroads .
in the event that the contractors first submission does not meet adot standards for shop detail drawings or engineering design drawings and specifications as determined by the department the entire submission will be returned without review and will be recorded as the first submission and when resubmitted will be subject to the same time requirements as the first submission .
the contractor shall submit at least one copy of the material submitted to the engineer directly to the appropriate departmental office in phoenix so that the time necessary for the required approval may be shortened .
the engineer will specify which departmental office is to receive the copy .
the department will endeavor to return corrected andor approved drawings with a minimum of delay .
in order to expedite the approval of critical drawings the contractor should indicate in its submittal the order of preference for review and return of drawings and submit all drawings in the order of their importance .
all working drawings will be reviewed by the engineer for conformance with the design intent of the contracts .
following the engineers review section num num of each submittal of working drawings the engineer shall respond in writing to the contractor as follows a approved which means approved for construction fabrication or manufacture subject to the provision that the work shall be in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
final acceptance of the work shall be contingent upon such compliance b approved as noted which means unless otherwise noted on the drawings approved for construction fabrication or manufacture subject to the provision that the work shall be carried out in compliance with all annotations or corrections indicated and in accordance with requirements of the contract .
final acceptance of work shall be contingent upon such compliance .
if also marked resubmit approval as noted is valid and a corrected submittal of the drawings is required or c disapproved which means that deviations from the requirements of the contract exist in the submittal such that no work based on such drawings shall be constructed fabricated or manufactured .
the contractor shall revise the drawing in compliance with the engineers annotations and pursuant to all requirements of the contract and shall resubmit the working drawings to the engineer for another review .
the engineers approval of the contractors working drawings shall not relieve the contractor from responsibility for errors in dimensions for successful completion of the work or in conforming with the requirements of the plans and specifications nor for responsibility for damage claims as defined in subsection num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the correctness of its plans and for shop fits and field connections although the plans may have been approved .
any work done or materials ordered or delivered prior to the approval of such working drawings shall be at the sole risk of the contractor .
all working drawings which are drawings or prints shall be num by num inches in size .
there shall be a twoinch margin on the left side of the numinch dimension and a numinch margin on the remaining three sides .
a blank space four inches wide by three inches high shall be left inside the margin in the lower right hand corner .
all drawings shall be made in such a manner that clear and legible copies can be made from them .
five sets of prints or other acceptable copies and one set of positive reproducibles such as positive mylars or positive sepia shall be submitted to the engineer for review .
the prints and the reproducibles shall be clear precise and suitable for microfilm photography .
upon completion of the review the engineer will stamp the drawings in accordance with item a b or c listed above and return one set of the prints to the contractor .
drawings requiring a resubmittal shall be section num num revised in accordance with the engineers annotations after being verified by the contractor and resubmitted as described above including the set of positive reproducibles .
this resubmittal process shall continue until all corrections and revisions have been made and are acceptable to the engineer .
no changes shall be made by the contractor to any working drawing after it has been approved by the engineer .
the cost of furnishing all working drawings shall be considered as included in the contract unit price for one or more of the contract items .
num conformity with plans and specifications all work performed and all materials furnished shall be in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown on the plans or indicated in the specifications .
the engineer will determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each individual case and the engineers judgment shall be final and conclusive .
w here specific provisions regarding quality control standards are set forth elsewhere in the contract they shall be controlling .
the engineers failure to discover or reject materials or work not in accordance with the contract during the progress of work shall not be considered an acceptance of the work or materials or a waiver of defects .
neither the failure to properly perform inspections tests or approvals required by the contract documents nor the activities or duties to the engineer in the administration of this contract shall relieve the contractor from its obligation to perform the work in strict accordance with the contract .
in the event the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product in which the materials are used not within reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications but that reasonably acceptable work meeting the design purpose has been produced the engineer will determine the conditions under which the work will be accepted and allowed to remain in place unless there are other provisions in the contract that provide for this determination .
w here this determination is made by the engineer rather than contract provisions the engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification .
the modification will provide for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price for such work or materials as necessary to support this determination .
in the event the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product in which the materials are used or the work performed are not in reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications and have resulted in work which is not reasonably acceptable the work or materials shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
section num num the contractor shall bear all the costs of providing the burden of proof that the nonconforming work is reasonable and adequately addresses the design purpose .
the contractor shall bear all risk for continuing with nonconforming work until it is accepted .
the engineer may impose conditions for acceptance of the nonconforming work .
the contractor shall bear all costs for fulfilling the conditions .
the decisions whether the product satisfies the design purpose whether the nonconforming work is reasonably acceptable and the conditions for acceptance are within the sole discretion of the engineer .
num restricted performance specifications w hen the work is performed under a restricted performance specification the target values specified shall be considered to be the values strived for and from which any deviation is allowed .
it is the intent of the specifications that the materials and workmanship shall be uniform in character and shall conform as nearly as realistically possible to the prescribed target value or to the middle portion of the tolerance range .
the purpose of the tolerance range is to accommodate occasional minor variations from the median zone that are unavoidable for practical reasons .
w hen either a maximum and minimum value or both are specified the production and processing of the material and the performance of the work shall be so controlled that material or work will not be preponderantly of borderline quality or dimension .
the engineer will determine acceptability of materials or construction as outlined in the applicable sections of the specifications .
num coordination of plans specifications and special provisions the special provisions the plans the standard specifications and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
in case of discrepancy or conflict the order in which they govern shall be as follows a supplemental agreements b special provisions c project plans d standard drawings e standard specifications section num num w here dimensions on the plans are given or can be computed from other given dimensions they shall govern over scaled dimensions .
the contractor shall take no advantage of any error or omission in the plans estimated quantities or specifications .
in the event the contractor discovers an error or omission it shall immediately notify the engineer in accordance with subsection num .
num cooperation by contractor the contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress thereof and shall cooperate with the engineer the engineers inspectors and other contractors in every way possible .
the contractor shall have on the work at all times as the contractors agent a competent superintendent capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications and thoroughly experienced in the type of work being performed who shall receive instructions from the engineer .
the superintendent shall have full authority to execute orders or directions of the engineer without delay and to promptly supply such materials equipment tools labor and incidentals as may be required .
a superintendent shall be furnished irrespective of the amount of work subcontracted .
num cooperation with utility companies the department will notify all utility companies all pipe line owners or other parties affected and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of the public or private utility fixtures pipe lines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction made as soon as practicable .
w ater lines gas lines wire lines service connections water and gas meter boxes water and gas valve boxes light standards cableways signals and all other utility appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction which are to be relocated or adjusted will be moved by the owners at their expense unless otherwise provided for in the special provisions or noted on the project plans .
the contract will indicate various utility items some of which will be relocated or adjusted by the utility owner including the date by which the work is expected to be completed and other utility items which shall be relocated or adjusted by the contractor .
it is understood and agreed that the contractor has considered in its bid all of the permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in their present or relocated positions as shown on the project plans or described in the special provisions .
the contractor shall make every effort to cooperate fully with each utility company and shall understand that delays to its operations may necessarily occur .
section num num if through the failure of the utility owners to relocate or adjust their facilities as provided for in the contract the contractor sustains loss which could not have been avoided by the judicious handling of forces equipment and plant or by reasonable revision in the contractors schedule of operations any revisions to the contract price or time will be provided in accordance with subsections num and num .
num cooperation between contractors the department reserves the right at any time to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the contract .
w hen separate contracts are awarded within the limits of any one project each contractor shall conduct its work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each other as directed .
if requested by the engineer each contractor shall furnish the engineer with written evidence that the contractor has made the necessary arrangements with the other contractors for the successful prosecution of the work for the benefit of all parties .
each contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with its contract and shall protect and save harmless the department from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced by it or other contractors because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project .
the contractor shall arrange its work and shall place and dispose of the materials being used so as not to interfere with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of the same project and on adjoining projects .
the contractor shall join the contractors work with that of the others in an acceptable manner and shall perform it in proper sequence to that of the others .
num construction stakes lines and grades unless the contract provides for construction survey and layout by the contractor the engineer will set construction stakes establishing lines slopes and continuous profile grade in road work and center line and bench marks for bridge work culvert work protective and accessory structures and appurtenances and will furnish the contractor with all necessary information relating to lines slopes and grades .
these stakes and marks will constitute the field control by and in accordance with which the contractor shall establish other necessary controls and perform the work .
during the course of construction the contractor shall submit requests for staking .
the department will not be responsible for staking delays unless the engineer is provided num calendar days notice before section num num beginning work on an item and thereafter num hours notice that stakes are needed .
w hen the contractor is aware of errors or suspects that there are errors in the staking the contractor shall bring them to the attention of the engineer prior to beginning any work on the basis of the errors .
the contractor shall take no advantage of any staking error .
the contractor shall be held responsible for the preservation of all stakes and marks and if any of the construction stakes or marks have been carelessly or willfully destroyed or disturbed by the contractor the cost of replacing them will be charged against it and will be deducted from the payment for the work .
the department will be responsible for the accuracy of lines slopes grades and other engineering work which it provides under this subsection .
the contractor shall be responsible to maintain all existing monumentation including section line rightofway and roadway monumentation .
monumentation disturbed by construction activities shall be re established at no additional cost to the department .
monumentation shall be reestablished in accordance with subsection num .
num authority and responsibility of project supervisor and inspectors the primary responsibility of inspectors is to accurately document the work detailed in the plans and specifications .
the documentation will include the level or degree of conformance of the work with the plans and specifications .
the inspectors are also responsible for requiring conformance with plans and specifications and are authorized to reject work or materials not in conformance with plans and specifications .
an inspector has neither the authority to issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications nor to alter or waive the provisions of the contract .
the resident engineer may appoint a project supervisor who will serve as lead inspector .
unresolved contractor and inspector disputes relative to interpretation of plans and specifications or acceptability of work or materials will be escalated to the resident engineer .
num inspection of work all materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the engineer .
the engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and section num num assistance by the contractor as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
the contractor shall schedule its operations to allow a reasonable amount of time for engineering inspection of the work .
in most cases inspection will be completed in eight work hours or less .
the contractor shall not be entitled to additional compensation or an extension of contract time for delay resulting from such inspections .
the engineer shall perform the inspection as expeditiously as possible in order that the work might progress in an orderly and continuous manner .
additional inspection costs incurred due to contractor errors shall be at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor at any time before acceptance of the work shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as directed by the engineer .
after examination the contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standard required by the plans and specifications .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable payment for uncovering or removal and replacement of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable the uncovering or removal and replacement of the covering or making good of the parts removed shall be at no additional cost to the department .
any work done or materials used without inspection by the engineer may be ordered removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department unless the engineer failed to inspect after having been given a minimum of num hours notice in writing that the work was to be performed .
failure to reject any defective work or materials shall not in any way prevent later rejection when such defect is discovered nor obligate the engineer to final acceptance .
w hen any unit of government political subdivision utility or any railroad corporation is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract its respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
such inspection shall in no sense make any unit of government political subdivision or any railroad corporation a party to the contract and shall in no way interfere with the rights of either party to the contract .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work all work which does not conform to the requirements of the contract will be considered as unacceptable work unless otherwise determined to be acceptable in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
unacceptable work whether the result of poor workmanship use of defective materials damage through carelessness or any other cause found to exist prior to the final acceptance of the work shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner .
section num num no work shall be done without lines and grades having been previously established .
w ork done contrary to the instructions of the engineer work done beyond the lines shown on the project plans or as given except as herein specified or any extra work done without authority will be considered as unauthorized and will not be paid for under the provisions of the contract .
w ork so done may be ordered removed or replaced at no additional cost to the department .
upon failure on the part of the contractor to comply with any order of the engineer made under the provisions of this subsection the engineer will have authority to cause unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed and to deduct the costs from any monies due the contractor .
num load restrictions the contractor shall comply with all legal load restrictions in the hauling of materials on public roads beyond the limits of the project .
a pamphlet sizes and w eights of vehicles and loads upon highways is available from the motor vehicle division arizona department of transportation .
a special permit will not relieve the contractor of liability for damage which may result from hauling of material or moving of equipment .
the operation of equipment of such weight or so loaded as to cause damage to structures or the roadway or to any other type of construction will not be permitted .
hauling of materials over the subgrade or the base course or surface course under construction shall be limited as directed by the engineer .
no loads will be permitted on a portland cement concrete pavement base or structure before the expiration of the curing period .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage done by the contractors hauling equipment .
in no case shall legal load limits be exceeded unless permitted in writing by the engineer .
num maintenance during construction the contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until the project is accepted except as otherwise specified in subsection numc .
this maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day with adequate equipment and forces to the end that the roadway or structures are kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
in the case of a contract for the placing of a course upon a course or subgrade previously constructed the contractor shall maintain the previous course or subgrade during all construction operations .
section num num all costs of maintenance work during construction and before the project is accepted shall be considered as included in the contract unit price for one or more of the contract items .
num failure to maintain roadway or structure if at any time the contractor fails to comply with the provisions of subsection num the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice the engineer may immediately proceed to maintain the project and the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from monies due or to become due the contractor .
num furnishing rightofway the department will be responsible for the securing of all necessary rightsofway in advance of construction .
any exceptions will be indicated in the contract .
num opening sections of project to traffic the engineer may order certain sections of work to be opened to traffic before completion or acceptance of the work .
opening these sections shall not constitute acceptance of the work or waiver of any contract provisions .
on those sections opened to traffic the cost of maintaining the roadway to accommodate traffic will be at the departments expense and the contractor will be compensated for costs incurred under subsection num .
the engineer will decide which maintenance is required .
compensation for additional expense and additional time if any shall be set forth in a supplemental agreement for those sections of the project ordered opened to traffic if the opening is not due to the fault or inactivity of the contractor .
if the contractor is late in completing features of the work according to the contract or progress schedule the engineer will give written notification establishing a time period for completing these features .
if the contractor fails to complete or make a reasonable effort to complete the work according to the written notification the engineer may order all or a portion of the project opened to traffic .
the contractor shall not be relieved of liability or responsibility for maintaining the work and shall conduct the remaining construction operations with minimum interference to traffic without additional compensation for the added cost of the work .
damage to the project that is not attributable to traffic shall be repaired at no additional cost to the department .
the removal of rock or mud slides shall be done on a basis determined by the engineer before removal .
num substantial completion section num num the project is substantially complete and liquidated damages will no longer be assessed when all of the following have occurred a all lanes of traffic of the completed project are finished and accepted and traffic can move unimpeded through the project at the posted speed b all signage is in place and accepted c all guardrails drainage devices ditches excavation and embankment have been accepted and d the only work left for completion is incidental away from the paved portion of the highway and does not affect the safety or convenience of the traveling public the decision whether the project is substantially complete is within the sole discretion of the engineer .
num acceptance a partial acceptance if at any time during the prosecution of the project the contractor completes a unit or portion of the project the contractor may submit a written request to the engineer to make inspection of that unit .
the engineer will approve or disapprove the request within five working days .
if approved and the engineer finds upon inspection that the unit has been satisfactorily completed in compliance with the contract the engineer may accept that unit as being completed and the contractor may be relieved of further responsibility for that unit .
such partial acceptance shall in no way void or alter any of the terms of the contract .
b final acceptance upon notice from the contractor that the entire project is substantially complete the engineer will make an inspection .
if all construction provided for and contemplated by the contract is found completed to the engineers satisfaction that inspection will constitute the final inspection and the engineer will make the final acceptance and notify the contractor in writing of this acceptance as of the date of the final inspection .
if however the inspection discloses any work in whole or in part as being unsatisfactory or not complete the engineer will give the contractor written notice of the unsatisfactory or incomplete work and the contractor shall immediately correct such work .
in such case the engineer will also give the contractor written notice as to whether or not the work is substantially complete .
in addition final acceptance section num num will not be made until all completed plans and working drawings as required in subsection num have been submitted and deemed acceptable by the engineer .
upon completion and correction of the work as called for by the engineers notice the above procedures will be repeated until the engineer gives notice of substantial completion and final acceptance separately or together .
num administrative process for the resolution of contract disputes the notice provision set forth in subsection num is a contractual obligation assumed by the contractor in executing the contract .
the contractor understands that it will be forever barred from recovering against the department if it fails to give notice of any act or failure to act by the engineer or the happening of any event thing or occurrence in accordance with subsection num .
the administrative process for the resolution of disputes is sequential in nature and is composed of the following steps step i .
review by the resident engineer step ii .
review by the district engineer step iii .
review by the state engineer .
except as provided in this subsection no dispute will be accorded a particular level of review unless the dispute has been reviewed at the preceding level and the contractor rejects the decision in writing within the time period specified .
unless specifically requested by the department the submission of additional information by the contractor at any step of the review process shall cause the process to revert to step i .
if at any step in the process a dispute is resolved the contractor must sign a supplemental agreement which sets for the resolution of the dispute and includes an unconditional release as to any and all matters arising from the dispute .
the contractor shall also notify the resident engineer in writing that all documentation in support of the dispute has been provided to the resident engineer and that the administrative review process should begin .
no formal action will be taken by the resident engineer until this written notification is received .
the documentation provided to the resident engineer shall serve as the basis for evaluating the contractors position regarding the dispute throughout the administrative process .
as a minimum the information described in subsection num must accompany each dispute .
if the following information applies it shall also be provided in addition to the information required by subsection num section num num a if the dispute relates to a decision of the engineer which the contract leaves to the engineers discretion or as to which the contract provides that the engineers decision is final the contractor shall set out in detail all facts supporting its contention that the decision of the engineer was not supported by any evidence .
b if additional compensation is sought the contractor shall submit the exact amount sought broken down into the following categories num direct labor num direct materials num equipment num job overhead num general and administrative overhead num subcontractors w ork broken down as num num num and num above num other categories as specified by the contractor .
c if additional compensation or a time extension is sought the contractor shall certify the above information in accordance with subsection numbnum .
the resident engineer will render a written decision regarding the matter in dispute within num calendar days of receipt of the contractors notification that the dispute resolution process should begin .
the contractor shall upon receipt of the decision by the resident engineer either accept or reject the decision in writing .
if the contractor does not reject the resident engineers decision within num calendar days of its receipt the contractor will be deemed to have accepted the decision the dispute will be considered withdrawn from the administrative process and there will be no further administrative remedy .
if the contractor rejects the decision of the resident engineer the dispute will be forwarded by the resident engineer to the district engineer .
the district engineer will within num calendar days of receipt of the dispute information from the resident engineer schedule and hold a meeting to review the dispute with the contractor .
this time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties .
the district engineer will within num calendar days of the meeting issue a written decision with justification regarding the dispute .
the contractor shall within num calendar days of receipt of the decision either accept or reject it in writing .
if the contractor does not reject the section num num district engineers decision within num calendar days the contractor will be deemed to have accepted the decision and the dispute will be considered withdrawn from the administrative process and there will be no further administrative remedy .
if the contractor rejects the decision of the district engineer the district engineer will forward the dispute to the state engineer .
the state engineer will within num calendar days of receipt of the dispute information from the district engineer schedule and hold a meeting with the contractor .
this time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties .
the state engineer will within num calendar days of the meeting issue a written decision with justification regarding the dispute .
the contractor shall within num calendar days of the receipt of the decision of state engineer either accept or reject it in writing .
if the contractor does not reject the state engineers decision within num calendar days the contractor will be deemed to have accepted the decision the dispute will be considered withdrawn from the administrative process and there will be no further administrative remedy .
if the contractor rejects the decision of state engineer there will be no further automatic review of the dispute .
d contractors options after state engineer review the decision of the state engineer in relation to the contractors claim shall be final unless the contractor commences arbitration or litigation as follows num w here the amount in controversy is num or less the contractors sole legal remedy shall be arbitration as prescribed in subsection num .
num w here the amount in controversy is more than num the contractors sole remedy shall be to initiate litigation pursuant to section num et seq .
of the arizona revised statutes .
e mediation if the contractor is not satisfied with the decision of the state engineer and prior to filing for arbitration or litigation the contractor may request a nonbinding mediation by filing a request for mediation in writing with the engineer .
the engineer will then arrange for a mutually agreeable mediator .
such request for mediation shall be made within num calendar days from the date of the state engineers decision as provided for in this subsection .
in connection with the mediation each party shall bear its own costs attorneys fees and expert fees .
any fees and expenses assessed by the mediator shall be borne equally by the parties .
section num num num arbitration of claims and disputes if the contractor elects to invoke its right to arbitration the contractor shall file a demand for arbitration in writing with the american arbitration association or united states arbitration and mediation of arizona and serve a copy thereof upon the state engineer .
such demand for arbitration shall be made by the contractor within num calendar days of the date of the state engineers decision as provided for in section num above unless a mediation process is already underway in which case the demand for arbitration shall be made within num days of the termination of the mediation process .
the scope of the arbitration proceeding shall be restricted and limited to the matters presented to the state engineer upon which the decision or determination was made and shall include no other matters .
all arbitration of claims shall be conducted in phoenix arizona in accordance with the rules of the arbitration service hearing the dispute .
the decision or award of the arbitrator shall be supported by substantial evidence and in writing contain the basis for the decision or award and findings of fact .
the decision or award by the arbitrator when made shall be final and nonappealable except as provided in section num arizona revised statutes .
both the contractor and the department shall be bound by the arbitration award for all purposes and judgment may be entered upon it in accordance with applicable law in the superior court of arizona in and for the county of maricopa .
for the purposes of this subsection a claim for adjustment in compensation shall mean an aggregate of operative facts which give rise to the rights which the contractor seeks to enforce .
that is to say a claim under this subsection is defined as the event transaction or set of facts that give rise to a claim for compensation costs expenses or damages .
in making a determination whether the amount in controversy is num or less the parties shall not consider quantify or take into account any requested extensions of contract time or the release or remission of liquidated damages previously assessed under subsection num and num of these specifications .
any contractor having a claim adjustment or dispute for an amount in excess of num may waive or abandon the dollar amount of any such claim in excess of num so as to bring the claim adjustment or dispute within the scope and coverage of this subsection provided that the amount allowed to any such contractor by the arbitration award shall not exceed num .
various damages claimed by the contractor for a single claim may not be divided into separate proceedings to create claims within the num limit .
the claim shall be submitted to a single arbitrator who shall be selected by the parties from a list of arbitrators furnished by the arbitration service .
each party shall alternately strike names from the list until only one name remains .
the person whose name thus remains on the list of arbitrators is their first choice but if that person is not section num num available to serve the two persons whose names were last stricken are acceptable with the one whose name was last stricken being the first alternate .
unless agreed to otherwise the parties shall select the arbitrator within num calendar days after each has received a copy of the list of arbitrators .
each party to the arbitration shall bear its own costs attorney fees and expert fees .
any other costs and fees assessed by the arbitration service shall be divided equally between the parties to the arbitration .
section num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements the contractor shall furnish all materials required to complete the work except materials that are designated in the special provisions to be furnished by the department as set forth in subsection num .
only materials conforming to the requirements of the specifications shall be incorporated into the work .
materials shall be new except as may be provided elsewhere in the contract .
the materials shall be manufactured handled and used in a workmanlike manner to insure completed work in accordance with the requirements of the plans and the specifications .
in order to expedite the inspection and testing of materials the contractor shall notify the engineer of the contractor proposed sources of materials prior to delivery .
at the option of the engineer materials may be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started .
if it is found after trial that sources of supply for previously approved materials do not produce specified products the contractor shall furnish materials from other sources .
w henever water is required on a project as part of either a process or a product it shall be free of contaminants which in the judgment of the engineer constitute a health hazard to those individuals employed on the project and to the general public .
untreated effluent shall not be utilized in any aspect of the work .
num items of special manufacture at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall furnish the engineer a list of all items of special manufacture or items which are or may be in short supply which will be incorporated into the work .
items of special manufacture shall include but shall not be limited to materials and equipment for traffic signal and lighting systems steel bridge members precast prestressed concrete bridge members structural components for rest areas compressors pumps sewage treatment plants water treatment plants and materials related thereto .
section num num the items of special manufacture which have been agreed upon by the engineer and the contractor shall be ordered by the contractor promptly so that they will be available as required and will not delay the work .
the contractor shall advise the engineer about the dates of the orders and the dates that the items are expected to be received .
num blank num tests and acceptance of material a general all materials will be inspected tested and approved by the engineer prior to incorporation in the work .
any work in which materials not previously approved are used shall be performed at the contractors risk and may be considered as unauthorized and unacceptable and not subject to the payment provisions of the contract .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents materials will be sampled and tested by a qualified representative of the department .
copies of all test results will be furnished to the contractors representative at the contractors request .
any laboratory performing sampling and testing for an adot project shall be open to unrestricted access for inspection and review by the department .
the laboratory shall provide an adequate amount of enclosed space and be supplied with the proper equipment facilities and utilities so that the required testing procedures can be performed .
it shall have adequate lighting ventilation and means of ingress and egress .
the laboratory shall be equipped with heating and cooling equipment capable of maintaining an ambient air temperature of num to num degrees f. the laboratory and all equipment and facilities therein shall be kept clean and maintained in good working order .
sampling and testing of materials shall be in accordance with the requirements of the adot materials testing manual the adot materials policy and procedure directives manual .
applicable federal aashto or astm specifications or test designations .
applicable specifications or test designations of other nationally recognized organizations .
w henever a reference is made to an arizona test method or an adot materials policy and procedure directive it shall mean the test method or policy and procedure directive in effect on the bid opening date .
section num num unless otherwise specified whenever a reference is made to a federal aashto or astm specification or test designation or to a specification or test designation of other nationally recognized organizations it shall mean the specification or test designation in effect on the bid opening date .
b contractor quality control the contractor is responsible for quality control measures necessary to provide acceptable quality in the production handling and placement of all materials .
except as specified below no payment will be made for such measures the cost being considered as included in contract items .
certain construction items may require additional quality control measures as specified in subsection numc .
w hen so specified the contractor shall provide all the personnel equipment materials supplies and facilities necessary to obtain samples and perform the tests listed in the applicable section and as given herein in subsection numc .
specific contractor quality control requirements will be shown in the applicable construction items .
payment for such additional work shall be in accordance with the special provisions and shall be included in bidding schedule item num .
c specific contractor quality control measures num general at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall designate a qualified employee as quality control manager to be responsible for implementing monitoring and as necessary adjusting the processes to assure acceptable quality .
the quality control manager shall be a full time employee of the contractor and shall be on the project site during all construction activities .
also at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall be prepared to discuss his understanding of the quality control responsibilities for the specified materials .
w hen requested by the contractor the department will engage in testing of materials for the purpose of correlating the contractors test results to those of the departments acceptance laboratory .
num quality control laboratory all field and laboratory sampling and testing shall be performed by a laboratory or laboratories approved by the department .
the requirements for approval of laboratories are specified in the adot system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
approved laboratories and the test methods for which they are approved to perform are listed in the adot directory of approved materials testing laboratories .
approved test methods listed in the adot directory of approved materials testing laboratories do not include field sampling and testing procedures .
w hen field sampling and testing procedures section num num are performed the appropriate valid arizona technical testing institute atti andor american concrete institute aci certifications are required .
the adot system for the evaluation of testing laboratories and the adot directory of approved materials testing laboratories may be obtained from adot materials group quality assurance section num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
the engineer will promptly advise the contractor in writing of any noted deficiencies concerning the laboratory facility equipment supplies or sampling and testing personnel and procedures .
num quality sampling and testing supervisor the contractor shall designate a quality sampling and testing supervisors who is responsible to supervise the sampling and testing and who meets the requirements given in table num for the specific material on which sampling and testing is being performed .
the quality sampling and testing supervisors shall be an employee of the contractor or a consultant engaged by the contractor and may be responsible for supervising the sampling and testing on more than one project .
the quality sampling and testing supervisors shall be able to be at the job site within num hours from any point in time .
additional information regarding quality sampling and testing supervisor certification can be obtained from the adot materials group quality assurance section num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
table num quality sampling and testing supervisor requirements soils and aggregate field laboratory arizona technical testing institute atti field certification plus one of a through g below .
arizona technical testing institute atti laboratory soilsaggregate certification plus one of a through g below .
asphaltic concrete field laboratory arizona technical testing institute atti field certification plus one of a through g below .
arizona technical testing institute atti asphalt certification plus one of a through g below .
concrete field laboratory american concrete institute aci concrete field testing technician grade i certification plus one of a through g below .
american concrete institute aci concrete strength testing technician certification plus one of a through g below .
section num num table num continued quality sampling and testing supervisor requirements a professional engineer registered in the state of arizona with one year of highway materials sampling and testing experience acceptable to the department .
b engineerintraining certified by the state of arizona with two years of highway materials sampling and testing experience acceptable to the department .
c obtained a bachelor of science degree in civil engineering civil engineering technology construction or related field acceptable to the department and with three years of highway materials sampling and testing experience acceptable to the department .
d certified by the national institute for certification in engineering technologies nicet in the construction materials testing field as an engineering technician level iii or higher in the appropriate subfield in which sampling and testing is being performed .
e certified by nicet in the transportation engineering technology field as an engineering technician level iii or higher in the highway materials subfield .
f certified by nicet as an engineering technician or higher in civil engineering technology with five years of highway materials sampling and testing experience acceptable to the department .
g an individual with eight years of highway materials sampling and testing and construction experience acceptable to the department .
num quality sampling and testing technician quality sampling and testing technicians who perform the actual sampling and testing shall meet the requirements given in table num for the specific material on which sampling and testing is being performed .
quality sampling and testing technicians shall be employees of the quality control laboratory and be supervised by a qualified quality sampling and testing supervisor for the specific material on which sampling and testing is being performed .
additional information regarding quality sampling and testing technician certification can be obtained from the adot materials group quality assurance section num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
section num num table num quality sampling and testing technician requirements soils and aggregate field laboratory arizona technical testing institute atti field certification .
arizona technical testing institute atti laboratory soilsaggregate certification .
asphaltic concrete field laboratory arizona technical testing institute atti field certification .
arizona technical testing institute atti asphalt certification .
concrete field laboratory american concrete institute aci concrete field testing technician grade i certification .
american concrete institute aci concrete strength testing technician certification .
num records the quality control laboratory shall maintain all sampling and testing records and supporting documentation used in the preparation of the w eekly quality control report .
upon request the contractor shall make those records and supporting documentation available to the department for review and copying as desired .
linear control charts shall be maintained by the contractor .
control charts shall be posted in a location satisfactory to the engineer and shall be kept up to date at all times .
as a minimum the control charts shall identify the project number the contract item number the test number each test parameter the upper andor lower specification limit applicable to each test parameter and the contractors test results .
the contractor shall use the control charts as part of a process control system for identifying production and equipment problems and for identifying potential pay factor reductions before they occur .
num weekly quality control reports the contractor shall submit w eekly quality control reports to the engineer .
the weekly reports shall state the types of work such as earthwork portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete which have been performed during the report period and shall also include the process control measures taken to assure quality .
the weekly report shall provide sample identification information for materials tested during the report period including sample number date sampled sample location person obtaining sample and original source of material .
the report shall also provide the results for all required tests and any retests corrective actions and other information relevant to quality control .
although handwritten documentation can be included the quality control report narrative sample identification information section num num results for tests and any retests and corrective actions shall be typed to ensure the department can make clear reproductions of the documents .
the report period shall end at midnight of each friday and the report shall be submitted to the engineer no later than num p.m. of the following w ednesday .
reports not submitted by the abovereferenced deadline shall be considered delinquent and monies shall be deducted from the contractors monthly estimate in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of item num contractor quality control .
num certificates a general the contractor shall submit to the engineer an original or copy of either a certificate of compliance or a certificate of analysis as required prior to the use of any materials or manufactured assemblies for which these specifications or the special provisions require that such a certificate be furnished .
the engineer may permit the use of certain materials or manufactured assemblies prior to or without sampling and testing if accompanied by a certificate of compliance or certificate of analysis as herein specified .
materials or manufactured assemblies for which a certificate is furnished may be sampled and tested at any time and if found not in conformity with the requirements of the plans and the specifications will be subject to rejection whether in place or not .
certificates shall comply with the requirements specified herein and of the materials testing manual .
b certificate of compliance a certificate of compliance shall contain the following information num a description of the material supplied .
num quantity of material represented by the certificate .
num means of material identification such as label lot number or marking .
num statement that the material complies in all respects with the requirements of the cited specifications .
certificates shall state compliance with the cited specification such as aashto m num astm a num or specific table or section of the arizona department of transportation standard specifications or special provisions .
certificates may cite both if applicable .
section num num num the name title and signature of a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturer or the supplier of the material .
the date of the signature shall also be given .
the name and address of the manufacturer or supplier of the material shall be shown on the certificate .
a copy or facsimile reproduction will be acceptable .
however the original certificate shall be made available upon request .
the person signing the certificate shall be in one of the following categories a an officer of a corporation .
b a partner in a business partnership or an owner .
c a general manager .
d any person having been given the authority in writing by one of the three listed above .
the manufacturer or supplier may submit a list of those who are authorized to sign certificates .
this list shall be submitted under the name title and signature of one of the first three listed above .
this list will be kept on file for subsequent certificates received on that project .
each of the first four items specified above shall be completed prior to the signing as defined in item five .
no certificate will be accepted that has been altered added to or changed in any way after the authorized signature has been affixed to the original certificate .
however notations of a clarifying nature such as project number contractor or quantity shipped are acceptable provided the basic requirements of the certificate are not affected .
c certificate of analysis a certificate of analysis shall include all the information required in a certificate of compliance and in addition shall include the results of all tests required by the specifications .
num inspection of the plant the engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source .
in the event plant inspection is undertaken the engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the contractor and the producer with whom the contractor has contracted for materials and the engineer shall have full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may be involved in the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
adequate safety measures shall be provided and maintained .
the department reserves the right to retest all materials which have been tested and accepted at the source of supply after the same have been delivered and prior to incorporation into the work and to reject all section num num materials which when retested do not meet the requirements of the specifications .
num sampling device all secondary crushers and screening plants used in producing material shall be equipped with a mechanical sampling device or devices that can either be operated from the ground or is accessible to the operator on a platform .
these devices shall be constructed and operated so that they will move at a constant rate across the full width of material and collect a representative sample of the falling column of material from the discharge belt or chute while the plant is in operation .
the sampling devices shall be substantially constructed so that a sample weighing up to num pounds can be taken .
the sampling devices shall be equipped with necessary attachments to convey the samples to the ground so that they can be safely and conveniently collected .
the sampling devices shall be approved by the engineer and shall be maintained in a satisfactory working condition so that samples may be taken at any time as required by the engineer .
num proprietary products trade names and substitutions the contract may contain references to equipment materials or patented processes by manufacturer trade name make or catalog number .
such references shall be regarded as establishing a standard of quality finish appearance or performance or as indicating a selection based upon compatibility with existing equipment or materials and shall not be construed as limiting selection to a specific item or source .
the use of an alternative or substitute article of equipment material or process which for the purpose intended is of equal quality finish appearance or performance and which is compatible with existing equipment and materials when required will be permitted subject to the following conditions a no consideration will be given to a request for substitution prior to contract award .
after award and in time to permit consideration and approval without delaying work the contractor shall submit a written request for substitution .
b a request for substitution shall include all information necessary for proof of equality and suitability for substitution including samples for testing if required .
the request for substitution shall meet the stipulations set forth in subsection num for value engineering proposals .
section num num c the department will evaluate the information submitted perform tests when necessary and make comparison .
the engineer will then make the final decision as to acceptability of the proposed substitution .
the department will neither be liable for any delay in acting upon any request for substitution nor for any failure to accept any request pursuant to this substitution .
num storage of materials materials shall be so stored as to insure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
stored materials even though approved before storage may again be inspected prior to their use in the work .
stored materials shall be located so as to facilitate their prompt inspection .
approved portions of the rightofway may be used for storage purposes and for the placing of the contractors plant and equipment but any additional space required for this purpose shall be provided by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner and lessee and if requested by the engineer copies of such written permission shall be furnished the engineer .
all storage sites shall be restored to their original condition by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
this shall not apply to the stripping and storing of topsoil or to other materials salvaged from the work .
num handling materials all materials shall be handled in such a manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
aggregates shall be transported from the storage site to the work in tight vehicles so constructed as to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring in order that there may be no inconsistencies in the quantities of materials as loaded and intended for incorporation into the work and the quantities of materials as actually received at the place where they are to be incorporated into the work .
num unacceptable materials material not conforming to the requirements of the specifications whether in place or not will be rejected and shall be promptly removed from the site of the work unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
no rejected material the defects of which have been corrected shall be returned to the work site until such time as approval for its use has been given by the engineer .
num departmentfurnished material the contractor shall furnish all materials required to complete the work except those specified to be furnished by the department .
section num num material furnished by the department will be delivered or made available to the contractor as specified in the special provisions .
the contractor shall receive inventory store inspect protect distribute and install department furnished material unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
the cost of handling and placing all materials after they are delivered to the contractor shall be considered as included in the contract price for the item in connection with which they are used .
the contractor will be held responsible for all material delivered to it .
deductions will be made from any monies due it to make good any shortages or deficiencies from any cause whatsoever and for any damage which may occur after such delivery and for any late delivery charges .
num warranties and guaranties the contractor shall obtain such manufacturers or producers warranties or guaranties on all items materials electrical or mechanical equipment consistent with those provided as customary trade practice .
the form in which such warranties or guaranties are delivered to the contractor shall include the provision that they are subject to transfer to the maintaining agency as named by the department and shall be accompanied by proper validation of such fact .
transfer of warranties or guaranties shall occur at the time of final acceptance of the work or equipment by the department .
in addition a contractor warranty or guaranty shall be furnished providing for satisfactory in service operation of the mechanical and electrical equipment and related components for a period of six months following project acceptance .
should any defect develop during this six month period the malfunction or defect shall be corrected by and at the expense of the contractor including all labor material and associated costs .
num approved products list the approved products list is a list of products which have been shown to meet the requirements of these standard specifications .
the approved products list is maintained by the department and updated monthly .
copies of the most current version are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
the contractor shall verify that any products chosen for use from the approved products list are selected from the version which was most current at the time of the bid opening .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions products not appearing on the approved products list at the time of the bid opening may be used if they meet section num num the requirements of the plans and specifications and are submitted for approval as specified below a no consideration will be given to a request for approval of a new product prior to contract award .
after award and in time to permit consideration and testing without delaying work the contractor shall submit a written request for approval .
b a request for approval shall include all information necessary for proof of conformance to the requirements of the plans and specifications including samples for testing if required .
c the department will evaluate the information submitted and perform tests when necessary .
the engineer will then make the final decision as to acceptability of the proposed new product .
the department will neither be liable for any delay in acting upon any request for approval of a new product nor for any failure to accept any request pursuant to this subsection .
w hen the special provisions limit product selection to only those listed on the approved products list other products will not be evaluated or approved .
section num legal relations and responsibility to public num laws to be observed the contractor shall keep fully informed of all federal state and local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority which in any manner affect those engaged or employed on the work or which in any way affect the conduct of the work .
the contractor shall at all times observe and comply with all laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees and shall defend indemnify and hold harmless the department and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by the contractor or by any of his subcontractors or suppliers or by any of their employees .
the contractor shall comply with drugfree w orkplace act americans with disabilities act osha and all other pertinent laws relating to conditions of employment .
in connection with the performance of the work the contractor shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race religion color age disability or national origin .
the aforesaid requirement shall include but not be limited to the following employment upgrading demotion or transfer recruitment or recruitment advertising layoff or termination rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including section num num apprenticeship .
the contractor shall post in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment notices to be provided by the department setting forth the provisions of the nondiscrimination requirements .
one or more bulletin boards large enough to display posters and other information required in the contract shall be erected on the job site before any work is allowed to begin .
the location of the bulletin boards will be subject to the approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall also insert the nondiscrimination requirements in all subcontracts .
num permits licenses and taxes the contractor shall procure all permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
num patented devices materials and processes if the contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright the contractor shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall defend indemnify and hold harmless the department any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the department for any costs expenses and damages which it may be obliged to pay by reason of any infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work .
num federal aid participation w hen the united states government pays all or any portion of the cost of a project the federal laws and the rules and regulations made pursuant to such laws shall be observed by the contractor and the work shall be subject to the inspection of the appropriate federal agency .
participation and inspection shall in no sense make the federal government a party to the contract and shall in no way alter the rights of either party to the contract .
num archaeological features the attention of the contractor is directed to title num article num archaeological discoveries sections num et seq .
of the arizona revised statutes which make it a felony punishable by a fine and imprisonment to investigate explore or excavate on state land in or on prehistoric ruins ancient burial grounds fossilized footprints hieroglyphics and all other archaeological features of arizona without permits from the arizona state museum .
section num num section numa of the federal archaeological resources protection act of num specifies that no person may excavate remove damage or otherwise alter or deface any archaeological resource located on public federal lands or indian lands unless such activity is pursuant to a permit issued under section num of the act .
violations of this act are considered a felony and are punishable by fine and imprisonment .
although the department will make every effort prior to construction to identify all cultural resources in a project area previously unidentified archaeological materials could be found during the construction of the project .
w hen archaeological historical or paleontological features are encountered or discovered during any activity related to the construction of the project the contractor shall stop work immediately at that location and shall take all reasonable steps to secure the preservation of those features and notify the engineer .
the engineer will direct how to protect the features .
the contractor shall not resume work until it is so directed by the engineer .
in the event of a suspension of work pursuant to this clause the contractor shall refer to the provisions of subsection num num historic preservation the attention of the contractor is directed to title num chapter num historic preservation section num et seq .
arizona revised statutes which makes it a felony to intentionally possess sell or transfer any human remain funerary object or other artifact .
although the department will make every effort prior to construction to identify all items that require historic preservation in a project area previously unidentified human remains funerary objects or artifacts may be found during the construction of the project .
w hen human remains or funerary objects are encountered or discovered during any activity related to the construction of a project the contractor shall stop work immediately at that location and shall take all reasonable steps to secure the preservation of those items and notify the engineer .
the engineer will direct how to protect the items .
the contractor shall not resume work until it is so directed by the engineer .
in the event of a suspension of work pursuant to the clause the contractor shall refer to the provisions of subsection num .
num sanitary health and safety provisions the contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat and sanitary condition such accommodations for the use of the contractors employees as may be necessary to comply with the requirements and regulations of the arizona state department of health services or other authorities having jurisdiction therein .
attention is directed to federal state and local laws rules and regulations concerning construction safety and health standards .
the section num num contractor shall not require any workers to work in surroundings or under conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to their health or safety .
occupational safety and health standards shall apply at all times .
the contractor shall have in accordance with osha requirements material safety data sheets msds available for all applicable materials stored or utilized on the project .
should the contractor fail to follow osha regulations the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until compliance has been achieved .
any such failure to comply with osha regulations shall constitute waiver of any right to claim for such suspended work .
if regulations are in conflict the more strict regulation will apply .
prior to construction the department will make a reasonable effort to locate identify and remove potentially hazardous or contaminated materials including underground storage tanks within a project area .
despite these efforts some of these materials may still be found during the construction of the project .
during construction operations should material be encountered which the contractor believes to be hazardous or contaminated the contractor shall immediately do the following num stop work and remove all workers within the contaminated area .
for life threatening situations follow the procedures in the safety plan specified in subsection num .
num barricade the area and provide traffic control if necessary to prohibit unauthorized entry .
num notify the engineer .
if the engineer can not be reached from throughout the state contact the arizona department of transportation operations center at num num .
if the operations center can not be reached contact the department of public safety dps .
the contractor shall not resume work in the area suspected to contain hazardous or contaminated materials until approved by the engineer .
the department will determine the extent and nature of the hazardous or contaminated area and specify a cleanup plan if necessary .
once the department determines the limits of the area affected by the contaminated materials work may then be resumed for the remaining areas of the project where contamination is determined not to present a significant hazard .
substantial suspension of work as a result of the discovery of contaminated or hazardous materials within the project limits shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the department will determine the contractors qualifications to perform the work specified in the cleanup plan .
if the contractor is not qualified to do the work specified in the cleanup plan the department section num num will obtain a contractor for cleanup .
the engineer will execute a supplemental agreement to cover the additional work in accordance with subsection num of the specifications .
num public convenience and safety the contractor shall at all times so conduct its work as to insure the least possible obstruction to traffic .
the safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along the highway and the protection of persons and property shall be provided for by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the contractor shall abide by osha regulations including but not limited to num cfr part num and num cfr part num as well as all applicable standards of the u.s. environmental protection agency epa the arizona department of environmental quality adeq and the u.s .
mine safety and health administration msha .
the contractor shall maintain a copy of the specified osha standards on the construction site at all times .
the contractor shall submit a safety plan at the preconstruction conference .
the safety plan shall specify the procedures the contractor will implement to satisfy osha and any state occupational safety guidelines related to the worker as well as the public in the construction of excavations structures and confined air spaces along with all other activities involved in the project .
the plan must also address num sitespecific safety rules and procedures to deal with the types of risks expected to be encountered on the site num routine inspection of construction sites to ensure compliance with applicable local state and federal safety laws and regulations num training of employees in safe practices and procedures num availability of firstaid medical and emergency equipment and services at the construction site including arrangements for emergency transportation and num security procedures to prevent theft vandalism and other losses at the construction site .
the engineer will review the safety plan within num working days and identify any additional items to be included .
the contractor shall then modify the safety plan if necessary for resubmittal to the engineer within five working days .
the contractor shall not commence work until the safety plan has been approved unless authorized by the engineer .
section num num the safety plan shall include a list of emergency procedures phone numbers and methods of communication for medical facilities police fire department and other emergency services which may become necessary .
the contractor shall be responsible for providing first aid treatment and medical supplies on the project site in accordance with osha num cfr part num and for producing and maintaining records of any injuryrelated incidents .
the safety plan shall include the requirement that all workers must wear osha approved hard hats reflective safety vests or other approved high visibility warning garments work shoes and when appropriate safety glasses while in construction areas .
the contractors project superintendent or safety supervisor shall ensure that visitors comply with the above requirements as appropriate .
the contractor shall designate a competent person as safety supervisor to be responsible for implementation of the safety plan throughout the contract period .
the safety supervisor shall be capable of identifying existing and predictable hazards in the surroundings or working conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to employees and have authority to take prompt corrective measures to mitigate or eliminate them .
the safety supervisor shall also conduct safety meetings oversee and maintain safe jobsite conditions and ensure that emergency procedures phone numbers and all applicable osha notification posters are conspicuously placed in all work areas .
the safety supervisor shall maintain records demonstrating that all workers have sufficient experience to operate their equipment and have been instructed in the proper operation of the equipment .
the safety supervisor shall furnish evidence that crane operators have been instructed in accordance with the requirements of osha num cfr part num subpart n and num subpart v. the safety plan submitted by the contractor shall include proposed methods to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access to the work areas .
in conjunction with the safety plan the contractor shall furnish and install numinch temporary chain link fencing or approved equal satisfactory to the engineer around all major structure construction areas i.e .
bridges pumphouses drop structures retaining walls etc .
and around any unattended excavation deeper than four feet with slopes steeper than num vh .
temporary fencing shall completely enclose the referenced construction activity and shall be secured after normal working hours to prevent unauthorized access .
w here called for in the plans new permanent fencing shall be installed as soon as practicable .
temporary fence materials which are no longer needed to restrict access to the work area may be utilized in constructing permanent fence .
fence materials which in the opinion of the engineer are unacceptable due to either appearance or structural defects shall be section num num replaced with new materials .
no direct payment will be made for furnishing or installing temporary fencing .
permanent fencing will be reimbursed under the appropriate bid items .
unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer open utility trenches shall be limited to num feet in length except for castinplace pipe installations during nonworking hours and shall be covered with steel plate in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num barricades and warning signs the contractor shall provide erect and maintain all necessary barricades suitable and sufficient lights danger signals signs and other traffic control devices and shall take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and safety of the public .
highways closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades and obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of darkness .
suitable warning lights shall be provided to control and direct traffic properly .
the contractor shall erect warning signs in advance of any place on the project where operations may interfere with the use of the road by traffic and at all intermediate points where the new work crosses or coincides with an existing road .
no signs barricades lights or other protective devices shall be dismantled or removed without permission of the engineer .
all signs barricades lights temporary signals and other protective devices shall conform to the requirements of the manual of uniform traffic control devices mutcd and associated arizona department of transportation supplement adot supplement .
num use of explosives w hen the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work the contractor shall exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage resulting from the use of explosives .
the contractor shall furnish and erect special signs to warn the public of the contractors blasting operations .
such signs shall be placed at appropriate points within the limits of the project and these signs shall be maintained as to be clearly evident to the public during all critical periods of the blasting operations .
if blasting is to be done involving the use of electric blasting caps the signs shall include a warning statement that all mobile radio transmitters should be turned off .
in advance of doing any blasting work involving the use of electric blasting caps within num feet of any railroad track or structure the contractor shall notify the railroad company of the locations date time and approximate duration of such blasting operations .
section num num the method of use storing and handling of explosives and liquid inflammable materials shall conform with all state and local laws regulations and safety codes .
all storage places shall be marked clearly and in large letters dangerous explosives .
w here no local laws or ordinances apply storage shall be provided satisfactory to the engineer and in general not closer than num feet from the road or from any building camping area or place of human occupancy .
the contractor shall notify each property owner and public utility company having structures or facilities in proximity to the site of the work of the contractors intention to use explosives .
such notice shall be given sufficiently in advance to enable them to take such steps as they may deem necessary to protect their property from damage .
before any explosives are used the contractor shall obtain necessary permits from and comply with the requirements of the national park service forest service bureau of indian affairs or other authority having jurisdiction over the area .
num protection and restoration of property and landscape the contractor shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property and shall protect carefully from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property marks until the engineer has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location .
land monuments and property marks shall not be moved by the contractor until directed by the engineer .
private mail boxes within the limits of operations shall be temporarily or permanently relocated as required by the contractor in such a manner as to permit uninterrupted mail service .
existing fences pole lines signs buildings and structures that are to remain in place shall be protected from injury or damage .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage or injury to property of any character during the prosecution of the work resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the contractors manner or method of executing work or at any time due to defective work or materials and the contractor will not be released from said responsibility until the project has been completed and accepted .
w hen or where any direct or indirect damage or injury is done to public or private property by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof by the contractor the contractor shall restore at no additional cost to the department such property to a condition similar to or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done by repairing rebuilding or otherwise restoring as may be directed or it shall make good such damage or injury in an acceptable manner .
section num num the contractor shall not deface injure or destroy trees shrubs or cacti except as required to complete the proposed construction .
the attention of the contractor is called to the requirements of the arizona native plant law arizona revised statutes section num et seq .
the contractor shall give the arizona department of agriculture at least num days notice prior to any clearing operations .
native plants as defined by the statutes shall not be transported from the land or offered for sale without the written permission of the commission .
notice shall be sent to assistant director division of compliance arizona department of agriculture state office building room num num w est adams street phoenix arizona num materials removed during construction operations such as trees stumps building materials irrigation and drainage structures broken concrete and other similar materials shall not be dumped on either private or public property unless the contractor has obtained written permission from the owner or public agency with jurisdiction over the land .
w ritten permission will not be required however when materials are disposed of at an operating public dumping ground .
under no circumstances shall the disposal of debris from construction operations create a blemish on the landscape .
material which is to be stockpiled or disposed of offsite shall not encroach on running or intermittent streams or other waters of the u.s. unless the contractor has obtained the appropriate permits in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations .
hauling outside of slope staked areas will not be permitted except around concrete structures structural plate pipe and at locations where topographical or other features render it impractical .
haul routes outside of slope staked areas shall be as short as practical and shall minimize defacement of or injury to landscape features and vegetation .
such haul routes shall be obliterated and the ground restored to a condition similar to or equal to that existing before such hauling was started .
num forest protection a general if a project or a material pit is located on land which is under the jurisdiction of the usda forest services forest service the contractor shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws section num num federal rules and regulations and the requirements of the national forest in which the work is located .
throughout this subsection the term forest service officer is used .
this person shall be understood to be the district ranger or any other person authorized or duly appointed to act in all matters affecting national forest lands and resources .
forest service officers for each project when applicable will be designated in the special provisions .
additional requirements of the national forest may be specified in the special provisions and may include a clearing plan a mining plan and an erosion control and seeding plan .
unless provided for otherwise in the special provisions the contractor shall comply with the following minimum requirements for activities within the national forest num the contractor shall do everything reasonably within the contractors power to prevent forest fires and shall not dispose of material by burning without a written permit from the forest service .
num the contractor shall not cut timber or brush or commence work in any material pit unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the forest service .
num the contractor shall fully repair all damage caused by its operations and provide maintenance commensurate with the contractors use of national forest roads and trails .
num the contractor shall fully comply with all requirements regarding air quality .
the departments publication requirements for the utilization of the schedule of equipment rental rates for equipment used on force account w ork will not be applicable when the contractors equipment is being utilized under the direction of the forest service officer in the suppression of fires .
b fire plan the following outlines the mutual responsibilities of the forest service the department and the contractor to ensure effective prevention and prompt suppression of all fires within the rightofway and other work areas .
num general fires discovered by the contractor and its employees shall be promptly reported to the engineer and the forest service officer .
the contractor and its employees shall take action on any and all fires within the rightofway and work areas and within a halfmile zone adjacent section num num thereto .
fires shall be attacked promptly so as to control them while they are small .
fires shall not be abandoned until the forest service officer declares the fire to be out or relieves the contractor and its employees .
the contractor shall place its equipment and employees at the disposal of the forest service officer for the purpose of fighting fires in accordance with this plan .
equipment will be operated by employees of the contractor .
the forest service will assume no responsibility toward such equipment for ordinary wear or damage due to negligence carelessness or willful misconduct .
num personnel the contractor shall provide the forest service officer with a list of the names of key personnel who will act in the matter of fire prevention and fire suppression .
the forest service officer will provide the contractor a similar list of names .
each list shall be kept current as to the names addresses and phone numbers .
num reimbursement reimbursement to the contractor or the contractors employees for equipment utilized including operators will be made by the forest service in accordance with rates which have been previously negotiated and agreed upon .
these rates will be established prior to mobilization of personnel and equipment to be used for the suppression of fires .
the forest service will not reimburse the contractor subcontractor or their employees for the suppression of fires started by them .
the contractor and the contractors employees in suppressing fires caused by others including lightningcaused fires in work areas or within a halfmile zone of work areas will be reimbursed by the forest service for such suppression .
in emergencies the contractor and the contractors employees may be called upon to suppress fires on other national forest lands outside the normal halfmile zone .
the contractor and its employees will be reimbursed by the forest service for such suppression .
if the forest service requests that any equipment be made available on standby status reimbursement to the contractor will be made at a rate established by negotiation .
num tool cache the contractor shall furnish and maintain a tool cache at the active work sites as designated by the forest service officer .
each tool cache shall contain five longhandled round point size no .
num shovels five mcleod tools and two pulaskis with sheaths .
these tools section num num are required separate from and in addition to the tools required on equipment .
num vehicles all vehicles on the project except those capable of building fire line and fuel or service trucks shall have a minimum of one longhandled size no .
num roundpointed shovel one ax or pulaski with sheath and not less than one num pound capacity abc triple class dry chemical fire extinguisher .
all earth moving equipment such as dozers and scrapers shall have a num pound capacity abc triple class dry chemical fire extinguisher .
all service and fuel trucks shall be equipped with a numpound capacity abc triple class dry chemical fire extinguisher and one longhandled size no .
num roundpointed shovel .
all internal combustion engines including those on tractors jammers or any stationary or mobile equipment shall be equipped with a spark arrester of a type approved by the forest service .
heavy equipment equipped with an exhaust driven turbocharger in good working order and with no exhaust bypass will qualify .
a straight mechanically driven supercharger does not qualify .
light trucks up to twoton pickups jeeps and passenger cars shall have effective mufflers and exhaust pipes comparable to the manufacturers standard equipment installation .
all internal combustion engine driven vehicles and equipment will be inspected by the forest service officer prior to initial operation .
all such vehicles and equipment arriving on the work after the initial inspection shall be reported to the forest service officer for inspection prior to operation .
all equipment will be inspected periodically after the initial inspection to insure that spark arresters or turbocharger are in working order .
all operators shall submit their equipment to the forest service officer for inspection upon request .
all num and later model passenger vehicles and pickups equipped with a catalytic converter will have a sticker clearly displayed on the dashboard warning the driver of the fire hazard of driving the vehicle over or parking the vehicle where tall grass or other flammable materials can come in contact with the catalytic converter .
the contractor shall make daily inspections of all internal combustion engines stationary and mobile to ascertain that spark arresters and mufflers are whole and effective and that there are no connections that can leak burning particles .
num smoking there shall be no smoking while working .
this requirement applies to those activities which require that work be performed in an uncleared area such as clearing and fencing operations .
smoking shall be section num num restricted to areas a minimum of two feet in diameter which have been cleared to mineral soil .
all smoking material shall be completely extinguished before leaving these areas .
there shall be no smoking when traveling except when traveling on a graveled oiled or otherwise surfaced road .
vehicles shall be equipped with ash trays .
smoking material shall be extinguished either in ash trays or on a spot cleared to mineral soil .
all smoking closures or other restrictions which may be put into effect shall be carefully observed .
num chain saws chain saws shall be equipped with an approved and serviceable spark arrestermuffler .
the spark arrester shall be maintained in effective working order meeting either department of agriculture forest service standard numa or appropriate society of automotive engineers sae recommended practice jnum and jnum num cfr numj as revised to the date of the opening of the proposals .
power saws shall be filled only in an area which has been cleared to mineral soil .
they shall not be started at the place where they have been filled .
mufflers shall be kept in place at all times and the spark arrester screens shall be checked daily .
broken or burned screens shall be promptly replaced .
power saw operators shall check the sawdust at each tree felled before leaving to make sure that no fires have been started .
each operator shall carry with their power saw a size no .
num longhandled roundpointed shovel .
w hen the fire danger is manning class num and above each work area shall be patrolled by the contractor for at least one hour after the cessation of power saw operations .
num burning no burning of slash camp refuse or other debris or any other burning will be permitted without a daily written permit from the forest service and a burn permit issued by the arizona department of environmental quality office of air quality .
num fires no lunch fires will be permitted except in designated cleared areas approved by the forest service officer .
any request for lunch fires warming fires or campfires at an area except those which have been approved shall be made in writing to the forest service officer .
num campsites parking and storage areas section num num campsites parking and storage areas on forest lands shall be approved by the forest service officer prior to use .
all campsites shall comply with all applicable federal state county and city statutes and ordinances concerning safety health and sanitation .
sites shall be cleared maintained and used in accordance with forest service regulations in order to keep the danger of fires to a minimum .
the layout of buildings tanks trailers sanitary facilities etc .
shall be approved by the forest service officer .
all chimneys shall be equipped with halfinch mesh screen for spark arrestors .
fire extinguishers approved by the forest service officer shall be placed in readily accessible places in campsites and storage areas .
no fires except those as may be approved in writing by the forest service officer will be permitted .
w hen required by the forest service officer the contractor shall maintain a cleared fire line around campsites .
upon cessation of use of the campsite the contractor shall clean up and restore the site to a condition satisfactory to the forest service officer .
such restoration shall give consideration to the minimizing of erosion .
num welding w elding shall be done only at sites which have been cleared to mineral soil .
immediately following welding and metal cutting operations and before leaving the site careful inspections shall be made to detect and extinguish smoldering materials .
a five or numgallon container of water with pump shall be available to all welding operations .
num blasting electric caps will be required however under certain conditions and with prior approval of the forest service officer fuse caps may be used .
primer cord shall be understood to be an explosive and not fuse .
num forest closure fire manning classes as established by the forest service and based on fire weather and fuel models will be used by the forest service officer in determining curtailment of operations .
a notification system will be provided to inform the contractor of the predicted fire manning class and the fire precautions required .
each day of operation when there is a predicted change in the fire precaution plan the forest service will inform the contractor between num and num p.m. mst of the numerical fire manning class to be followed the next day within the local operation area .
the forest service will no later than num a.m. mst the following day advise the contractor if conditions have changed from those predicted .
the contractors operations will be governed by the following fire prevention schedule section num num fire manning class description of precaution required num num num normal fire precautions num normal fire precautions except designated areas for smoking and warming or cooking fires require a written permit .
num shut down from num noon until num p.m. mst all machine treatment of slash skidding road pioneering clearing and loading .
no smoking warming or cooking fires permitted at any time .
power saws will shut down from num a.m. until num p.m. mst .
operations on mineral soil may continue if approved by the forest service officer .
num shut down all operations except operations on mineral soil may continue with special forest service permit .
red flag conditions total shut down of all operations with everyone to leave the permitted area except the fire protection officer .
area closure proclaimed by regional forester total shut down of all operations and area closed to entry .
advance notice will be given as soon as area closure appears a reality followed by a meeting convened to discuss the situation at that time .
the criteria for establishing the existence of red flag conditions is when sustained high winds are predicted or are occurring .
a red flag day identifies those few critical days throughout the fire season that strong winds and low humidity constitute an unusual threat to the national forest resources .
under unusually severe conditions or with operations that constitute an unusual risk the forest service officer may institute any or all of the above stipulations or may require additional action in certain specialized cases .
in specific instances where it can be adequately demonstrated that little or no risk is incurred the forest service officer may permit certain construction activities to take place under carefully controlled conditions .
num responsibility for damage claims the contractor shall indemnify defend and hold harmless the state of arizona acting by and through the arizona department of transportation from any and all claims demands suits actions section num num proceedings loss cost and damages of every kind and description including any attorneys fees andor litigation expenses which may be brought or made against or incurred by the department on account of loss of or damage to any property or for injuries to or death of any person to the extent caused by arising out of or contributed to by reasons of any alleged act omission professional error fault mistake or negligence of the contractor its employees agents representatives or subcontractors their employees agents or representatives in connection with or incident to the performance of the work or arising out of w orkmens compensation claims unemployment compensation claims or unemployment disability compensation claims of employees of the contractor andor its subcontractors or claims under similar such laws or obligations .
the contractors obligation under this subsection shall not extend to any liability to the extent caused by the negligence of the department or its employees except the obligation does apply to any negligence of the contractor which may be legally imputed to the department by virtue of its ownership or possession of land .
the contractor shall indemnify defend and hold harmless any county or incorporated city its officers and employees within the limits of which county or incorporated city work is being performed all in the same manner and to the same extent as provided above .
num insurance prior to the execution of the contract the contractor shall file with the department a certificate or certificates of insurance executed by a company holding a certificate of authority to transact insurance business in the state of arizona and acceptable to the department .
the certificate of insurance shall be on the form provided by the department and shall state that with respect to the contract awarded the contractor the contractor carries insurance in accordance with the requirements of this subsection .
w ithout limiting any liabilities or any other obligations of the contractor the contractor shall provide and maintain if commercially available the minimum insurance coverage listed below until all obligations under this contract are satisfied a general liability insurance with a minimum combined single limit of num each occurrence applicable to all premises and operations .
the policy shall include coverage for bodily injury broad form property damage including completed operations personal injury including coverage for contractual and employee acts blanket contractual independent contractors products and completed operations .
further the policy shall include coverage for the hazards commonly referred to as xcu explosion collapse and underground .
the products and completed operations coverage shall extend for one year past acceptance cancellation or termination of the work .
the policy shall contain a severability of interests provision .
section num num b comprehensive automobile liability insurance with a combined single limit for bodily injury and property of not less than num each occurrence with respect to contractors owned hired or nonowned vehicles assigned to or used in performance of the work .
c w orkers compensation insurance to cover obligations imposed by federal and state statutes having jurisdiction of its employees engaged in the performance of the work and employers liability insurance with a minimum limit of num .
evidence of qualified selfinsured status will suffice for this subsection .
the insurance policy may not have any deductible amounts with respect to the coverage of the department except that the department may approve a deductible amount if the department has approved the contractor as a selfinsurer with respect to the deductible amount and the contractor has agreed in writing that its self insurance will extend to the deductible amount prior to any other matters .
the policies required by a and b above shall be endorsed to include the department its agents officials employees and the state of arizona as additional insureds with respect to any negligence of the contractor which may be legally imputed to the department or state and shall stipulate that the insurance afforded the contractor shall be primary insurance and that any insurance carried by the department its agents officials employees or the state of arizona shall be excess and not contributory insurance to that provided by the contractor as provided by arizona revised statutes section numc .
all insurance policies or certificates shall include a requirement providing for num days prior written notice to the department of any cancellation or reduction of coverage .
the contractor shall immediately notify the department and shall cease operations on the occurrence of any such cancellation or reduction and shall not resume operations until the required insurance is in force and new certificates of insurance have been filed with the department .
the certificates of insurance shall be issued to the department by the contractors insurer as evidence that policies providing the required coverages conditions and limits are in full force and effect .
certificates of insurance shall be addressed as follows arizona department of transportation contracts and specifications section num w est jackson street room numf phoenix arizona num failure on the part of the contractor to produce or maintain required insurance shall constitute a material breach of contract upon which the department may immediately terminate the contract or at its discretion produce or renew such insurance and pay any and all premiums in connection therewith and all monies so paid by the department shall section num num be repaid by the contractor to the department upon demand or the department may offset the cost of the premiums against any monies due to the contractor from the state .
the cost of coverage will be considered as included in the contract price .
costs for coverage maintained by the contractor in excess of those required shall not be charged to the department .
the department reserves the right to request and receive certified copies of any or all of the above policies andor endorsements .
the contractor and its insurers providing the required coverages shall waive all rights of recovery against the department and its agents officials and employees .
num contractors responsibility for utility property and services the contractors attention is directed to the requirements of arizona revised statutes section num through .num requiring all parties excavating in public streets alleys or utility easements to first secure the location of all underground facilities in the vicinity of the excavation .
the contractor may wish to review copies of existing adot permits subject to availability prior to start of construction to assist the contractor in determining the location of any utilities which the department may have record of and which are not otherwise identified .
utility locations obtained from the department are for information only and shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for identifying locating and protecting any existing utility lines .
copies of permits may be obtained from the adot area permit supervisor in the district in which a project is located .
at points where the contractors operations are adjacent to properties of railway telegraph telephone water sewer electric gas and cable television companies hereinafter referred to as utilities or are adjacent to other facilities and property damage to which might result in considerable expense loss inconvenience injury or death work shall not be commenced until all arrangements necessary for the protection thereof have been made .
the contractor shall cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility lines in their removal and rearrangement operations in order that these operations may progress in a reasonable manner that duplication of rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by these parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
the contractor shall contact the owners of the various utilities prior to the start of construction and shall obtain from them any information pertaining to existing utilities that will either supplement information shown on the project plans or will correct any such information that section num num may be incorrect .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with evidence that the contractor has contacted the utility companies and shall furnish the engineer with a copy of the information furnished it as a result of such contacts .
if the contractor learns from either the owner of the utility or from any other source of the existence and location of properties of railway telegraph telephone fiber optics cable water sewer electric gas and cable television companies either omitted from or shown incorrectly on the project plans the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer and shall not disturb the utilities .
relocation or adjustment of such utilities if deemed necessary will be either performed by others or shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
the exact locations and depths of all utilities that are underground or the location of those on or near the surface of the ground which are not readily visible shall be determined .
such locations shall be marked in such a manner so that all workmen or equipment operators will be thoroughly apprised of their existence and location .
it will be the contractors responsibility to see that every effort possible has been made to acquaint those actually involved in working near utilities not only with the type size location and depth but with the consequences that might follow any disturbance .
no trenching or similar operation shall be commenced until the engineer is satisfied that every possible effort has been taken by the contractor to protect utilities .
w hen the operations of the contractor result in any damage to any utility line or service connection the location of which has been brought to the contractors attention the contractor shall assume full responsibility for such damage .
in the event of interruption to water or utility services as a result of accidental breakage or as a result of lines being exposed or unsupported the contractor shall promptly notify the proper authority and shall cooperate with the said authority in the restoration of service .
w hen service is interrupted repair work shall be continuous until the service is restored .
no work shall be undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
temporary or permanent relocation or adjustment of any utility line or service connection desired by the contractor for its convenience shall be its responsibility .
the contractor shall obtain the approval of both the engineer and the utility company and upon approval shall make all necessary arrangements with the utility company and shall bear all costs in connection with such relocation or adjustment .
num personal liability of public officials in carrying out any of the provisions of these specifications or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the contract there shall be no liability upon the transportation section num num board and any member thereof the director the engineer or their authorized representatives either personally or as officials of the state it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the state .
num no waiver of legal rights partial or final acceptance pursuant to subsection num shall not preclude or prohibit the department from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the work nor shall the department be precluded or prohibited from recovering from the contractor or its surety insurance or any combination thereof such overpayment as it may sustain or by failure on the part of the contractor to fulfill his obligations under the contract .
a waiver on the part of the department of any breach of any part of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract shall be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards to the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
num contractor and subcontractor records the contractor subcontractors and all suppliers shall keep and maintain all books papers records files accounts reports bid documents with backup data including electronic data and all other material relating to the contract and project for five years following completion and acceptance of the work .
all of the above material shall be made available to the department for auditing inspection and copying and shall be produced upon request at the department offices located at num south numth ave. phoenix arizona num .
the contractor shall insert the above requirement in each subcontract purchase order and lease agreement and shall also include in all subcontracts a clause requiring subcontractors to include the above requirement in any lowertier subcontract purchase order or lease agreement .
num federal immigration and nationality act a general the contractor including all subcontractors shall comply with all federal state and local immigration laws and regulations as set forth in arizona executive order num relating to the immigration status of their employees who perform services on the contract during the duration of the contract .
the state shall retain the right to perform random audits of contractor and subcontractor records or to inspect papers of any employee thereof to ensure compliance .
section num num b compliance requirements by submission of a bid the contractor warrants that the contractor and all proposed subcontractors are and shall remain in compliance with all federal state and local immigration laws and regulations relating to the immigration status of their employees who perform services on the contract .
the state may at its sole discretion require evidence of compliance from the contractor or subcontractor .
should the state request evidence of compliance the contractor or subcontractor shall have ten working days from receipt of the request to supply adequate information .
the department will accept as evidence of compliance a showing by the contractor or subcontractor that it has followed the employment verification provisions of the federal immigration and nationality act as set forth in sections numa and numb of that act including implementation of regulations and agreements between the department of homeland security and the social security administrations verification service .
the contractor shall include the provisions of subsection num in all its subcontracts .
c sanctions for non compliance failure to comply with the immigration laws or to submit proof of compliance constitutes a material breach of contract .
the department will reduce the contractors compensation by num for the initial instance of noncompliance by the contractor or a subcontractor .
should the same contractor or subcontractor commit subsequent violations within a twoyear time period from the initial violation the contractors compensation will be reduced by num for each violation .
the third instance by the same contractor or subcontractor within a twoyear period may result in addition to the num reduction in compensation in removal of the offending contractor or subcontractor suspension of work in whole or in part or in the case of a third violation by the contractor termination of the contract for default .
in addition the department may debar a contractor or subcontractor who has committed three violations within a twoyear period for up to one year .
for purposes of this paragraph a violation by a subcontractor does not count as a violation by the contractor .
any delay resulting from a sanction under this subsection is a non excusable delay .
the contractor is not entitled to any compensation or extension of time for any delays or additional costs resulting from a sanction under this subsection .
an example of the sanctions under this subsection is presented in the following table section num num offense by reduction in contractor subcontractor a subcontractor b compensation first num first num second num first num third num may in addition result in removal of the subcontractor andor debarment of the subcontractor .
section num prosecution and progress num subletting of contract the contractor shall not sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion thereof or of the contractors right title or interest therein without written consent of the engineer .
in case such consent is given the contractor will be permitted to sublet a portion thereof but shall perform with the contractors own organization work amounting to not less than num percent of the original contract amount .
no subcontracts or transfer of contract shall release the contractor of its liability under the contract and bond .
contractors own organization shall be construed to include only workers employed and paid directly by the prime contractor and equipment owned or rented by it with or without operators .
such term does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor assignee or agent of the prime contractor .
the contract amount upon which the numpercent requirement is computed includes the cost of materials and manufactured products which are to be purchased or produced by the contractor under the contract provisions .
a person who has been convicted of a violation of arizona revised statutes section num is not eligible to enter into any contract either as a contractor subcontractor or supplier for a period of up to three years from date of conviction as determined by the court .
a person means any individual partnership corporation association or other entity formed for the purpose of doing business as contractor subcontractor or supplier .
the department may also refuse to approve any entity as a subcontractor or supplier for any of the reasons for which it could refuse to issue the entity a proposal pamphlet suspend the entity from bidding or declare the entity nonresponsible .
the departments consent to a subcontract will be given only after the department determines that the subcontract purchase order or lease agreement is evidenced in writing and that it contains all pertinent section num num provisions and requirements of the prime contract .
the following data shall be submitted seven calendar days prior to the start of each subcontractors work except data regarding dbe subcontracts must be submitted at the preconstruction conference .
a a complete copy of each subcontractor agreement and each second tier subcontractor .
b verification that all required federal provisions i.e .
federal form num executive order and w age determination decisions are attached to each subcontract in any federalaid funded contract .
c subcontracts must show the total price subcontracted .
the items of work and quantities of each item subcontracted shall be shown .
unit prices or extended prices may be deleted except in the case of dbe subcontractors .
d dbe subcontracts shall include full extensions of all unit prices .
e partial items shall be explained in detail and show the amount of each contract item being subcontracted .
noncontract item work shall be fully explained i.e .
trucking num hours truck asphaltic concrete .
f the contractor shall certify to the department that all of its subcontractors have all required registrations .
the engineer will not consent to subletting of any portion of the contract if a copy of the subcontract or lower tier subcontract is not received .
the engineers consent shall in no way be construed to be an endorsement of the subcontractor or its ability to complete the work in a satisfactory manner .
calculation of the num percent subcontracting limit will be based upon the amount of work subcontracted and verified by subcontract documents .
subcontractors performing contracting work subject to arizona revised statutes sections num et seq .
shall be duly licensed in accordance with those statutes .
subcontractors providing other services shall be licensed in accordance with the requirements of arizona law .
num start of work w ork shall not be started until the contract has been executed by both the contractor and the department .
the contractor shall begin work within the number of calendar days after the date of notice of award of contract as follows section num num contract size dollars calendar day period num to num num over num to num num over num num w hen the contract time is on a calendar day basis or on a working day basis contract time will be charged commencing on the date num num or num calendar days as determined by the contract size after the date of the notice of award letter .
should this date fall on a saturday sunday or holiday the next working day shall be considered the starting date for the purpose of charging contract time .
num preconstruction conference the contractor shall meet with the engineer for a preconstruction conference prior to commencing work .
the conference may be combined with the partnering conference and all requirements of this subsection may be submitted at that time .
should both conferences be held at the same time the partnering conference will be held first .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit a progress schedule showing the order in which the contractor proposes to carry out the work the dates on which the contractor and its subcontractors will start the salient features of the work including procurement of materials equipment etc .
the ordering of articles of special manufacture the furnishing of drawings plans and other data required under subsection num for the review and approval of the engineer the inspection of structural steel fabrication and the contemplated dates for the completion of the said salient features .
the schedule may be in a bar chart format or a critical path method format .
no schedule activity shall be shorter than one day or longer than num working days .
the schedule must show interrelationships among the activities and the controlling items of work throughout the project shall be identified .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall furnish information needed to justify activity time durations .
such information shall include estimated manpower equipment unit quantities and production rates .
the schedule shall illustrate the completion of the work not later than the contract completion date .
the contractor shall furnish authorized signature forms and a list of the contractors proposed subcontractors and major material suppliers .
progress schedules shall have considered the time requirement for ordering articles of special manufacture to meet specific requirements of the work and subsection num when structural steel fabrication inspection is required .
if the contract requires trainees on the project the contractor shall submit a schedule showing the number of trainees the hours and the work items for which trainees will be used .
section num num if the contract has a dbe requirement the contractor shall submit copies of completed and signed dbe subcontracts purchase orders or invoices to the department .
the contractor shall submit a traffic control plan in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall designate an employee who is competent and experienced in traffic control to implement and monitor the traffic control plan .
the qualifications of the designated employee must be satisfactory to the engineer .
the contractor shall submit a safety plan and designate an employee as safety supervisor in accordance with subsection num .
both plans must be satisfactory to the engineer .
during the preconstruction conference the engineer will designate a department employee or employees who will be responsible to see that the traffic control plans and any alterations thereto are implemented and monitored to the end that traffic is carried through the work in an effective manner .
if approved by the engineer the contractor may designate one employee to be responsible for both the traffic control and safety plans .
the contractor shall not designate its superintendent as the responsible person for either the traffic control plan or the safety plan unless approved by the engineer .
if the project requires that contractor or state personnel to work from falsework within shoring or in any other hazardous area the contractor shall submit as part of the contractors safety plan specific measures it will use to ensure worker safety .
the contractor shall also submit a program for erosion control and pollution prevention as set forth in subsection num on all projects involving clearing and grubbing earthwork structural work or other construction when such work is likely to create erosion or pollution problems .
if the contractor fails to provide the required submissions the engineer may order the preconstruction conference suspended until such time as they are furnished .
w ork shall not begin until the preconstruction conference has been concluded and the safety plan has been approved unless authorized by the engineer .
the contractor shall not be entitled to additional compensation or an extension of contract time resulting from any delays due to such a suspension .
w hen the specifications require specific quality control measures for certain materials by referencing subsection numc the contractor shall designate a qualified employee as quality control manager .
the quality control manager shall be responsible for the implementing and monitoring of the quality control requirements described in subsection numc .
num prosecution and progress section num num the contractor shall start the work in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours before beginning work .
unless suspended the work shall be diligently and continuously carried on to completion and the contractor agrees to provide at all times an adequate force of labor and sufficient materials and equipment to insure the completion of the contract within the time allowed .
the progress of the work shall be at a rate sufficient to complete the contract in an acceptable manner within the time allowed .
at a mutually convenient location and time the contractor shall meet weekly with the engineer to discuss construction activities however a meeting may be waived if mutually agreed to due to weather conditions work progress or for other reasons .
at the meetings the contractor shall provide the engineer with a detailed written schedule of all construction activities and phases of work for the forthcoming two week period .
this written schedule shall detail the start and anticipated completion dates of major phases of work as well as indicate the status of major ongoing activities .
minutes of the weekly meetings will be kept by the engineer and a copy given to the contractor .
failure to provide an accurate appropriate schedule may be grounds for the suspension of the work .
schedule changes requiring an increase in the departments engineering personnel will not be put into effect for num days after the submission of weekly schedules detailing such activities or until the engineer has made arrangements for additional personnel whichever is the shorter time .
every num days throughout the contract or at any other time as requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit a revised progress schedule reflecting the actual progress of activities all activity logic revisions the anticipated completion dates of the major phases of work remaining and the anticipated completion date of the work .
num limitation of operations the contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such a manner and in such sequence as will insure the least interference with traffic and the safety of the public and the protection of the workmen .
it shall have due regard to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
it shall not open up work to the prejudice or detriment of work already started .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section of work which is in progress before work is started on any additional sections if the opening of such section is essential to public convenience .
except as required to protect work already accomplished to provide dust control and for work of a similar nature no work on sundays or holidays will be permitted unless written permission is obtained from section num num the engineer .
the contractor shall advise the engineer at least num hours in advance if the contractor elects to work on any saturday sunday or holiday .
in general all work shall be performed during daylight hours .
if the contractor elects to perform work at night or if the contractor is required to do so in the special provisions the contractor shall furnish erect and maintain an amount of artificial lighting sufficient for the construction flagging inspection etc .
and for the safety of the workers and the traveling public .
no night work shall be performed until the engineer is satisfied that an adequate amount of artificial light has been furnished and placed properly .
num character of workers the contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the several classes of work to fulfill completion in the manner and within the time required by these specifications .
all workers shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work assigned to them .
w orkers engaged in special work or skilled work shall have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily .
any person employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor who in the opinion of the engineer does not perform the contractors work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall at the written request of the engineer be removed immediately by the contractor or subcontractor employing such person and shall not be employed again in any portion of the work without the approval of the engineer .
should the contractor fail to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until compliance .
num methods and equipment all equipment which is proposed to be used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to meet the requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
equipment used on any portion of the project shall be such that no damage to the roadway adjacent property or other highways will result from its use .
w hen the construction methods and types of equipment to be used by the contractor in accomplishing the construction are not set forth in the contract the contractor may use any methods or equipment that it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer will accomplish the contract work in conformity with the requirements of the contract .
section num num w hen the contract specifies that the construction be performed by the use of certain methods and equipment such methods and equipment shall be used unless others are authorized by the engineer .
if the contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract it may request authority from the engineer to do so .
the request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the method and equipment proposed to be used and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
if approval is given it will be on the condition that the contractor shall be fully responsible for producing construction work in conformity with the contract requirements .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the engineer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements the contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
the contractor shall either remove the deficient work or replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the engineer may direct .
num determination and extension of contract time the contract time as defined in section num will be stated in the special provisions .
w hen the contract time is on a working day basis the engineer will furnish the contractor a weekly statement showing the number of days charged to the contract for the preceding week and the number of days specified for completion of the contract .
the contractor will be allowed one week after the contractor has received the statement in which to file a written protest with the engineer setting forth in what respect such weekly statement is incorrect otherwise the statement shall be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct .
w hen the contract time is on a calendar day basis it shall consist of the number of calendar days stated in the contract counting from the starting date and including all sundays holidays and nonwork days .
all calendar days elapsing between the effective dates of any orders of the engineer to suspend work and to resume work for suspensions not the fault of the contractor will be excluded .
w hen the contract completion time is a fixed calendar date this date shall be the date on which all work on the project is required to be substantially complete .
contract time is based on the amount of work included in the original contract .
if satisfactory fulfillment of the contract involves alterations to the contract that affect the contractors completion time the contractor may request a supplemental agreement which extends the contract time .
such request will be made in accordance with subsection num shall be in the form of a request for extension of contract time and shall include the contractors revised schedule and all other pertinent data .
the request shall show why an increase of contract time is warranted .
section num num an extension of contract time will not be considered unless the work affected is a controlling item on the contractors schedule at the time of the alteration or becomes a controlling item as a result of the alteration .
if a nationwide shortage exists in basic materials or standard items which are necessary in the fabrication or manufacture of equipment parts or articles to meet the specific requirements of the project a serious widespread shortage of such equipment parts or articles may be considered as a valid reason for the extension of contract time .
delivery delays or shortages caused by ordinary supply fluctuations are not nationwide shortages and therefore are not valid reasons for extension of time .
the contractors plea that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for extension of time .
if the contractor requests additional time and if the engineer finds that the work activities controlling overall job progress and the projected completion date were delayed because of conditions beyond the control and without the fault of the contractor and could not have been anticipated by the contractor the engineer may extend the time for completion in such amount as the conditions justify .
the extended time for completion shall then be in full force and effect the same as though it were the original time for completion .
w hen substantial completion has been duly determined by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of subsection num the daily time charge will cease .
num failure to complete the work on time for each calendar day or working day as specified that the contractor shall fail to achieve substantial completion after the contract time or calendar date specified for the completion of the work provided for in the contract the sum shown in the schedule of liquidated damages specified below will be deducted from any monies due the contractor not as a penalty but as liquidated damages provided however that due account will be taken of any adjustment of the contract time for the completion of the work allowed under the provisions of subsection num .
permitting the contractor to continue and finish the work or any part of it after the time fixed for its completion or after the date to which the time for completion may have been extended will in no way operate as a waiver on the part of the department of any of its rights under the contract .
section num num schedule of liquidated damages original contract amount liquidated damages per day from more than to and including calendar day or fixed date w orking day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num termination of contract for default if the contractor fails to begin the work under the contract within the time specified or fails to perform the work with sufficient workers and equipment or with sufficient materials to insure the prompt completion of said work or performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or to perform anew such work as may be rejected as unacceptable and unsuitable or discontinues the prosecution of the work or fails to resume work which has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so or becomes insolvent or allows any final judgment to stand against it unsatisfied for a period of num days or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or fails to comply with contract requirements regarding minimum wage payments or equal employment opportunity requirements or is a party to fraud or section num num for any other cause whatsoever fails to carry on the work in an acceptable manner the engineer will give notice in writing to the contractor and to the contractors surety of such delay neglect or default .
if the contractor or the contractors surety within a period of num days after such notice shall not proceed in accordance therewith the department will upon written notification from the engineer of the fact of such delay neglect or default and the contractors failure to comply with such notice have full power and authority without violating the contract to terminate the contract .
the department may appropriate or use any or all materials and equipment on the ground as may be suitable and acceptable and may enter into an agreement for the completion of said contract according to the terms and provisions thereof or use such other methods as in the opinion of the engineer will be required for the completion of said contract in an acceptable manner .
all costs and charges incurred by the department together with the cost of completing the work under contract will be deducted from any monies due or which may become due said contractor .
if such expense exceeds the sum which would have been payable under the contract then the contractor and the contractors surety shall be liable and shall pay to the department the amount of such excess .
if it is determined after termination of the contractors right to proceed that the contractor was not in default the rights and obligations of the parties will be the same as if the termination had been issued for the convenience of the department in accordance with subsection num .
thus damages to which a contractor may be entitled as a result of an improper default termination will be limited to the amounts provided for in subsection num .
num termination of contract for convenience of the department the department may terminate the entire contract or any portion thereof if the engineer determines that a termination is in the departments best interest .
the engineer will deliver to the contractor a w ritten order of termination specifying the extent of termination and the effective date .
a submittals and procedures after receipt of a w ritten order of termination the contractor shall immediately proceed with the following obligations num stop work as specified in the notice .
num place no further subcontracts for orders or materials services equipment or facilities except as necessary to complete the continued portion of the contract .
section num num num terminate all subcontracts or orders for materials services equipment or facilities to the extent they relate to the work terminated .
num transfer title and deliver to the department a the fabricated partially fabricated or unfabricated parts work in process completed work supplies and other material produced or acquired for the work terminated and b the completed or partially completed plans drawings information and other property that if the contract had been completed would be required to be furnished to the department .
num take any action necessary or that the engineer may direct for the protection and preservation of the property related to the contract that is in the possession of the contractor and in which the department has or may acquire an interest .
num complete performance of the work not terminated .
b inventory acceptable materials obtained by the contractor for the project that have not been incorporated in the work shall be inventoried in conjunction with the engineer at a date identified by the engineer .
c settlement provisions w hen the department orders termination of all or a part of the contract effective on a certain date completed items of work as of that date will be paid for at the contract bid price .
payment for partially completed work or for items that are eliminated in their entirety will be made either at agreed prices or under the provisions below .
num additional costs w ithin num calendar days of the effective termination date the contractor shall submit a claim to the engineer for additional damages or costs not covered above or elsewhere in the contract .
such claim may include such cost items as reasonable idle equipment time mobilization efforts bidding and project investigative costs overhead expenses attributable to the project terminated legal and accounting charges involved in claim preparation subcontractor costs not otherwise paid for actual idle labor cost if work is stopped in advance of termination date guaranteed payments for private land usage as part of the original contract and any other cost or damage for which the contractor feels reimbursement should be made .
anticipated profits will not be considered as part of any settlement .
section num num the contractor and the department may agree upon the whole or any part of the amount to be paid because of the termination .
the amount may include a reasonable allowance for profit on work done .
the agreed amount may not exceed the total contract price as reduced by the amount of payments previously made and the contract price of work not terminated .
the contract shall be amended and the contractor paid the agreed amount .
num additional cost review if the contractor and the department fail to agree on the whole amount to be paid the contractor because of the termination of work the department will pay the amounts determined as follows but without duplication of any amounts agreed upon above a for contract work performed before the effective date of termination the actual and reasonable costs of work performed and inventoried materials plus a reasonable profit thereon not to exceed unit bid prices .
b the reasonable costs of settlement of the work terminated including num accounting legal clerical and other expenses reasonably necessary for the preparation of termination settlement proposals and support data num the termination and settlement of subcontracts and orders for materials services equipment and facilities and num storage transportation and other costs incurred as reasonably necessary for the preservation protection or disposition of the termination inventory .
c except for normal spoilage and to the extent that the department expressly accepts the risk of loss department will exclude from the fair value all that is destroyed lost stolen or damaged so as to become undeliverable to the department or to the buyer .
d in arriving at the amount due the contractor under this clause the department will deduct num all unliquidated advance or other payments to the contractor under the terminated portion of the contract section num num num any claim that the department has against the contractor under the contract and num the agreed price for or the proceeds from the sale of materials supplies or other things acquired and sold by the contractor not recovered by or credited to the department .
if the termination is partial the contractor may file a proposal with the department for an equitable adjustment of the prices of the continued portion of the contract .
the department will make any equitable adjustment agreed upon .
any proposal for an equitable adjustment under this clause shall be requested within num calendar days from the effective date of termination unless extended in writing by the engineer .
the department may under the terms and conditions it prescribes make partial payments and payments against costs incurred by the contractor for the terminated portion of the contract if these payments will not exceed the amount to which the contractor is entitled .
the contractor shall maintain and make available all project cost records to the department for audit to the extent necessary to determine the validity and amount of each item claimed .
this includes all books and other evidence bearing on the contractors costs and expenses under the contract .
these records and documents shall be made available to the department at the contractors office at all reasonable times without any direct charge .
if approved by the department photographs microphotographs or other authentic reproductions may be maintained instead of original records and documents .
termination of the contract or portion thereof shall not relieve the contractor of contractual responsibilities for the work completed nor shall it relieve the surety of its obligation for and concerning any just claim arising out of the work performed .
section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities all work completed under the contract will be measured by the engineer according to united states standard measures .
a station when used as a definition or term of measurement will be num linear feet .
the methods of measurement and computation to be used in determination of quantities of material furnished and of work performed under the contract will be those methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
section num num all items which are to be measured on an area basis will unless otherwise specified be measured by longitudinal and transverse measurements made along the surface area in such manner as to ascertain reasonably the true area of the item actually placed in accordance with contract requirements .
no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of nine square feet or less .
structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the project plans or as altered to fit field conditions .
unless otherwise specified all items which are to be measured by the linear foot will be measured along or parallel to the longitudinal axis of that item in such manner as to ascertain reasonably the true length of the item .
in computing volumes of earthwork the average end area method or other acceptable methods will be used .
corrections will not be made for curvature prismoidal corrections and similar refinements unless specified .
the nominal diameter of wire and the thickness of plates and sheets used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe metal plate pipe culverts and arches and metal cribbing will be specified and measured in decimal fractions of inches .
the wire size in welded wire fabric used for concrete reinforcement will be identified by a w number directly corresponding to the crosssectional area of the wire in hundredths of a square inch .
the term ton will mean the short ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
all materials which are measured or proportioned by weight shall be weighed on accurate approved scales .
w here the specifications require scales for the determination of weight the use of load cells and electronic digital readout will be acceptable for all applications .
the weighing system shall conform to and be maintained in accordance with the requirements of the department of w eights and measures .
w hen using platform scales materials shall be weighed by or under the inspection of department personnel .
w hen using hopper scales department personnel may weigh or inspect materials to be measured for payment .
inspection of weigh operations may be performed by the engineer at any time .
scales of acceptable size shall be furnished by the contractor and shall be sealed by an inspector of the department of w eights and measures state of arizona or a licensed service agency approved by the state of arizona department of w eights and measures .
the licensed service agency certifying the scales shall not be affiliated with the contractor or company supplying the materials for payment by weight .
section num num during weighing operations weights will be read and recorded to the nearest num pounds .
the gross tare and net weights of each load will be recorded and documented with all or part of the following information as applicable to the type of scales and recording system used project identification contract item number material sourceplant identification date load number truck identification time of w eighing applicable w eights w eighpersons signature scales shall be resealed as often as required to assure accurate weights scales shall be resealed at least once every num calendar days .
the contractor shall also provide with each scale at least twenty numpound certified weights to be used in checking the scale .
each weight shall be recertified one year from the date of previous certification by the department of w eights and measures metrology laboratory .
each weight shall be stamped with a number and the contractor shall furnish a certificate showing the numbers of the weights and the dates of certification .
certification will be obtained from the department of w eights and measures metrology laboratory .
tests conducted by the engineer to check the accuracy of scales shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility of maintaining the accuracy of the scales .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for all of the measures hereinbefore described taken to seal scales provide and certify weights and to weigh materials .
each platform scale installation shall be provided with a shelter for the scale operator .
the shelter shall be weatherproof and shall be provided with adequate ventilation light a stool and a work bench .
the contractor shall provide means for heating or cooling the shelter to a reasonably comfortable degree if the work is in progress during cold or hot weather .
the approximate minimum dimensions for the shelter shall be six feet in width eight feet in length and seven feet in height .
w hen material will be measured by weight for payment using platform scales trucks hauling such material shall be weighed empty at least once daily and at such other times as the engineer directs .
each truck shall bear a plainly legible identification mark .
materials to be measured by volume in the hauling vehicle shall be hauled in approved vehicles and measured therein at the point of delivery .
vehicles for this purpose may be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided that the body is of such shape section num num that the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
all vehicles shall be loaded to at least their water level capacity .
w hen requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer in writing material specified to be measured by the cubic yard may be weighed and such weight will be converted to cubic yards for payment purposes .
factors for conversion from weight measurement to volume measurement will be determined by the engineer and shall be agreed to by the contractor before such method of measurement of pay quantities is used .
bituminous materials will be measured either by the gallon or by the ton .
w hen bituminous materials are measured by the gallon the volume as measured shall be corrected to the volume at num degrees f. conversion from volume at num degrees f to tons is made in accordance with the requirements of table num .
net certified scale weights or weights based on certified volumes in the case of rail shipments will be used as a basis of measurement subject to correction when bituminous material has been lost from the car or the distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated into the work .
w hen bituminous materials are shipped by truck or rail net certified weights or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
cement will be measured by the ton or the hundredweight .
timber will be measured by the num feet board measure m.f.b.m .
actually incorporated in the structure .
measurement will be based on nominal widths and thicknesses and the extreme length of each piece .
the term lump sum when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the work described in the proposal .
w hen a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories .
w hen standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit etc .
and these items are identified by unit weight section dimensions etc .
such identification will be considered to be nominal weights or dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved will be accepted .
num scope of payment the contractor shall accept the compensation provided in the contract as full payment for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and section num num incidentals necessary to the completed work and for performing all work contemplated and embraced under the contract also for loss or damage arising from the nature of the work or from the action of the elements or from any unforeseen difficulties which may be encountered during the prosecution of the work until the acceptance by the department and for all risks of every description connected with the prosecution of the work also for all expenses incurred in consequence of the suspension or discontinuance of the work as provided in the contract and for completing the work according to the plans and specifications .
neither the payment of any estimate nor of any retained percentage shall relieve the contractor of any obligation to make good any defective work or material .
no compensation will be made in any case for loss of anticipated profits .
if the basis of payment clause in the specifications relating to any unit price in the bidding schedule requires that the said unit price cover and be considered compensation for certain work or material essential to the item this same work or material will not also be measured or paid for under any other pay item which may appear elsewhere in the specifications .
num compensation for altered quantities w hen the accepted quantities of work vary from the quantities in the bid schedule the contractor shall accept as payment in full payment at the original contract unit prices for the accepted quantities of work .
no adjustments in the contract unit prices will be allowed except as provided by subsection num .
under no circumstances will a modification of contract unit prices be made for loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the contractor resulting either directly from such alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense on the part of the bidder and subsequent loss of expected reimbursement or from any other cause .
num adjustments in the contract price adjustments in the contract price may be made only by supplemental agreement .
the contract price adjustments set forth in a supplemental agreement must be determined in accordance with this subsection .
efforts to establish the calculation of the contract price adjustment must be accomplished in the order set forth in this subsection .
a letter agreement for alterations of num or less w hen the department makes alterations in the details of construction or specifications that are limited in scope to the extent that the cost of the alterations will not exceed num the engineer and the contractor may reach agreement upon the scope of work and a lump sum amount to cover the cost of the work to be performed .
this agreement shall be reflected in a letter from the engineer to the section num num contractor which when executed by both parties shall have the same force and effect as a supplemental agreement .
w ork shall not proceed until both parties have signed the agreement .
this work will be paid for under item num miscellaneous w ork at the lump sum amount agreed upon which item will not be a part of the bidding schedule but will be established by the engineer through the initial letter agreement .
b unit prices should paragraph a not apply an attempt must be made before proceeding to any other pricing method to price the work described by the supplemental agreement in accordance with the unit prices provided for each bid item .
c detailed estimate if agreement can not be reached by the engineer and contractor to price the supplemental agreement in accordance with the unit prices provided for bid items then the contractor must provide a detailed estimate of its proposed unit prices or lump sum amount to perform the work described in the supplemental agreement .
this detailed estimate must include the following num estimate of labor effort by trade in man hours for each task .
num estimate of base labor and burdened labor rate .
num estimate of equipment cost including time requirements and rate .
num estimated cost of materials .
num estimated cost to be expended by subcontractors prepared to the same level of detail as required in items num through num above .
num any other costs to which the contractor feels it is entitled .
each such cost shall be presented in detail similar to items num through num above .
num markup percentage if used for overhead profit or bond .
the maximum allowable markup for the prime contractor shall be num percent for work performed by the prime contractor and num percent for work performed by subcontractors .
the maximum allowable markup for the subcontractor is num percent but in no event will the cumulative amount paid to the prime contractor and subcontractors for overhead profit or other markups for any work exceed num percent of the estimate set forth in num through num above .
section num num the contract price adjustment shall be based on the actual cost to the contractor as determined in cnum through cnum above rather than on a force account basis whenever possible .
the contractor will be allowed num calendar days to prepare such a cost estimate .
direction to proceed with the work described in the supplemental agreement will not be provided to the contractor by the engineer until a detailed estimate is provided .
the contractor will not be entitled to an adjustment in the contract price or time for the time required to prepare and submit a detailed cost estimate .
upon receipt of the contractors estimate the engineer will immediately schedule negotiations .
should such negotiations be conducted and a contract price adjustment not be agreed upon the engineer will consider the performance of the work on a force account basis although the engineer may at any time direct the contractor to proceed with the work on a force account basis .
d force account if directed by the engineer work required by supplemental agreement may be performed on a force account basis .
such work will be compensated in the following manner num labor for all labor including foreman in direct charge of specific operations but excluding general superintendence the contractor will be paid a regular pay rp which will be determined as follows rp w r fr x num w here w r hourly wage rate as determined by payroll fr fringe benefit rate as determined by payroll the contractor shall provide the hourly wage rates and fringe benefit rate at the preconstruction conference .
the rates will be verified by comparison to the contractors payrolls .
b overtime pay ot which will be determined as follows ot w r x num fr x num c subsistence and travel allowances paid to workers as required by collective bargaining agreements or as approved by adot construction group .
rates section num num for lodging meals and mileage shall not exceed the rates published by the state at the time of the force account work .
no markup will be allowed for profit or overhead .
num materials for all materials accepted by the engineer and used in the work the contractor will be paid the actual invoice cost of such materials including actual freight and express charges less all offered or available discounts and rebates not withstanding the fact that they may not have been taken by the contractor .
to the above cost will be added a sum equal to num percent thereof .
the department reserves the right to furnish such materials as it deems appropriate and the contractor shall have no claims for any costs overhead or profit on materials provided by the department .
no partial payment will be allowed .
the contractor shall be compensated for materials after the materials invoice is submitted along with any documentary backup for the cost of materials .
num equipment equipment which the engineer considers necessary for the performance of work will be eligible for payment at the established rates only during the hours that it is operated except as otherwise allowed elsewhere in these specifications .
equipment hours will be recorded to the nearest onehalf hour .
for the use of equipment owned by the contractor and approved by the engineer the contractor will be paid the rental rates as modified herein set forth in the rental rate blue book rrbb for construction equipment which is published by the equipment guidebook company a division of nielson dataquest num ridder park drive san jose california num phone num num .
all rate determinations will be based on the blue book rental rate chapter revisions that are applicable at the time the equipment is being used .
a rental rates without operators the hourly equipment rental rate herr will be determined by the following formula h oc num her r f x num x r w here f adjustment factor to r as shown in the special provisions .
r current rrbb monthly rate section num num hoc hourly operating cost an overhead and profit adjustment of num percent of the rates provided in the rental rate blue book is included in the above formula .
the hourly operating cost represents the major costs of equipment operation such as fuel and oil lubrication field repairs tires expendable parts and supplies .
for each piece of equipment used whether bought or rented the contractor shall provide the engineer with the following information the manufacturers name equipment type year of manufacture model number type of fuel used horsepower rating attachments required together with their size or capacity and any further information necessary to ascertain the proper rate .
w hen multiple attachments are included with the rental equipment only the attachment having the higher rental rate will be eligible for payment provided the attachment has been approved by the engineer as being necessary to the force account work .
rental charges will not be allowed for tools or equipment that show a daily rate less than five dollars or for unlisted equipment that has a value of less than four hundred dollars .
the above provisions apply to approved equipment of modern design and in good working condition .
the equipment shall be handled and used to provide normal output or production .
equipment that is not in good working condition or is not of proper size for efficient performance of the work may be rejected by the engineer .
equipment ordered for force account work will be paid for until such time as the engineer directs that the use of such equipment be discontinued or until completion of the work .
unless otherwise specified manufacturers ratings and manufacturerapproved modifications shall be used to classify equipment for the determination of applicable rental rates .
equipment which has no direct power unit shall be powered by a unit of at least the minimum rating recommended by the manufacturer .
if it is deemed necessary by the engineer to use equipment not listed in the above publication a suitable rate for such equipment will be established by the engineer .
the contractor may furnish cost data which might assist the engineer in the establishment of such rental rate .
the rental rates shall be agreed to in writing prior to the use of such equipment on force account work or paid for by invoices in the case of outside rented equipment .
b standby time equipment that is in operational condition and is standing by with the engineers approval for participation in force account w ork shall be paid for according to the following standby rate sbr section num num sbr f r num num num payment for standby will be limited to not more than eight hours in a numhour day or num hours in a normal week .
no compensation shall be allowed for equipment that is inoperable due to breakdown .
no payment shall be allowed for equipment that is not operating because work has been suspended by the contractor for the contractors reasons .
c outside rented equipment in cases where a piece of equipment to be used is rented or leased by the contractor from a third party exclusively for force account work the contractor will be paid as follows rental invoice x num hoc the above formula includes a num percent markup of the rental invoice for all overhead and incidental costs for furnishing the equipment .
d moving of equipment rental time will also be allowed for the time required to move needed equipment to the location of the force account work and to return it to its original location .
loading and transportation costs will be allowed in lieu of moving times when equipment is moved by means other than its own power .
moving time back to the original location or loading and transportation costs will not be allowed if the equipment is used at the site of the force account work on contract items or related work .
for use of equipment moved on the work exclusively for force account work the cost of transferring the equipment to the site of the work and returning it to the original location will be allowed as specified herein as an additional item of expense .
the original location of the equipment to be hauled to the site of the work shall be agreed to by the engineer in advance .
w here the move of the equipment is made by common carrier the allowance will be the invoiced amount paid for the freight plus fifteen percent .
if the contractor hauls the equipment with its own forces rental will be allowed for the hauling unit plus the drivers wages and the cost of loading and unloading the equipment .
the maximum rental period for the day that the equipment is moved on the work and the day that the use of the equipment is discontinued shall be the actual time that the equipment is in operation on force account work .
num superintendence section num num no part of the salary or expense of anyone connected with the contractors forces above the grade of foreman and having general supervision of the work will be included in the labor items as specified above except when the contractors organization is entirely occupied with force account work in which case the salaries of the superintendent and the timekeeper may be included in the labor item specified above when the nature of the work is such that their services are required .
num compensation the compensation as set forth above shall be received by the contractor as payment in full for work done on a force account basis .
in addition the contractor shall be paid an amount equal to num percent of the force account compensation times the applicable sales tax rate .
num statements all statements shall be accompanied and supported by receipted invoices for all materials used and transportation charges .
if materials used on the force account work are not specifically purchased for such work but are taken from the contractors stock then instead of invoices the statements shall contain or be accompanied by an affidavit of the contractor certifying that such materials were taken from stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
the contractor and subcontractor will submit an equipment list for all equipment to be used during the contract an equipment rate sheet and a labor rate sheet all within num days after contract award but prior to the start of any force account work .
the contractor shall submit payrolls and other cost data documents for all force account work within num calendar days after completion of the work .
no partial payment will be made .
all invoiced work must have documentation for payment .
final payment will not be made for work performed on a force account basis until the contractor has furnished duplicate itemized statements of the cost of such force account work detailed to the following name classification date daily hours total hours rate and amount for each foreman and laborer .
designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and amount for each unit of equipment .
quantities of materials prices and amounts .
transportation charges on materials fob jobsite .
num force account work by subcontractors section num num w hen force account work is determined by the engineer to require specialized labor or equipment not normally utilized by the contractor and such force account work is performed by subcontractors the contractor will be allowed a supplemental markup of five percent of the subcontractors costs .
such allowance will be applied to the subcontractors force account costs less its markups for overhead and profit .
num bond an amount of num percent of the total amount will be added for the performance and payment bond .
e nonallowable charges if the contractor chooses to accept force account then the contractors compensation in any supplemental agreement will only be for what is stated in the above force account provisions .
w hether the amount of supplemental agreement negotiated is for unit price lump sum agreement or force account in no case will the contractor be reimbursed for the following items num profit in excess of that provided herein num loss of profit num home office overhead num consequential damages including loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency num indirect costs or expenses of any nature num attorneys fees claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation .
num interest num eliminated items the engineer may upon written order to the contractor eliminate items from the contract and such action shall in no way invalidate the contract .
the contractor will be compensated under the provisions of subsection num .
num partial payments and retention a partial payments if satisfactory progress is being made the contractor will receive a payment each month based on the amount of work completed during the section num num preceding month .
except as herein provided the department will not retain monies from the monthly payments .
partial payment on either a lump sum item or on an item paid for as a unit each may be made if the amount of work in the opinion of the engineer is of sufficient magnitude to warrant partial payment .
the amount of the partial payment to be made will be in proportion to the percentage of the work completed on the item as estimated by the engineer .
the monthly payments will be approximate only and all partial statements and payments will be subject to correction in the final statement and payment .
if in the opinion of the engineer progress is unsatisfactory after num percent of the contract time has expired the department reserves the right to withhold num percent of payments due the contractor until progress is determined to be satisfactory .
the acceptance of work for purposes of partial payment does not constitute final acceptance of the work .
should any defective work or material be discovered prior to the final acceptance the department will deduct monies from subsequent monthly payments to provide for correction of the defective work .
payment for such defective work will not be allowed until the defect has been remedied .
b subcontractor payments num partial payment the contractor shall make prompt partial payments to its subcontractors within seven days of receipt of payment from the department in accordance with the requirements of arizona revised statutes section num paragraph a.num .
num final payment the contractor shall make prompt final payment to each of its subcontractors all monies including retention due the subcontractor within num days after the subcontractor has satisfactorily completed all of its work .
num noncompliance if prompt partial payment or prompt final payment including any retention is not made within the time frames established above the department will retain num per subcontractor per occurrence .
each additional month that payment is not made constitutes an additional occurrence .
the amount withheld by the department will be released after the issue is resolved .
section num num c payroll submittals if by the numth of the month the contractor has not submitted its payrolls for all work performed during the preceding month the engineer will provide written notification of the discrepancies to the contractor .
for each payroll document that the contractor fails to submit within num days after the written notification the department will retain num from the progress payment for the current month .
the contractor shall submit each complete and correct payroll within num days of the date of written notification .
if the payroll is complete and correct within the numday time frame the department will release the num on the next monthly estimate .
for each payroll that is not acceptable until after the numday time frame the department will only release num of the num retained .
the department will retain num as liquidated damages .
these liquidated damages shall be in addition to all other retention or liquidated damages provided for elsewhere in the contract .
num partial payment for material on hand materials listed below may be considered for partial payment without the execution of a supplemental agreement when the materials are delivered and stockpiled or produced on the project site or on another site approved by the engineer .
such partial payment will be made at the contract unit price for the quantity of material on hand multiplied by the partial payment factor .
section num num partial payment type of material factor aggregate subbase num aggregate base num mineral aggregate num cover material num structural steel num reinforcing steel num corrugated metal pipe num structural plate pipe or pipearch num concrete pipe num flared end section for pipe culvert num cattle guard grill num guardrail rail and brackets num guardrail posts num fencing posts and w ire num precast concrete bridge members after curing period is completed num vertical support for breakaway sign num perforated sign posts num cantilever and bridge sign structures num sign panel num material for items of work whether shown above or not may be considered for partial payment without the execution of a supplemental agreement when the materials are delivered and stockpiled or produced on the project site or on another site approved by the engineer .
such partial payment will be made at num percent of invoice cost but shall not exceed num percent of the total item bid amount .
partial payment will be made only if the material is approved by the engineer and if satisfactory progress is being made on the contract work by the contractor .
no partial payment will be made for living or perishable plant materials until they are planted .
section num num no partial payment will be made for materials stockpiled at a commercial source .
partial payments will not be made on items until all required certificates of compliance have been provided .
num blank num acceptance and final payment w hen final acceptance has been made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num the engineer will prepare the final estimate of quantities of the various items of work performed .
final payment will be made in accordance with the engineers final statement of the total amount earned by the contractor .
the final payment will not be made until all quantities have been checked and verified .
the final payment will generally not be made before num days after the date of final acceptance of the work by the engineer although final payment may be made in num days or less at the sole discretion of the department but only when all quantities have been checked and verified .
the cost of any work material equipment or incidental specified in the division i for which no direct payment has been specified in the proposal shall be considered as included in the contract unit price for one or more of the contract items .
num lump sum payment for structures a general w hen the bidding schedule contains items shown with an alpha or numeric suffix and approximate quantities required to complete specific structures or designated groups of structures the contractor will be compensated on a lump sum basis .
bidders shall specify a unit price and an extended amount for each item within the lump sum structure or group of structures for which a quantity is given .
no separate total for each structure will be shown on the bidding schedule .
the lump sum amount shall be the total of the extended amounts for all items related to each structure or group of structures as designated by the same alpha or numeric suffix except for driven piles caissons and drilled shafts which will be paid for under their respective contract items .
bidders shall verify the accuracy and completeness of the quantities listed in the bidding schedule and bid prices shall reflect the cost of quantities which the contractor determines to be necessary to construct the structures and shall also include any additional costs for work necessary to complete the structures but for which no bid quantities are listed .
section num num b adjustments due to quantity variations for all items of work other than the structural concrete structural steel reinforcing steel structural excavation and structure backfill items no adjustment to the bidding schedules quantities unit prices and extended amounts will be made following the award of contract because of any errors or omissions made either by the department in its calculations of quantities or by the contractor in its calculations .
adjustments in the bidding schedule quantities for structural concrete structural steel reinforcing steel structural excavation and structure backfill may be initiated by the contractor or the engineer if evidence indicates that the required quantity varies by an amount greater than five percent of the bidding schedule quantity .
the contractor shall advise the engineer in writing submitting such evidence and requesting an adjustment of the quantities .
the engineer will determine the amount of adjustment if any .
the quantity upon which payment will be based will be the bidding schedule quantity plus or minus only that portion of the adjustment that exceeds five percent of the bidding schedule quantity .
no adjustment to contract time will be allowed due to lump sum structure quantity variations .
c adjustments due to revisions ordered by the engineer if the engineer orders a revision in the project plans or specifications for a specific structure or group of structures contracted under this provision and the revision affects work for which bidding schedule items have been established each item affected shall be considered a major item and the unit price shall be subject to revision in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
payment to the contractor will be adjusted by an amount equal to the product of the quantity adjustment and the unit price bid or the revised unit price as appropriate .
if the revisions affect work for which no bidding schedule item has been established payment for this work will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
d payment payment for all work necessary to construct the structures including but not necessarily limited to all excavating backfilling foundations concrete reinforcing steel structural steel expansion joints bearings approach slabs post tensioning systems handrails and utility and lighting conduit systems will be made on the basis of the lump sum amount as calculated by adding the extended amounts for all related bid items designated with the same alpha or numeric suffix except as may be adjusted in accordance with subsections numb and c. section num num driven piles caissons and drilled shafts will be paid for under the respective contract items and will not be paid for under lump sum payment for structures .
partial payments will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num on the basis of the quantities shown in the bidding schedule for each structure and the respective unit prices .
at least five days prior to the closing date scheduled for monthly progress payments the contractor shall furnish the engineer an estimate of the quantity of each item of work shown in the bidding schedule for which the contractor expects to be compensated .
the engineer shall be the sole judge as to the approximate quantities of work eligible for payment in any month .
the total amount of all partial payments shall equal the lump sum amount as determined above or adjusted as specified herein .
payments made for structural concrete will be adjusted in accordance with the table shown in subsection num for material which fails to meet the required numday compressive strength when sampled in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num statistical acceptance a general w hen referenced in individual specifications this subsection will be used to determine the total percentage of lot w ithin ul and ll pt or the percent of lot w ithin limits pw l for statistical acceptance .
subsection numb is used for asphaltic concrete .
subsection numc is used for thickness of portland cement concrete pavement and subsection numd for compressive strength of portland cement concrete pavement .
b definitions abbreviations and formulas for determining the total percentage of lot within ul and ll pt for asphaltic concrete target value tv target values shall be as given in individual specifications .
average ave the sum of the lots test results for a measured characteristic divided by the number of test results the arithmetic mean .
the average will be determined to one decimal place except for asphalt cement content or asphaltrubber content which will be determined to two decimal places .
standard deviation s the square root of the value formed by summing the squared difference between the individual test results of a measured characteristic and section num num ave divided by the number of test results minus one as shown in the equation below .
the standard deviation will be determined to two decimal places .
num number of tests ave individual test results s num upper limit ul the value above the tv of each measured characteristic which defines the upper limit of acceptable production .
lower limit ll the value below the tv of each measured characteristic which defines the lower limit of acceptable production .
upper quality index qu s qu ul ave the qu will be calculated to three decimal places .
lower quality index ql s ql ave ll the ql will be calculated to three decimal places .
percentage of lot within ul pu determined by entering the appropriate n value table with qu .
percentage of lot within ll pl determined by entering the appropriate n value table with ql .
total percentage of lot within ul and ll pt pt puplnum c definitions abbreviations and formulas for determining the percent of lot within limits pwl for thickness of portland cement concrete pavement average ave the average of the thickness measurements of the cores obtained in accordance with subsection num .
the average will be determined to the nearest hundredth of an inch .
section num num standard deviation s the square root of the value formed by summing the squared difference between the thickness measurement for each core and ave divided by the number of cores minus one as shown in the equation below .
standard deviation will be reported to two decimal places .
num number of cores ave thickness measurement for each core s num lower limit ll the required thickness less num inches .
lower quality index ql s ql ave ll ql will be determined to three decimal places .
percent of lot within limits pwl determined by entering the appropriate n value table with ql .
d definitions abbreviations and formulas for determining the percent of lot within limits pwl for compressive strength of portland cement concrete pavement average ave the average of the compressive strengths of the samples .
the average will be determined to the nearest whole number .
standard deviation s the square root of the value formed by summing the squared difference between the compressive strength result for each sample and ave divided by the number of samples minus one as shown in the equation below .
the standard deviation will be determined to the nearest whole number .
num number of samples ave compressive strength result for each sample s num lower limit ll the specified minimum strength .
lower quality index ql s ql ave ll ql will be determined to three decimal places .
percent of lot within limits pwl section num num determined by entering the appropriate n value table with ql .
determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num section num num determination of pu pl or pwl number of tests n num qu or ql pu pl or pwl qu or ql pu pl or pwl num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or less num section num num section num clearing and grubbing num description the work under this section shall consist of removing and disposing of all vegetation rubbish debris and other objectionable matter from within the highway rightofway bridge construction areas road approaches areas through which ditches and channels are to be excavated and such other areas as may be specified in the special provisions .
clearing and grubbing shall be performed in advance of grading operations and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
all vegetation and objects designated to remain shall be preserved from injury or defacement .
property and landscape shall be protected and restored in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num blank num construction requirements num clearing and grubbing the entire length of the project to the widths specified below shall be cleared and grubbed unless otherwise shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions .
the area above the natural ground surface shall be cleared of all vegetation such as trees logs upturned stumps roots brush grass weeds and all other objectionable material within the following limits highway construction areas including structures frontage roads streets ramps road approaches ditches and channels and all access roads and connections that are to be constructed .
such areas shall extend to a width of five feet outside of structures and excavation and embankment slope lines .
areas enclosed by interchange loops and ramps .
w ithin the limits of clearing the areas below the natural ground surface except in embankment areas where the finished subgrade elevation is five feet or more above the natural ground shall be grubbed to a depth necessary to remove all stumps roots buried logs and other objectionable material .
in embankment areas where the subgrade is five or more feet above the natural ground line all trees stumps and roots shall be cut off not more than one foot above the natural ground or shall be completely removed where a structure is to be constructed piles are to be placed or driven or where unsuitable material is to be removed .
section num num cavities resulting from the removal of stumps or other materials except in areas to be excavated shall be backfilled with material approved by the engineer .
the material shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
scarred surfaces resulting from the work on trees and shrubs that are to remain shall be treated with an approved asphaltum base tree paint .
unless specified otherwise in the special provisions merchantable timber and other vegetation not designated to remain shall become the property of the contractor .
in national forest areas clearing and grubbing shall also conform to the applicable rules and regulations of the united states forest service in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num removal and disposal of materials all materials removed in clearing and grubbing shall be disposed of at locations outside of the rightofway which are not visible from the roadway and in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
in the disposal of all tree trunks stumps brush limbs roots vegetation and other debris the contractor shall comply with the requirements of title num public health and safety chapter num article num air pollution of the arizona revised statutes and with the rules and regulations for air pollution control article num adopted by the arizona department of health services pursuant to the authority granted by the statutes .
burning will be permitted only after the contractor has obtained a permit from the arizona department of health services and from any other federal state county or city agency that may be involved .
combustible material may be reduced to chips of a maximum thickness of num inch and disposed of in areas between the slope lines and rightofway lines as approved by the engineer .
the chips may either be buried or distributed uniformly on the ground surface and mixed with the underlying earth to such extent that the chips will not support combustion .
the roadway and adjacent areas shall be left with a neat and finished appearance .
no accumulation of material shall remain on or adjacent to the rightofway .
num method of measurement section num num clearing and grubbing will be measured either on a lump sum basis or by the acre .
measurement by the acre will be to the nearest tenth of an acre measured on a horizontal plane .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of clearing and grubbing measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price or by the acre as designated in the bidding schedule including furnishing placing and compacting the material required to fill the cavities resulting from the removal of tree stumps or other materials .
no payment will be made for clearing and grubbing outside the specified limits unless such work is authorized by the engineer .
w hen clearing and grubbing is not included as a contract pay item full compensation for any clearing and grubbing necessary to perform the construction operations designated on the project plans or specified in the special provisions shall be considered as included in the price of contract items .
section num removal of structures and obstructions num description the work under this section shall consist of the removal wholly or in part and satisfactory disposal of all structures and obstructions within the rightofway which have not been designated on the project plans or specified in the special provisions to remain except for those structures and obstructions which are to be removed and disposed of under other items of work in the contract .
the work shall also include salvaging of designated materials and backfilling the resulting cavities .
existing structures pavement sidewalks curbs gutters and other existing improvements which are to become an integral part of the planned improvements shall remain even though not specifically noted .
materials removed and not designated to be salvaged or incorporated into the work shall become the property of the contractor .
num blank num construction requirements num general bridges culverts and other structures in use by traffic shall not be removed until satisfactory arrangements have been made to accommodate the traffic .
section num num blasting or other operations necessary for the removal of an existing structure or obstruction which may damage new construction shall be completed prior to commencing the new work .
items designated to be salvaged shall be carefully stockpiled or stored by the contractor at locations designated in the special provisions or as directed by the engineer .
items which are to be salvaged or reused in the new construction and are damaged or destroyed as a result of the contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
holes cavities trenches and depressions resulting from the removal of structures or obstructions except in areas to be excavated shall be backfilled with suitable material which shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
num removal of pipe all removed pipe which is to be salvaged or relaid shall be cleaned of all earth and other material inside and outside prior to being stockpiled or reused .
pipe to be reused shall be stored when necessary to avoid damage or loss before relaying .
existing pipe to be partially removed shall be cut with straight and smooth edges on a plane perpendicular to the center line of the pipe .
num removal of pavement a portland cement concrete pavement unless otherwise specified in the special provisions concrete pavement designated on the project plans to be removed shall either be removed from the job site and disposed of at a site secured by the contractor or buried in embankment areas .
if the contractor elects to bury the concrete in embankment areas the concrete shall be broken into pieces and placed in the embankment in accordance with the requirements of subsection numa .
w here new construction is to join the existing concrete pavement the pavement shall be saw cut to a true line perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement with straight vertical edges free from irregularities .
b bituminous pavement unless milling is specified in the special provisions all bituminous pavement designated on the project plans to be removed shall be section num num completely removed down to the underlying base course or subgrade .
the pavement material shall be removed and disposed of as specified in the special provisions .
w here new construction is to join existing bituminous pavement the existing pavement shall be cut to a true line perpendicular to the centerline of the pavement with straight vertical edges free from irregularities .
the removal of asphaltic concrete at the approaches to structures shall be accomplished in a manner approved by the engineer .
c bituminous pavement removal by milling w hen milling is specified the existing asphaltic concrete shall be removed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans with equipment specifically designed to remove such material by means of grinding or chipping to a controlled line and grade .
the equipment used shall be capable of removing the existing asphaltic concrete within num feet of the specified removal depth .
the removal shall be accomplished in a manner which does not destroy the integrity of any asphaltic concrete pavement that remains and which does not result in a contamination of the milled asphaltic concrete with the underlying base material .
the milled material shall be removed and disposed of as specified in the special provisions .
under no circumstance shall the removal of existing asphaltic concrete begin until the mix design for replacement asphaltic concrete has been approved by the engineer .
the extent of removal of existing asphaltic concrete must be in keeping with the contractors ability to produce haul place and compact replacement asphaltic concrete so that at all times the length of open trench is at a minimum .
if the contractors production of replacement asphaltic concrete is stopped for any reason the removal of asphaltic concrete shall either cease or shall be reduced .
the engineer will be the sole judge as to whether the removal shall cease or be reduced .
the engineers decision will be based on the reason for the stoppage in asphaltic concrete production the expected length of the stoppage the type and depth of the material being removed and the time of day .
replacement asphaltic concrete shall be placed as soon as possible after the trench has been opened up .
the surface on which the material is to be placed shall be uniform and free of loose material .
any exposed base material shall be compacted to the extent required by the engineer .
the trench in which asphaltic concrete is being placed shall be filled before the end of each days work and the lane shall be opened to traffic .
the length of open trench at any one time shall not exceed two miles or half the length of the work whichever is the lesser .
section num num in the event of circumstances beyond the control of the contractor such as equipment breakdown or if the production of the replacement asphaltic concrete has been stopped by the engineer and the contractor is unable to comply with the requirements in the preceding paragraph the contractor shall provide and maintain such traffic control devices that the engineer deems necessary under the circumstances in order to provide safe and efficient passage through the work zone .
if the engineer deems it to be warranted the engineer will require that the contractor provide for the surface drainage of areas where the pavement surface has temporarily been removed .
pavement to be removed by milling adjacent to manholes valve boxes small radius curbs and other fixed objects that produce confined areas shall be removed with milling equipment specifically designed to operate in restricted areas and capable of removing asphaltic concrete of the specified thickness without damage or displacement of the adjacent object .
on projects with existing curb and gutter any asphaltic concrete buildup in the gutter designated to be removed shall be removed prior to the pavement removal operation by equipment and methods approved by the engineer .
the equipment and methods used shall be capable of removing the asphaltic concrete buildup without causing damage to the curb and gutter .
num removal of miscellaneous concrete miscellaneous concrete shall be defined as all or portions of mortared rubble masonry curbs gutters sidewalks driveways aprons slope paving island paving retaining walls spillways drainage structures concrete box culverts foundations footings and all other portland cement concrete or masonry construction except bridges and pavement .
all existing miscellaneous concrete shall be removed to a depth of at least five feet below finished subgrade elevation unless otherwise specified in the special provisions or on the project plans .
w here new concrete is to join existing concrete the existing concrete shall be saw cut to a true line with straight vertical edges free from irregularities .
concrete removal operations shall be performed without damage to any portion that is to remain in place .
all damage to the existing concrete which is to remain in place shall be repaired to a condition equal to that existing prior to the beginning of removal operations .
the repairing of existing concrete damaged by the contractors operations shall be at no additional cost to the department .
existing reinforcement that is to be incorporated in new work shall be protected from damage and shall be thoroughly cleaned of all adhering material before being embedded in new concrete .
section num num concrete shall be disposed of as provided in subsection numa .
the floors of concrete basements pits and structures that are not required to be removed and which are located within the roadway shall be broken in a manner that will prevent the entrapment of water .
num removal of bridges the removal of existing bridges either wholly or in part shall be as shown on the project plans or as described in the special provisions .
bridge removal operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to cause the least interference to public traffic .
at least ten days before beginning bridge removal over or adjacent to public traffic or railroad property the contractor shall submit to the engineer details of the removal operations showing the methods and sequence of removal and equipment to be used .
w hen total bridge removal is specified all materials designated for salvage such as structural steel structural steel members timber and other reusable materials shall be carefully dismantled removed and salvaged in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
steel members shall be match marked as directed by the engineer .
piling piers abutments footings and pedestals shall be removed to at least one foot below ground line or five feet below finished subgrade elevation unless specified otherwise in the special provisions or on the project plans .
w hen partial bridge removal is specified or alteration of an existing bridge requires removal of portions of the existing structure such removal shall be performed with sufficient care as to leave the remaining portion of the structure undamaged .
in case of damage to the existing bridge structure the contractor shall make all necessary repairs at no additional cost to the department .
reinforcing steel extending from the remaining portion of the structure shall be protected cleaned and incorporated in the new portion of the structure in accordance with the details shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
flame cutting and saw cutting may be used for removing widening or modifying bridges provided the contractor complies with all protection safety and damage requirements .
explosives shall not be used in bridge removal operations unless approved by the engineer .
before beginning concrete removal operations involving the removal of a portion of a monolithic concrete element a saw cut approximately one section num num inch deep shall be made to a true line along the limits of removal on all faces of the element which will be visible in the completed work .
concrete shall be disposed of as provided in subsection numa .
num removal of signs and delineators existing warning regulatory guide route marker signs and delineators that are to be removed will be designated by the engineer .
the contractor shall dismantle the sign panels and delineators and remove the sign posts from the ground in such a manner as to prevent damage to the posts .
the contractor shall not remove the existing signs prior to the completion of the new sign installation but shall remove them within five working days after the installation of the new signs or as directed by the engineer .
signs delineators and sign posts shall be removed and salvaged in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num removal of embankment curb the existing embankment curb downdrain inlets and spillway inlets designated on the project plans to be removed shall be removed in such a manner as to preserve the existing bituminous surfacing .
asphaltic concrete obtained either from commercial or other sources and approved by the engineer shall be used to fill and repair voids on the existing pavement surface that result from the removals .
num removal of fence all fence to be removed shall become the property of the contractor unless designated for salvage on the project plans .
if fence is designated to be removed and salvaged all fence including gates shall be salvaged in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w hen designated for salvage fence and gates shall be carefully dismantled and neatly rolled or coiled .
posts shall be cleaned of all concrete and dirt .
in areas where new fence or relocated fence is to be installed the contractor shall perform the removals in such a manner as to prevent the escape of any livestock .
num removal of guardrail all guardrail to be removed shall become the property of the contractor unless otherwise specified on the project plans .
if guardrail is designated to be removed and salvaged the contractor shall carefully dismantle the guardrail and remove the blocks and posts section num num in such a manner as to prevent any damage to the removed items .
the guardrail including panels end sections posts and all hardware shall be salvaged in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num method of measurement removal of structures and obstructions will be measured on a lump sum basis except that when the bidding schedule contains specific items under this section on a unit basis measurement will be made by the units designated in the bidding schedule .
num basis of payment payment for the accepted quantities of removal of structures and obstructions will be made by lump sum or by specific removal items or by a combination of both .
payment for removal of structures and obstructions not listed in the bidding schedule but necessary to perform the construction operations designated on the project plans or specified in the special provisions shall be considered as included in the prices of contract items .
the prices shall include all excavation and subsequent backfill incidental to the removals the furnishing and placing of asphaltic concrete to fill and repair voids resulting from the work under subsection num compaction of base material resulting from the work under subsection numc and the salvaging hauling storing and disposing of all materials as provided herein .
section num earthwork num description the work under this section shall consist of performing all operations necessary to excavate all materials regardless of character and subsurface conditions from the roadway or adjacent thereto to excavate drainage and irrigation ditches and channels to excavate for structures culverts and other facilities to furnish and place borrow material for use as specified to construct embankments to place backfills for structures culverts and other facilities to backfill holes pits and other depressions within the roadway area to remove and replace unsuitable material to excavate and grade road approaches driveways and connections to construct dikes and berms and to apply water for compaction all as designated on the project plans specified in the special provisions or directed by the engineer .
num general operations shall be conducted such that existing highway facilities utilities railroad tracks and other nonhighway facilities which are to remain in place will not be damaged .
the contractor at its expense section num num shall furnish and install sheet piling cribbing bulkheads shoring or provide whatever means necessary to adequately support the facilities which are to remain and maintain such supports until they are no longer needed .
temporary pavements facilities utilities and installations shall also be protected until they are no longer required .
w hen temporary supports and other protective means are no longer required they shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
w hen hauling is done over highways or city streets the loads shall comply with legal load requirements all material shall be removed from shelf areas of vehicles in order to eliminate spilling of material and loads shall be watered or covered to eliminate dust .
the bidding schedule quantities for roadway excavation drainage excavation and borrow if applicable will be considered to be the final quantities for payment unless adjusted in accordance with the requirements of subsections num or num .
all suitable material removed from excavated areas within the project limits shall be used in the construction of embankments and other designated areas .
num earthwork adjustments adjustments in the bidding schedule quantities for roadway excavation drainage excavation or borrow may be initiated by the contractor or the engineer if evidence indicates that the required quantity varies by an amount greater than five percent of the bidding schedule quantity .
the contractor shall advise the engineer in writing submitting evidence in the form of a construction survey or photogrammetric survey with measurement for the proposed adjustment substantiated in accordance with subsections num num and num and requesting an adjustment in quantities .
the engineer will determine the amount of adjustment if any .
the quantity upon which payment will be based will be the bidding schedule quantity plus or minus only that portion of the adjustment that exceeds five percent of the bidding schedule quantity .
should the item of earthwork to be adjusted also be a major item as specified in subsections num and num the determination as to whether the unit price may be adjusted will be based on the difference between the final quantity and the bid schedule quantity plus or minus the five percent tolerance .
neither variations in shrink or swell of material from those shown on plans nor variations of shrink or swell from contractor obtained sources will be reason for establishing a quantity adjustment .
adjustments in earthwork quantities due to revisions ordered by the engineer will be isolated by measurement or calculations in accordance with the requirements of subsections num num and num .
the bidding schedule quantities will be adjusted by the amount of the section num num ordered change and will not be included in any other adjustment of the bidding schedule quantities as specified in this subsection .
num roadway excavation num description roadway excavation shall consist of excavating grading and hauling all types of materials encountered in constructing the roadway lookouts parking areas turnouts driveway entrances ditches within the roadway and other roadrelated areas as designated on the plans or specified in the special provisions and the placement and compaction of excavated material in embankments as provided under subsection num .
roadway excavation will not include drainage excavation or structural excavation when these items are designated as separate items of work in the bidding schedule .
num blank num construction requirements a general all roadway excavation shall be finished to a reasonably smooth uniform surface shall not vary by more than num feet above or below the grade established and shall be in reasonably close conformance to the lines dimensions and crosssections shown on the project or established by the engineer .
w hen portland cement concrete pavement or asphaltic concrete pavement are to be placed directly on the subgrade the finished surface shall not vary by more than num feet above or num feet below the established grade .
w hen roadway excavation is made in rock the full crosssection width of the roadway between the ditches shall be overexcavated a minimum depth of six inches below the subgrade elevation .
the overexcavated area shall be filled with embankment material satisfactory to the engineer and compacted and finished in accordance with the requirements of the specifications .
in situations where only part of the roadway section intersects areas of rock that portion occurring in the rock zone shall be overexcavated and backfilled as specified above .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for the work in overexcavating the rock areas or placing the embankment material the cost being considered as included in the cost of contract items .
all suitable excavated material shall be used in the construction of embankments or in other designated areas .
no excavated material shall be wasted without the approval of the engineer .
w asted material shall be disposed of by the contractor in a section num num manner approved by the engineer and in accordance with subsection num .
during construction the roadway shall be maintained in a welldrained condition at all times .
the top six inches of the subgrade shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer except that when asphaltic concrete or portland cement concrete is to be placed directly on subgrade the required density shall be num percent of the maximum density .
b slopes earth slopes shall be finished to reasonably smooth surfaces and shall be free of all debris and loose material .
w hen earth slopes are to be seeded the surface shall be finished to a loose evenly roughened condition in accordance with the requirements of subsection num numb .
all shattered or loosened material shall be removed from rock cut slopes .
adjustments in slopes shall be made as directed by the engineer to avoid damage to standing trees marring weathered rock or to harmonize with existing landscape features .
the transition of such adjusted slopes shall be gradual .
at the intersections of cuts and fills slopes shall be adjusted and warped to flow into each other or into the natural ground surfaces without noticeable break .
except in rock the intersection of roadway cut slopes with the ground surfaces shall be rounded as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
rock that is disintegrated to such an extent that it will work and handle as earth shall be considered as earth and the slopes shall be rounded the same as earth slopes .
w hen earth overlays a rock cut the top of slope shall be rounded in the same manner as earth slopes .
w here directed by the engineer the top six inches of topsoil including duff within the limits of the rounding shall be removed and windrowed outside of the rounding limits .
after completion of the rounding of the slope the windrowed materials shall be uniformly spread over the rounded area .
c blasting num general overshooting or any method of blasting that might cause damage to the roadway section or highway structures or that might be dangerous or section num num destructive to adjacent property or landscape will not be permitted .
the contractor shall provide and install suitable protection for all trees shrubbery pole lines and other existing facilities within the adjacent area .
num controlled blasting w hen controlled blasting is specified in the special provisions all blasting in connection with roadway excavation shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
should the engineer determine that controlled blasting procedures are to be followed and such procedures are not specified in the special provisions payment for any additional work will be made in accordance with subsection num .
prior to any blasting operations that require controlled blasting the contractor shall furnish the engineer a written statement setting forth the details and materials to be used in the presplitting operations .
the written statement shall include spacing of the drill holes depth of the holes amount of explosives to be used in each hole method of loading stemming depth and the time delay between detonations .
if the initial results obtained using the proposed method are satisfactory in relation to the character of the material to be presplit the procedures shall be continued .
if in the opinion of the engineer the results of the blasting are considered unsatisfactory for any reason the contractor shall submit corrective modifications of the plan to the engineer for review .
drill holes for presplitting shall be spaced at centers not exceeding three feet and shall be drilled as near to the design slope lines and as parallel to one another as possible .
predrilling and presplitting to depths greater than one lift approximately num feet will be permitted only if satisfactory hole alignment is maintained .
explosive charges placed in slopedrilled holes shall be uniformly spaced along the length of hole and shall be as light as possible to effect clean splitting of the rock along the plane of the slope and to minimize the fracturing of the remaining rock face or cut .
loading of slopedrilled holes shall be by string charges connected so that all charges in a hole and all holes in the designated section are exploded simultaneously .
explosives for presplitting shall be detonated at least several milliseconds in advance of primary blasting .
primary blasting shall be accomplished by means of millisecond delay excavation blasting methods .
d unsuitable material material below the natural ground surface in embankment areas and below the finished subgrade elevation in excavation areas that is unsuitable shall be excavated and disposed of as directed by the engineer .
section num num w hen unsuitable material is removed and disposed of the resulting space shall be filled with material suitable for the planned use .
such suitable material shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
e surplus material unless otherwise indicated on the project plans or specified in the special provisions surplus excavated material shall be removed from the job site and disposed of by the contractor in a manner approved by the engineer and in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
surplus material shall not be removed from the job site until the work specified in subsection num has been completed or when approved by the engineer .
any surplus material removed prior to the completion of the specified work which must subsequently be replaced shall be at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement measurement of roadway excavation for payment will not be required unless adjustments are made in accordance with subsection num .
w hen adjustments are required roadway excavation will be measured by the cubic yard in the original space occupied and the volume of material removed will be computed in cubic yards by the average end area method .
excavation originating outside of the neat lines of cut slopes as a result of necessary blasting operations will not be measured for additional payment .
num basis of payment the quantities of roadway excavation as shown in the bidding schedule and any adjustments as specified in subsection num will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the price shall include full compensation for the work complete in place including slope rounding blasting hauling stockpiling placing and compacting embankments disposal of surplus material and preparation of the subgrade in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
payment for removal of slides which are not deemed to be the result of carelessness on the part of the contractor will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w hen unsuitable material is removed as specified in subsection numd payment for this work will be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
no adjustment to the contract unit price will be made because of increased excavation quantities resulting from the removal of unsuitable material .
section num num num drainage excavation num description drainage excavation shall consist of the excavation of ditches channels or waterways except that excavation which is required to construct ditches paralleling the roadway and constituting a part of the roadway prism shall be considered as roadway excavation .
num blank num construction requirements ditches channels and waterways shall be constructed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
w hen directed by the engineer to provide outfall ditches channels and waterways shall be continued outside the limits of the rightofway .
prior to performing work outside the rightofway the engineer will obtain proper authorization from the property owner .
all waterways shall be constructed to drain effectively .
suitable materials from ditch channel or waterway excavation shall be used in the construction of embankment or for other purposes as shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions .
unsuitable and surplus excavation material shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement measurement of drainage excavation for payment will not be required unless adjustments are made in accordance with subsection num .
w hen adjustments are required drainage excavation will be measured by the cubic yard in the original space occupied and the volume of material removed will be computed in cubic yards by the average end area method .
num basis of payment the quantities of drainage excavation shown in the bidding schedule and any adjustments as specified in subsection num will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the unit price per cubic yard shall include hauling placing and compacting the excavated material to form embankments or other features shown on the plans or directed by the engineer and disposal of all surplus excavated material .
section num num payment for grader ditches and crown ditches will be made as specified under subsections num and num respectively .
num structural excavation and structure backfill num description structural excavation shall consist of the excavation and removal of all materials necessary for the construction of bridges concrete box culverts inlet and outlet wings retaining walls or other specific items designated on the project plans or in the special provisions as structural excavation the control and removal of water the construction or installation of all facilities necessary to accomplish the work and the subsequent removal of such facilities except when designated on the project plans or specified in the special provisions to remain in place .
structure backfill shall consist of furnishing placing and compacting backfill material around structures to the lines designated on the plans specified in the special provisions directed by the engineer and as specified herein .
the work under this section includes the furnishing and installing of a geocomposite drainage system as an abutment or retaining wall drainage when specified in the plans .
all geocomposite drainage materials and installation shall be as approved by the engineer .
num materials a geocomposite drain the geocomposite wall drain materials shall conform to the requirements of subsections num and num .
b geocomposite packaging handling and storage the identification packaging handling and storage of the geocomposite wall drain material shall be in accordance with astm d num .
geocomposite wall drain shall be furnished in rolls or in another acceptable manner wrapped with a suitable protective covering to protect the fabric from mud dirt dust debris or harmful ultraviolet light .
the wall drain material shall be free of defects or flaws which significantly affect its physical properties at the time of delivery and installation .
each roll or package shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient to determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacture shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
geocomposite wall drain materials shall be stored on the site or at another location approved by the engineer in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors the materials shall be elevated and protected with a light colored opaque waterproof cover .
section num num at no time shall the geocomposite wall drain materials be exposed to direct sunlight for a period exceeding num days .
num construction requirements a excavation the contractor shall notify the engineer sufficiently in advance of the beginning of excavation to allow measurements to be taken of the undisturbed ground .
the required excavation shall then be performed in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and cross sections established by the engineer or shown on the plans .
in lieu of providing approved shoring methods the sides of excavations may be sloped as required by soil conditions to stabilize the sides for safe working conditions .
side slopes shall conform to the requirements specified in current osha regulations and be approved by the engineer .
w hen structure footings concrete box culverts or other structures are to rest on an excavated surface other than rock and no piles are used care shall be taken to protect the surface from water and not disturb the bottom of the excavation .
if suitable material in the bottom of the excavation is disturbed or is removed for the contractors convenience the foundation shall be restored by the contractor at its expense to a condition at least equal to the undisturbed foundation as determined by the engineer .
w hen material at the planned grade of the excavation is determined by the engineer to be unsuitable such material shall be removed to the limits directed by the engineer and the resulting excavation backfilled with structure backfill material .
w hen structures are to rest on rock the surface shall be removed to a depth sufficient to expose sound rock .
the rock shall be roughly leveled or cut to steps and the surface roughened .
any seams in the rock shall be grouted under pressure or treated as directed by the engineer .
w here rock or other unyielding material is encountered at the planned grade of a structure and a yielding material is encountered in an adjacent area for the same structure the unyielding material shall be removed to a minimum depth of two feet below grade and replaced with structure backfill conforming to the requirements of subsection numb .
w hen structures are to be supported on piles excavations shall be completed to the bottom of the footings before any piles are drilled or driven therein .
w hen swell or subsidence results from driving piles the contractor shall at its expense excavate or backfill with suitable section num num material the footing area to the grade of the bottom of the footings as shown on the project plans .
w hen during the course of structural excavation material is removed outside the designated pay limits the contractor shall backfill said excavated areas in accordance with the requirements for structure backfill as specified herein and no compensation will be made for the additional material or work required .
excavated material which is suitable for and not used as structure backfill shall be used either for the construction of embankment or in filling other areas as designated on the plans .
material which in the opinion of the engineer is not suitable for use or which is deemed surplus shall be disposed of in accordance with subsection num .
prior to placing concrete or masonry the area excavated shall be inspected and approved by the engineer .
b backfill num structure backfill structure backfill material shall be selected from excavation or from a source selected by the contractor .
it shall not contain frozen lumps chunks of clay or other objectionable material .
backfill material shall not contain salvaged asphaltic concrete materials .
backfill material shall have a value of resistivity not less than num ohmcentimeters .
backfill material to be used for metal piles or similar items of metal shall have a value of resistivity not less than num ohmcentimeters or the value shown on the plans .
backfill material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive when placed against metal installations except aluminum .
backfill material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive when placed against aluminum installations .
backfill material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive when placed against installations other than metal .
tests for ph and resistivity shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
structure backfill material shall conform to the following gradation arizona test method num sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num the plasticity index shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
num use of slurry section num num as an alternate to the material requirements of structural backfill the engineer may allow material conforming to the following requirements to be used in a slurry mixture in situations where the slurry will be confined by freedraining soils arizona test method num sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num the plasticity index shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
num placement of backfill all earth material which has loosened or collapsed into the excavation from the adjacent ground and all trash forms and loose large rock shall be removed from the excavation before backfill is placed .
backfill material shall not be placed against the back of concrete abutments concrete retaining walls or castinplace concrete structures until the concrete has developed its full design strength .
backfill material shall not be placed against concrete structures not designed to retain earth loads until the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch and in no case before num hours after casting .
backfill shall be placed uniformly on each side of the structure and at all times during placement shall be not more than two feet above any other side .
unless otherwise shown on the plans or designated in the special provisions minor structures such as catch basins or cattle guards which are furnished as precast structures shall be placed on a layer of structure backfill at least six inches in depth .
the layer shall have been shaped to fit the bottom surface of the precast unit and compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
at the time the unit is placed the moisture content of the layer shall be at or near the optimum moisture as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
after the unit has been initially set in place and checked for line and grade it shall be removed and any defects in its bearing area shall be corrected by trimming and by placing and compacting similarly moistened structure backfill .
the process of removal correction and replacement shall continue until the imprint of the unit on the bearing area indicates essentially uniform section num num contact and the unit is in reasonable conformity with the lines and grades shown on the project plans .
w here a structure is located within a paved area all backfill material above finished subgrade elevation shall conform to the requirements of the typical pavement section of the same elevations .
backfill compacted by pneumatic or mechanical tamping devices shall be placed in layers not more than eight inches in depth before compaction .
backfill material placed as a slurry shall be placed in uniform layers not exceeding four feet in depth .
the maximum water content of the slurry mixture shall be num gallons of water per ton of backfill material .
aggregate slurry shall be thoroughly mixed in a mixer approved by the engineer .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the slurry shall be compacted with internal vibrators in accordance with the requirements of subsection numd .
num compaction of backfill backfill material shall be compacted to at least num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
backfill material may be compacted by either mechanical or pneumatic tamping devices or backfill material may be placed as a slurry .
compaction equipment or methods which may cause excessive displacement shall not be used .
if backfill is placed as a slurry and when directed by the engineer the contractor shall excavate holes in the compacted slurry to the depths and at the locations designated by the engineer .
upon completion of the tests the contractor shall refill the excavated areas and compact the material to the required density in a manner approved by the engineer .
c geocomposite wall drain geocomposite wall drains shall be installed on the soil side of abutment walls wing walls retaining walls and culvert sidewalls .
the concrete surface of the structure against which the geocomposite drain is to be placed shall be free of soil debris and excessive irregularities that will prevent continuous contact between the concrete surface and the drain material .
the geocomposite drain shall be installed with the single fabric surface in contact with the backfill material .
w hen the core of the geocomposite wall drain is not perforated during manufacture perforations shall be made in the core where the wall drain will lay against a weephole or other drainage outlet .
w hen making these perforations the fabric shall not be damaged in any way .
section num num unless otherwise specified geocomposite wall drains shall be constructed in horizontal courses and in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
to prevent infiltration of the backfill material the geocomposite material shall be firmly secured to the face top and sides of the wall by using adhesive or num to num inch long concrete nails with approved washers or wood battens of not less than four square inches in area .
the adhesive or alignment of the core shall not affect the drainage area or downward flow within the core .
the spacing of concrete nails shall be as directed by the engineer but shall not be more than four feet apart both horizontally and vertically .
w hen nails are utilized there shall be at least one horizontal row of nails in each course of geocomposite .
horizontal seams shall be formed by utilizing the fourinch flap of geotextile fabric extending from the upper geocomposite course and lapping over the top of the fabric on the next lower course .
the fabric flap shall be securely fastened to the lower fabric by means of a continuous strip of threeinch wide waterproof plastic tape .
w here vertical splices are necessary at the end of a geocomposite roll or panel an eightinch wide continuous strip of geotextile fabric may be placed centering over the seam and continuously fastened on both sides with the threeinch wide waterproof plastic tape .
as an alternative method of splicing either horizontally or vertically rolls of geocomposite drain material may be joined together by turning back the fabric at the roll edges and interlocking the cuspations approximately two inches .
for overlapping in this manner the fabric is then lapped over and tightly taped beyond the seam with the threeinch wide waterproof tape .
interlocking of the core shall always be in the direction of water flow .
to prevent soil intrusion all exposed edges of the geocomposite drainage core shall be covered by tucking the fourinch fabric lap over and behind the core edge .
alternatively a numinch wide strip of fabric may be utilized in the same manner taping it to the exposed fabric eight inches in from the edge with a continuous strip of threeinch wide waterproof plastic tape and folding the remaining four inches over and behind the core edge .
should the fabric become damaged during installation by tearing or puncturing the damaged section shall be cut out and replaced completely .
if in the judgment of the engineer the damage is not serious enough to warrant removal the damaged area may be repaired by overlaying with a piece of fabric large enough to cover the damaged area and provide a fourinch overlap on all sides and taping it in place with threeinch wide strips of waterproof plastic tape .
structural backfill operations shall be started as soon as possible after placing the geocomposite material but in no case shall the geocomposite material be exposed to sunlight for more than num days after installation .
care shall be taken during the backfill operation not section num num to damage the geotextile surface of the drain and to avoid excessive settlement of the backfill material .
num method of measurement a structural excavation structural excavation will be measured for payment by the cubic yard based on the volume calculated from the pay limits shown on the plans .
no deduction will be made from the pay quantities when the contractor elects not to excavate material which is within the pay limits shown on the plans .
w here it is necessary to excavate to a greater depth than shown on the plans for a footing or to remove unsuitable material in accordance with the requirements of subsection numa such additional excavation which is less than three feet below the elevation shown on the plans will be measured for payment as structural excavation .
no measurement for payment will be made of excavation required because of slides caveins silting or filling due to the lack of support of sides the action of the elements or the carelessness of the contractor .
no measurement for payment will be made for structural excavation when structures are to be supported on piles or drilled shafts in new embankment sections .
b structure backfill structure backfill will be measured by the cubic yard of material based on the volume calculated from the pay limits shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of structural excavation and structure backfill measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price .
the price shall be full compensation for the work complete as hereinbefore specified .
full compensation for hauling placing and compacting surplus structural excavation in embankments or otherwise disposing of the material shall be considered as included in the contract price paid for excavating the material .
payment for additional excavation where it is found necessary to excavate to a depth greater than three feet below the elevation shown on the plans for a footing to treat seams in rock or to remove unsuitable material in accordance with the requirements of subsection section num num numa will be made in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
no measurement or payment will be made for furnishing and installing geocomposite drains the cost being considered as included in the cost of contract items .
num grader ditch num description grader ditch shall consist of a triangular shaped ditch as detailed on the plans excavated and finished with a motor grader or similar type equipment .
num blank num construction requirements grader ditches shall be constructed at the locations designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement grader ditch will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the ditch parallel to the ground surface .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of grader ditch measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num crown ditches num description crown ditches shall consist of excavating and finishing ditches as detailed on the plans to intercept surface water .
num blank num construction requirements crown ditches shall be constructed at the locations designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement crown ditches will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the ditch parallel to the ground surface .
section num num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of crown ditches measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num crown dike num description crown dikes shall consist of placing material to the lines and grades required to intercept the flow of the surface water and to direct it down continuing slopes to an appropriate discharge point .
num blank num construction requirements crown dikes shall be constructed as designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the material shall be placed in layers not exceeding eight inches in depth before compaction and compacted to a density of at least num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement crown dike will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the dike parallel to the ground surface .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of crown dike measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num borrow num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and placing suitable and satisfactory material obtained from sites outside of the rightofway for use in embankments shoulders berms dikes and other similar purposes .
the widening of roadway cuts and ditches and similar work within the rightofway shall be considered as roadway excavation not borrow .
num materials borrow shall be secured from material sources in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the material shall be of a quality section num num suitable for the purpose intended free of vegetation or other unsatisfactory material .
borrow placed within three feet of the finished subgrade elevation shall conform to the requirements of the special provisions .
num construction requirements borrow material shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num method of measurement measurement of borrow for payment will not be required unless adjustments are made in accordance with subsection num .
w hen adjustments are required borrow will be documented for payment as shown in the bidding schedule by either of the two following methods a borrow pit w hen the contract provides for borrow pit the borrow will be measured by the cubic yard in the original space occupied and volume of material removed will be computed in cubic yards by the average end area method .
b borrow in place w hen the contract provides for borrow in place the borrow will be calculated by the cubic yard in the final space occupied and volume of material placed will be computed in cubic yards by the average end area method .
no measurement for payment will be made for borrow material placed prior to completion of roadway excavation drainage excavation or structural excavation when such placement results in unauthorized wasting of roadway drainage or structural excavation materials .
num basis of payment the quantities of borrow as shown in the bidding schedule and adjustments to same as described in subsection num will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the price shall be full compensation for the item complete in place including furnishing hauling placing and compacting the material and applying water .
num embankment requirements num description embankment requirements shall apply to the construction of roadway embankments including the widening of embankment sections with surplus material and the preparation of the areas upon which section num num embankment material is to be placed the construction of dikes and berms the placing and compacting of material where unsuitable material has been removed and the placing and compacting of embankment material in holes pits and other depressions within the roadway area in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num embankment materials a metal pile locations w here metal piles are to be driven through a newly placed embankment the embankment material within ten feet of the pile shall have a value of resistivity not less than num ohmcentimeters or the value shown on the plans whichever is less .
w hen resistivity is not shown on the plans embankment material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive .
tests for ph and resistivity shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
b drilled shaft locations embankment material containing broken concrete rock or other solid material which is larger than num inches in its greatest dimension shall not be placed horizontally within num feet or three shaft diameters whichever is greater of any proposed drilled shaft .
c abutment wingwall and anchor slab locations embankment material placed adjacent to bridge abutments and wingwalls as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer will be structure backfill and shall conform to the requirements specified in subsection num .
the limits of the structure backfill material placed adjacent to abutments and wingwalls shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
fill materials shall not be placed against the back of abutments or wingwalls until the concrete has reached design strength .
w hen anchor slabs are specified the embankment material placed under and adjacent to the anchor slabs shall be of a cohesive nature which will allow a neat line excavation of the anchor slab lugs .
num embankment construction requirements a placement all embankments shall be constructed to a reasonably smooth and uniform surface and shall not vary by more than num feet above or below the grade established and in reasonably close conformity to the lines dimensions and cross sections shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
w hen portland cement concrete pavement or asphaltic concrete pavement are to be placed directly on section num num the subgrade the finished surface shall not vary by more than num feet above or num feet below the established grade .
all embankment material whether from sources within the site or from borrow to be placed within three feet of the finished subgrade elevation shall have a resilient modulus value equal to or greater than the design resilient modulus value for the pavement structure .
embankment construction shall not be started until clearing and grubbing for the embankment area is completed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
w hen embankment material is to be placed over existing bituminous surfacing the surfacing shall be scarified prior to placing embankment material unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
w hen directed by the engineer surplus material or unsuitable material as specified in subsection num shall be disposed of by flattening embankment slopes within the project limits .
in constructing embankments on hillsides or against existing embankments or when constructing embankments one half width at a time the slopes of the original hillside except where solid rock is encountered the existing embankments or the half width of new embankments shall be cut into a minimum of six feet horizontally as the work is brought up in layers in order to minimize the possibility of slippage between the existing materials and the new embankment material .
the material thus cut out shall be recompacted along with the new embankment material .
embankment of earth material shall be placed in uniform horizontal layers not exceeding eight inches in depth before compaction and shall be compacted in accordance with the requirements of these specifications before the next layer is placed .
w hen the embankment material resulting from the required excavations consists predominately of rock fragments of such size that the material can not be placed in an eightinch layer without crushing pulverizing or further breaking down the pieces such material may be placed in the embankment in layers not exceeding in thickness the approximate average size of the larger rocks being excavated but not larger than two feet .
it may be necessary to reduce the size of the excavated material by crushing or otherwise breaking down the material in order to comply with this requirement .
the placing of individual rocks and boulders greater than num inches in diameter will be permitted provided they do not exceed num inches in maximum dimension are carefully distributed to prevent nesting and the interstices are filled with finer material and compacted to form a dense and compact mass .
each layer shall be leveled and smoothed by evenly distributing spalls and finer fragments of rock and earthen material with suitable leveling equipment .
section num num embankment material containing broken concrete rock or other solid materials which are larger than six inches in greatest dimension shall be placed so that no surface of said material is within three feet horizontally of any planned piling structure pole or sign foundations and underground conduit .
no additional compensation will be allowed for the excavation and installation of any planned facility when the additional work is caused by material in excess of six inches within the embankment area .
it may be necessary to reduce the size of the excavated material by crushing or otherwise breaking down the material in order to comply with this requirement .
embankment material placed at bridge abutments as specified in subsection num bnum shall have a plasticity index of not more than num when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
material placed within these limits shall contain no rocks or other solid material greater than num inches in its largest dimension between the subgrade elevation and a depth of seven feet .
embankments deeper than seven feet within these limits shall contain no rocks or other solid material greater than num inches in its largest dimension .
concrete with any dimension greater than two feet shall be removed and wasted or reduced to a maximum of num inches before placing in embankment .
embankment construction shall not take place when the material is frozen or a blanket of snow prevents proper compaction of the embankment material .
w hen embankment slopes are to be seeded the surface shall be finished to a loose evenly roughened condition in accordance with the requirements of subsection numb .
b compaction num earth each layer of the embankment material shall be compacted by rolling tamping or other suitable means to the specified density before the next layer is placed .
effective spreading equipment shall be used on each layer to obtain uniform thickness prior to compacting .
as the compaction of each layer progresses continuous leveling and manipulation of the material shall be required to assure uniform density .
the moisture content of the material shall be adjusted if necessary to obtain the required density .
as far as practicable construction equipment shall be continuously routed uniformly over the entire surface of each layer .
w here embankments five feet or less in height are to be constructed the top six inches of the ground on which the embankment material is to be placed shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density .
section num num w hen embankments are to be constructed at bridge abutments each layer of embankment material placed beneath the approach slab anchor slab if specified and an additional num feet beyond the limits of these slabs shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density including the material specified in subsection numc .
density requirements will not apply to rocky material placed within these limits when in the opinion of the engineer the specified arizona test methods for density are not appropriate .
each layer of roadbed embankment shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density except that when asphaltic concrete is to be placed directly on subgrade the top six inches of the embankment shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density .
embankment material placed in dikes shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density .
all density determinations will be made in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
num rock density requirements will not apply to portions of embankments constructed of materials that can not be tested by approved methods .
rocky materials shall be placed spread and leveled in num inches thick layers when possible over the full width of the embankment with sufficient earth or other fine material so deposited to fill the interstices to produce a dense compact embankment .
the average dimension of the largest rock shall not exceed num inches .
vibratory compactors grid paddlefoot or vibratory rollers or other compacting equipment approved by the engineer shall be used for fills constructed of materials which are predominately rock .
rolling may be omitted on any layer or portion thereof when in the judgment of the engineer it is physically impractical .
in addition to the above rolling each layer shall be further compacted by routing the hauling equipment uniformly over the entire width of the embankment .
additional compaction of rock embankments may be required at the discretion of the engineer .
num blank num basis of payment no measurement for payment will be made for hauling placing shaping applying water to and compacting embankment materials .
section num num section num reshaping and grading existing improvements num description the work under this section shall consist of reconstructing or restoring existing dikes berms and median slopes including furnishing placing and compacting embankment material as required at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num blank num construction requirements reconstructing or restoring shall be the rebuilding of existing improvements at or near the same location to either new lines grades and cross sections or to their original lines grades and cross sections as shown on the project plans .
the reconstruction or restoring of dikes berms and median slopes shall be accomplished in accordance with the same requirements as for new work of equivalent type and character and conform to the applicable requirements of section num .
num method of measurement reshaping and grading existing improvements will be measured on a lump sum basis .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of reshaping and grading existing improvements will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the work as described and specified herein complete in place .
section num grading roadway for pavement num description the work under this section shall consist of removing pavement excavating removal and disposal of excess material furnishing and placing embankment material and all grading shaping and compacting of materials necessary to construct the subgrade to the lines and grades shown in the plans and as depicted by the new pavement section specified and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num blank section num num num construction requirements num general all existing pavement shall be removed as designated on the project plans .
w here new asphaltic concrete is to match existing bituminous surfaces the edges of the existing bituminous surfaces abutting the new paving shall be either saw cut or wheel cut to a minimum depth of num inches to form a neat true line with straight vertical edges free from irregularities .
should the contractor elect to wheel cut the edges the cutter wheel shall be adequate for the work in the opinion of the engineer to produce the desired result .
if at the time of removing any portion of the existing roadway inplace materials from which the new subgrade is to be constructed contain an excess of moisture so that the required compaction can not be obtained with reasonable and customary aeration and manipulation the engineer will determine the cause of such condition and will determine whether the material shall be further aerated or removed and replaced .
if the cause of such condition is determined to have been unforeseeable and beyond the control of and without fault or negligence of the contractor such further work shall be done as directed and will be paid for as extra work in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
excess moisture caused by irrigation water storm drainage weather breakage of mains or other similar cause will be considered as within the responsibility of the contractor .
num excavation excavation shall conform with the requirements of subsection num .
num embankment the placement and compaction of embankment shall conform with the requirements of subsection num .
num compacting and finishing the top six inches of the subgrade shall be compacted to a density not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer except that when asphaltic concrete or portland cement concrete is to be placed directly on subgrade the required density shall be num percent .
the surface of the subgrade shall be finished to a reasonably smooth and uniform surface and in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades dimensions and cross section shown on the project plans or section num num established by the engineer .
the finished surface of the subgrade shall not vary by more than num feet above or below the grade established by the engineer except when portland cement concrete pavement or asphaltic concrete pavement are to be placed directly on the subgrade the finished surface shall not vary by more than num feet above or num feet below the established grade .
num method of measurement measurement of grading roadway for pavement will be made by the square yard of the area prepared and subsequently covered with a subbase base asphaltic concrete or portland cement concrete however when raised median islands are constructed the area occupied by these islands will be included in the area measured for payment .
w here the new pavement is not bounded by curb and gutter and additional shoulder work is necessary to construct the typical section shown in the project plans such work shall be considered as incidental and the cost will be considered as included in the cost of the contract bid item grading roadway for pavement .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of grading roadway for pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the work complete as specified herein and as shown on the project plans .
section num furnish water supply num description the work under this section shall consist of either developing or obtaining an adequate water supply and furnishing all water required for the work .
num blank num construction requirements material may be watered either at the source or on the roadway at the option of the contractor .
if the contractor elects to apply water to materials at the source and these materials will subsequently be measured and paid for on the basis of weight the contractor shall give the engineer ample notice of its intentions .
prior to the application of water the contractor shall furnish such equipment and labor as may be necessary to enable the engineer to obtain samples for determining the inplace moisture in the materials .
the difference in weight between the average inplace moisture content of the material prior to prewetting and the average section num num moisture content of the material at the time of weighing will be deducted from the total weight of the material .
num method of measurement the work will be measured as a single complete lump sum item .
num basis of payment payment for this work will be made at the contract lump sum price .
no adjustment of compensation to the contract lump sum price for furnish w ater supply will be made for any increase or decrease in the quantity of water required regardless of the reason for such increase or decrease .
the cost of providing a water distribution system the cost of delivering the water and the cost of applying the water to aid the compaction of the materials will not be paid for directly but will be considered as included in the prices paid for the various contract items requiring water .
w hen the bidding schedule does not contain a contract pay item for furnish water supply full compensation for either developing or obtaining an adequate water supply and furnishing all water required for the work shall be considered as included in the prices paid for the various contract items of work requiring the use of water .
section num blank section num separation geotextile fabric num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and placing a permeable separation geotextile fabric .
the fabric shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num geotextile fabric the separation geotextile fabric shall be supplied in accordance with and conform to the material requirements of subsections num and num .
special attention shall be given to the required survivability of the fabric material which will be as called out in the special provisions or as shown on the plans .
num fabric packaging handling and storage section num num the identification packaging handling and storage of the geotextile fabric shall be in accordance with astm d num .
fabric rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping for protection against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient to determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacture shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
rolls will be stored on the site or at another identified storage location in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof light colored opaque cover .
at no time shall the fabric be exposed to sunlight for a period exceeding num days .
num construction requirements num weather limitations separation geotextile fabric shall not be placed when weather conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable to allow placement or installation .
this will normally be at times of wet or snowy conditions heavy rainfall extreme cold or frost conditions or extreme heat .
num equipment mechanical or manual laydown equipment shall be capable of handling full rolls of fabric and laying the fabric smoothly without wrinkles or folds .
the equipment shall be in accordance with the fabric manufacturers recommendations or as approved by the engineer .
num surface preparation the surface upon which the separation fabric will be placed shall be compacted and finished according to the requirements of these specifications .
num fabric placement the separation geotextile fabric shall be unrolled on the finished surface and laid smooth without wrinkles .
the placement of fabric by dragging across the finished surface will not be allowed .
the geotextile fabric shall be overlapped a minimum num inches for longitudinal and transverse joints .
the center of a longitudinal overlapped joint shall be located in the same manner as a longitudinal pavement joint according to subsection num .
transverse overlaps shall be in the direction of aggregate placement .
num placement and compaction of aggregate section num num aggregate materials shall be placed by back dumping the aggregate in a manner which does not damage the fabric and then spreading the aggregate material onto the geotextile fabric in a constant forward direction .
traffic or construction equipment shall not be permitted directly on the geotextile unless approved by the engineer for emergency purposes .
pins or piles of aggregate can be used to hold the geotextile in place while being covered .
overstressing the subgrade soil shall be avoided by utilizing equipment in spreading and dumping that exerts only moderate pressures on the soil .
if ruts of two inches or greater occur in the aggregate the contractor shall use lighter equipment which transmits less ground pressure .
any ruts which develop during spreading or compacting aggregate shall be filled with additional aggregate rather than bladed from adjacent areas so that the final design aggregate thickness is maintained .
construction equipment shall not be allowed to turn or stop suddenly on the aggregate placed over the geotextile fabric .
aggregate base shall be compacted as specified in subsection num .
aggregate base material shall not be mixed or processed on the separation geotextile fabric .
the aggregate base material shall be premixed at the stockpile area or at another location in a manner approved by the engineer .
aggregate base materials will be sampled for acceptance after premixing and prior to placement on the separation fabric .
contamination and segregation of aggregate base materials prior to or during placement shall be minimized .
any damage to the fabric occurring during placement of the aggregate must be repaired immediately .
the aggregate shall be removed from the damaged area to allow placement of a fabric patch extending three feet on all sides beyond the damaged area followed by replacement of the aggregate .
num method of measurement separation geotextile fabric will be measured by the square yard inplace .
measurement will be to the nearest square yard .
no allowance will be made for material in laps .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of separation geotextile fabric measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials and equipment and performing all operations in connection with placing the separation geotextile fabric as shown on the project plans .
no payment will be made for separation geotextile fabric rejected or patches which are necessary due to either contamination or damage due to either the fault or negligence of the contractor .
section num num section num furnish water num description except as specified below the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all water required for construction within the project limits .
this work shall include securing and transporting water to the project site .
all costs and all labor equipment and materials required to secure transport and furnish water to the project limits including but not limited to hauling pumping and piping water to the project site from canals rivers lakes and wells shall be considered as included in the work .
the work under this section shall also include furnishing all water as specified above for the control of dust as considered necessary for public safety and convenience of the traveling public for the reduction of the dust nuisance to adjacent property for the allaying of dust in noncommercial crusher and pit operations and on roads used to haul material and for other purposes as directed by the engineer .
w hen included in the contract or approved by the engineer this item shall also include furnishing water to the project site for those pre wetting areas specified in the special provisions or as approved by the engineer .
w ater used for materials prepared in an onsite mixing or processing plant such as concrete lean concrete base or soil cement will not be included in this work .
w ater used in landscape establishment as specified in section num will not be included in this work .
num blank num construction requirements the use of pressure pumps and spray bars on all sprinkling equipment used on the project will be required .
the use of gravity flow spray bars and splash plates will not be permitted for dust control operations .
w ater for use in compaction or for prewetting shall be applied in accordance with section num and the special provisions .
w ater applied for dust control shall be as approved or directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide appropriate equipment for effective control of dust .
w ater conservation by using alternative dust control treatments is encouraged .
the contractor may propose alternative dust suppressants for subgrades embankments and other areas within the project for haul roads or for controlling dust at equipment yard sites .
w hen the use of chemical dust suppressants is proposed in lieu of water the section num num contractors submittal shall be in accordance with the value engineering process as specified in subsection num .
num method of measurement the work will be measured by the unit of num u.s. gallons of water mgal .
measurement will be made by means of sealed and certified flowmeters .
for small quantities or where a sealed flowmeter is not feasible measurements can be made in tanks or tank trucks of certified capacity or by other means if approved by the engineer .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of water used in construction and for control of dust and if required for prewetting secured and transported to the project site and measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price which price shall included all costs including all labor equipment and materials necessary for furnishing water as required .
no payment will be made for the labor equipment and materials required for furnishing water from sources located within the project limits .
the contract unit price for furnish w ater will not include payment for application or distribution of the water within the project limits or for water trucks hoses fittings sprinklers meters and any other equipment required to distribute and apply the water or for the labor involved .
the cost for application and distribution of water required for construction shall be considered as included in other related contract items such as earthwork subgrades base courses and backfill materials as appropriate .
the costs for distributing and applying water for prewetting if required including all fittings and equipment and the labor involved will be considered as included in the appropriate contract items for earthwork .
the cost for distributing and applying water for dust control including the water truck and all fittings and equipment and the labor involved will be considered as included in other contract items .
except for mandatory departmentfurnished sources and roads used to haul materials from mandatory departmentfurnished sources no measurement or payment will be made for water or other suppressants used for prevention of dust from any material sources pit or crusher operations located outside of the project limits whether contractor section num num furnished sources commercial sources or nonmandatory department furnished sources or for related haul roads the cost being considered as included in other contract items .
except for mandatory departmentfurnished sources no measurement or payment will be made for water used for prewetting off the project site .
no adjustment to the bid price for furnishing water as specified in subsection num will be allowed as a result of a value engineering proposal for alternative dust suppressants .
payment for chemical dust suppressants when approved shall be in accordance with subsection num .
other alternative dust suppressants when approved by the engineer will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
section num num section num lime treated subgrade num description the work under this section shall consist of preparing roadbed for lime treatment furnishing and applying lime mixing lime and water with inplace material and spreading compacting and curing the mixture to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num lime lime shall be either a commercial dry hydrated lime or a commercial granular or pelletized quicklime conforming to the requirements of astm c num .
w hen sampled on delivery the sample of lime shall conform to the following gradations percent passing sieve size hydrated lime quicklime num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num test method astm c num astm c num dry sieving only hydrated lime shall contain not less than num percent calcium hydroxide caoh num as determined by astm c num .
quicklime shall contain not less than num percent total available calcium oxide and magnesium oxide cao mgo and not less than num percent total available calcium oxide cao as determined by astm c num .
lime from more than one source or more than one type may be used on the same project but the different limes shall not be mixed .
the lime shall be protected from exposure to moisture until used and shall be sufficiently dry to flow freely when handled .
the type of lime will be specified in the special provisions .
num water w ater used for mixing shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
section num num num bituminous material for curing seal bituminous material for curing seal shall be emulsified asphalt grade ssnum conforming to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements num preparation of roadbed inplace material to be lime treated shall be scarified and thoroughly broken up to the full roadway width .
the material to be treated shall contain no rocks larger than num inches in any dimension .
the depth to be scarified shall be such that when the lime water and inplace material is mixed and compacted the treated subgrade will be in close conformity to the specified thickness .
if the mixing machine to be used requires that the material be windrowed the windrows shall be of uniform cross section and limited to such size that all the material can be passed through the mixer at each operation .
otherwise the material shall be shaped to the required line grade and cross section before application of lime and mixing .
num application of lime lime shall be added to the material to be treated at a rate not varying more than num percent from the rate specified in the special provisions .
the equipment used to distribute the lime shall be approved by the engineer and it shall be capable of uniformly distributing the required amount of lime for the full width of the pass .
lime or lime treated material shall not be spread or mixed when the soil is frozen when the air temperature is less than num degrees f in the shade or when conditions indicate that the temperature may fall below num degrees f within num hours .
the area upon which lime may be spread ahead of the mixing operation shall be limited to that which the contractor may thoroughly mix by the end of the working day .
no traffic other than water trucks and the mixing equipment shall be allowed to pass over the spread lime until after completion of mixing .
num mixing mixing shall be accomplished by a traveling pugmill or a single or multiple transverse shaft mixer and shall be approved by the engineer .
it shall be equipped with a system capable of introducing water at a controlled rate during mixing in order to produce a completed mixture with a uniform moisture content within two percentage points of the optimum moisture content of the material being treated .
the optimum moisture content will be determined in accordance with the section num num requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
mixing or remixing operations shall continue until the material is uniformly mixed free of streaks or pockets of lime .
the final mixture shall not contain more than five percent of untreated dirt clods larger than one inch in diameter .
after the initial mixing operation and before the lime treated material is compacted a curing period of num to num hours will be required .
if quicklime is used for subgrade treatment sufficient water shall be added prior to or during initial mixing to slake all of the quicklime .
num compaction and finishing the treated mixture shall be spread and compacted to the required width grade and cross section .
the thickness of a compacted layer shall not exceed eight inches .
w here the required thickness is more than eight inches the mixture shall be spread and compacted in two or more approximately equal lifts .
the moisture content shall be maintained to achieve compaction .
unless specified otherwise the lime treated material shall be compacted to a density of at least num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
initial compaction shall be by means of sheepsfoot or grid rollers .
final compaction shall be by means of steel wheel or pneumatic tired rollers .
areas inaccessible to rollers shall be compacted to the required density by other means satisfactory to the engineer .
the lime treated subgrade shall be finished to a reasonably smooth and uniform surface and in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades dimensions and cross sections shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
the treated subgrade shall not vary by more than num feet above or below the grade established by the engineer .
damage to the lime treated subgrade which occurs as a result of the contractors construction activities shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department when so directed by the engineer .
num curing the surface of each compacted layer of lime treated material shall be kept moist until covered by a subsequent layer of lime treated material or until a bituminous curing seal is applied .
the bituminous curing seal section num num shall be applied uniformly at an approximate rate of num gallons per square yard of surface the exact rate to be determined by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the curing seal shall be applied as soon as possible after the completion of final compaction and before the temperature falls below num degrees f. no equipment or traffic will be permitted on lime treated subgrade for three days after curing seal is applied unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
subsequent subbase base or pavement course shall be placed within num days after the curing seal is applied .
any damage to the curing seal or lime treated subgrade shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department and as directed by the engineer until a subsequent subbase base or pavement course is placed over the lime treated subgrade .
num safety program the contractor shall provide to the engineer for review a detailed safety program for the protection of the workers and public covering precautions to be exercised and emergency treatment to be available on the project site .
the program shall include protective equipment for eye mouth nose and skin protection and a first aid kit with an eyeball wash. said protective equipment shall be available on the project site during spreading and mixing operations .
this program shall be provided and agreed upon before the lime spreading begins .
the contractor shall actively enforce the program for the protection of its work force and others in the construction area .
adequate care must be taken to avoid quicklime contact during spreading and slaking operations .
num method of measurement hydrated lime or quicklime will be measured by the ton in accordance with the requirements of section num .
subgrade treatment will be measured by the square yard of subgrade treated .
the area will be determined from horizontal measurements of the surface area treated excluding any side slopes of the treated section .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of lime and subgrade treatment measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit prices per ton for hydrated lime or quicklime and per square yard for subgrade treatment complete in place .
payment for lime will include furnishing and application of lime .
section num num payment for lime treated subgrade will also include furnishing and application of curing seal .
section num cement treated subgrade num description the work under this section shall consist of preparing the roadbed for cement treatment furnishing and applying cement mixing cement and water with inplace material and spreading compacting and curing the mixture to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num inplace material inplace material on the roadbed shall be the native material or embankment .
num hydraulic cement and water hydraulic cement and water shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num bituminous material for curing seal bituminous material for curing seal shall be emulsified asphalt grade ssnum conforming to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements num preparation of roadbed inplace material which is to be cement treated shall be scarified and thoroughly broken up over the full roadway width .
the material to be treated shall contain no rocks larger than num inches in any dimension .
the depth to be scarified shall be such that when the cement water and inplace material is mixed and compacted the treated subgrade will be in reasonably close conformity to the specified thickness .
if the mixing operation requires that the material be windrowed the windrows shall be of uniform cross section and limited to a size that will allow all the material to pass through the mixer in each operation .
otherwise the material shall be shaped to the required line grade and cross section before application of cement and mixing .
section num num num application of cement cement shall be added to the material to be treated at the rate specified in the special provisions .
the actual application rate shall not vary by more than num percent from the rate specified .
the equipment used to distribute the cement shall be as approved by the engineer and it shall be capable of uniformly distributing the required amount of cement for the full width of the pass .
cement or cement treated material shall not be spread or mixed when the soil is frozen when the air temperature is less than num degrees f in the shade or when conditions indicate that the temperature may fall below num degrees f within num hours .
the area upon which cement may be spread shall be limited to that which the contractor can thoroughly mix and compact by the end of onehalf of a work shift .
no traffic other than water trucks and mixing equipment shall be allowed to pass over the spread cement until after completion of mixing .
num mixing mixing shall be accomplished with a traveling pugmill or a single or multiple transverse shaft mixer as approved by the engineer .
mixers shall be equipped with a system capable of introducing water at a controlled rate during mixing and be capable of producing a completed mixture with a uniform moisture content .
the moisture content of the completed mixture shall be within two percentage points of the optimum moisture content of the material being treated as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
the inplace material and cement shall be mixed such that cement balls are prevented from forming when water is added .
mixing shall be continued until the mixture is uniform and at the required moisture content .
num compaction and finishing the thickness of a compacted layer shall not exceed eight inches .
the moisture content shall be maintained to achieve compaction .
unless specified otherwise the cement treated material shall be compacted to a density of at least num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
section num num initial compaction shall be accomplished with sheepsfoot or grid rollers .
final compaction shall be accomplished with steelwheel or pneumatictired rollers .
areas inaccessible to rollers shall be compacted to the required density as approved by the engineer .
the cement treated subgrade shall be finished to a reasonably smooth and uniform surface and in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades dimensions and cross sections shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
the surface of the treated subgrade shall not vary by more than num feet above or below the grade established by the engineer .
damage to cement treated subgrade which occurs as a result of the contractors construction activities shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department when so directed by the engineer .
num operation time requirement not more than two hours shall elapse between the time water is added to the subgrade and cement and the time of completion of initial compaction prior to trimming .
not more than num hours shall elapse between the time water is added to the subgrade and cement and the time of completion of final compaction after trimming unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num curing the surface of cement treated subgrade shall be kept moist until a curing seal is applied .
bituminous curing seal shall be applied uniformly at the rate of num gallons per square yard of surface .
the curing seal shall be applied on the same day that final compaction is performed and as soon after the final compaction as is practicable .
any damage to the curing seal or the cement treated subgrade shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department and as directed by the engineer .
after the curing seal has been applied the cement treated subgrade shall be kept free of heavy equipment and traffic for a period of at least three days .
light construction traffic will be allowed after the curing seal has been placed .
subsequent subbase base or pavement course shall be placed within num days after the curing seal is applied .
any damage to the curing seal or cement treated subgrade shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department and as directed by the engineer until a subsequent subbase base or pavement course is placed over the cement treated subgrade .
w hen the project plans call for four inches or more of aggregate base over the cement treated subgrade the aggregate base may be used as section num num the curing seal in lieu of a bituminous curing seal .
the aggregate base shall be kept moist for num hours .
the section may be opened to traffic immediately after placement and compaction of the aggregate base .
num method of measurement cement for cement treated subgrade will be measured by the ton .
cement treated subgrade will be measured by the square yard of subgrade treated .
the area will be determined from horizontal measurements of the surface area treated excluding any side slopes of the treated section .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of cement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton of cement furnished and applied .
the accepted quantity of cement treated subgrade measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard of subgrade treatment complete in place including furnishing and applying a bituminous curing seal when required .
section num aggregate subbases and aggregate bases num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing placing and compacting aggregate subbases and aggregate bases in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
aggregate subbases and aggregate bases are designated as class num through class num .
the class of aggregate subbase and aggregate base will be shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions .
num materials aggregate for the various classes of aggregate subbases and aggregate bases shall consist of stone gravel or other approved inert material of similar characteristics and shall be clean and free from vegetable matter and other deleterious substances .
aggregate subbases and aggregate bases shall conform to the requirements shown in the following table for the class specified section num num table num class of percent passing sieve inch or no .
pi aggre gate num num num num num num num max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes num the percentage by weight passing each sieve will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
num the pi plasticity index will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
num classes num num and num are bases classes num num and num are subbases .
num the requirements for class num and for class num will be specified in the special provisions .
num for class num through class num aggregate the amount of fractured coarse aggregate particles shall be at least num percent when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
num resistance to abrasion for class num through class num aggregate will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num and shall meet the following requirements maximum loss of num percent at num revolutions maximum loss of num percent at num revolutions w hen production of class num through class num aggregate requires composite mixing of materials from more than one source to meet the gradation requirements of table num the material from each source shall meet the abrasion requirements specified in herein .
num construction requirements num placement aggregate subbases and aggregate bases shall have water added to them and shall be mixed and processed to produce a uniform blend of material before final placement .
after processing the material shall be section num num placed and spread on the prepared subgrade subbase or base in a uniform layer or layers not exceeding six inches in compacted depth unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer .
the method of dumping or spreading shall be determined by the contractor .
the spread material shall be free of segregation .
num compaction each layer of aggregate subbase and aggregate base shall be compacted to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
num finishing the final layer of subbase or base shall be finished with equipment capable of shaping and grading the finish surface within the tolerances specified herein .
the finished surface of aggregate subbase or aggregate base shall not vary from the grades established by the engineer by more than num feet .
the compacted layers of aggregate subbase and aggregate base shall be maintained in a condition satisfactory to receive any subsequent subbase base or surfacing material or traffic when so required .
areas not within the allowable tolerance shall be corrected by scarifying placing additional material remixing reshaping and recompacting to the specified density and surface tolerance .
num method of measurement the quantity of aggregate subbase and aggregate base will be calculated by the cubic yard in place using plan dimensions .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of aggregate subbase and aggregate base measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the class or classes involved complete in place .
section num cement treated base num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and mixing aggregate cement and water and spreading compacting and curing section num num the mixture in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num aggregate aggregate shall conform to the requirements of subsection num for class num aggregate unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
num hydraulic cement and water hydraulic cement and water shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num bituminous material for curing seal bituminous material for curing seal shall be emulsified asphalt grade ssnum conforming to the requirements of section num .
num mix design the contractor shall determine the mix proportions and shall furnish cement treated base conforming to the requirements specified herein .
the jobmix design with the supporting test results shall be submitted to the engineer and the engineers approval shall be obtained prior to incorporating any of the material into the work .
the brand of cement and the location of the aggregate source shall be included with the job mix design data .
a new mix design shall be submitted for approval any time the contractor requests a change in materials or proportioning of the materials from that given in the approved mix designs .
unless otherwise specified cement treated base shall contain no less than num pounds of hydraulic cement per cubic yard and it shall attain a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at seven days .
num construction requirements num preparation of subgrade cement treated base shall be placed on a prepared subgrade which shall have been constructed in accordance with the surface finish and grade tolerance requirements specified for the subgrade material involved .
the subgrade shall be free of loose or extraneous material and maintained in an acceptable condition throughout the treatment operation .
any soft or yielding areas of the subgrade shall be corrected prior to placement of cement treated base .
section num num num mixing a general requirements aggregate and cement for cement treated base shall be proportioned and mixed in a central mixing plant unless otherwise specified .
the plant shall be either the batchmixing type using revolving blade or rotary drum mixers or the continuous mixing type .
the aggregate and cement may be proportioned either by weight or by volume .
w ater shall be proportioned by weight or volume and there shall be means by which the engineer may readily verify the amount of water required per batch or the rate of water flow required for continuous mixing .
the time of the addition of water or the points at which it is introduced into the mixer shall be as approved by the engineer .
the moisture content of the completed mixture shall be uniform and within two percentage points of the optimum at the point of delivery to the work .
the optimum moisture content will be determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
the cement shall be added in such a manner that it is uniformly distributed throughout the aggregate during the mixing operation .
there shall be safe convenient facilities for sampling the cement in the supply line to the weigh hopper or pugmill .
the charge in the batch mixer or the rate of feed to the continuous mixer shall not exceed that which will permit complete mixing of all of the mix material .
b batch mixing the mixer shall be equipped with a sufficient number of paddles of a type and arrangement which will produce a uniformly mixed batch .
the mixer shall be equipped with an accurate timing device which will indicate by a definite audible or visual signal the expiration of the mixing period .
the time of mixing a batch shall begin after all ingredients are in the mixer and shall end when the mixer is half emptied .
mixing shall continue until a homogeneous mixture of uniformly distributed and properly coated aggregate of unchanging appearance is produced .
the time of the mixing shall not be less than num seconds .
the batchmixing plant shall be equipped with sampling facilities as approved by the engineer .
the sampling facilities shall allow for the easy and safe collection of representative samples of aggregate and cement treated base mixture .
section num num c continuous mixing aggregate shall be drawn from the storage facility by a feeder or feeders which will continuously supply the correct amount of aggregate in proportion to the cement .
a control system shall be provided that will automatically close down the plant when the material in any storage facility approaches the strikeoff capacity of the feed gate .
the plant will not be permitted to operate unless this automatic control system is in good working condition .
the feeder for the aggregate shall be mechanically or electrically driven .
continuous mix plants shall be equipped with sampling facilities approved by the engineer .
the sampling facilities shall allow for the easy and safe collection of representative samples of aggregate and cement treated base mixture .
the cement feeder and the aggregate feeders shall be equipped with devices by which the rate of feed can be accurately determined while the plant is in full operation .
d spreading mixed material shall be transported from the plant to the roadway in approved vehicles and spread on a moistened subgrade in a uniform layer for the full width of the base under construction .
mixed material may be placed in partial widths as approved by the engineer .
spreading shall be accomplished with approved spreader boxes or finishing machines or motor graders .
if the engineer approves the use of one spreader operating alternately on two or more lanes not more than num minutes shall elapse between the time of placing the material in adjacent lanes at any location .
the material shall be spread full depth in one pass unless otherwise specified .
cement treated base shall not be mixed or placed while the air temperature is below num degrees f in the shade or when conditions indicate that the temperature may fall below num degrees f within num hours .
cement treated base shall not be placed on frozen subgrade or mixed when the aggregate is frozen .
num compacting and finishing initial compaction shall begin immediately after spreading .
successive passes of compacting equipment shall overlap the previous adjacent pass by at least num percent of its width .
following initial compaction and before final compaction the treated material shall be trimmed by blading with a motor grader or a planing machine to obtain surface in section num num reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and cross sections established or shown on the project plans .
extreme care shall be exercised by the contractor during the trimming operation so that no more material than is necessary is disturbed and so that the trimming operation can be completed as quickly as possible .
trimmed material shall be wasted if so directed .
compaction shall proceed without interruption except as stated above to achieve at least num percent of maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
the finished surface of cement treated base shall be uniform and shall not deviate at any point more than num feet from the bottom of a numfoot straightedge laid in any direction .
the surface of the finished cement treated base shall not vary more than num feet.above or below the grade established by the engineer .
the surface shall be kept moist at all times until the curing seal is applied .
num operation time requirement not more than two hours shall elapse between the time water is added to the aggregate and cement and the time of completion of initial compaction prior to trimming .
not more than num hours shall elapse between the time water is added to the aggregate and cement and the time of completion of final compaction .
num construction joints at the end of each days work or when cement treated base operations are delayed or stopped for more than two hours a construction joint shall be made in thoroughly compacted material .
the joint shall be normal to the center line of the roadbed and have a vertical face .
additional mixture shall not be placed until the construction joint has been approved by the engineer .
w hen partialwidth construction of cement treated base is allowed and when the material has been finally compacted more than one hour a longitudinal joint shall be constructed by cutting back into the previously placed material to a point where it meets the proper line and grade and trimmed to a true vertical face which is free of any loose or shattered material .
trimmed material shall be disposed of .
the face of transverse and longitudinal construction joints shall be moistened prior to placement of the adjacent base material .
num curing seal section num num after final compaction the cement treated base shall be covered with a bituminous curing seal applied uniformly to the surface at an approximate rate of num gallons per square yard .
the curing seal shall be applied on the same day that final compaction is performed and as soon after the compaction as is practicable .
after the curing seal has been applied the cement treated base shall be kept free of traffic for a period of at least three days .
only light construction traffic will be allowed from the fourth through the seventh day after the curing seal has been placed .
subsequent subbase base or pavement course shall be placed within num days after the curing seal is applied .
any damage to the curing seal or the cement treated base shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at its expense and as directed by the engineer .
w hen the project plans call for four or more inches of aggregate base over the cement treated base the aggregate base may be used as the curing seal in lieu of a bituminous curing seal .
the aggregate base shall be kept moist for num hours after placement .
the section may be opened to traffic immediately after placement and compaction of the aggregate base .
num cement treated base strength tests samples for strength tests will be taken at random for each lot of production .
a lot shall be considered to be the production during one shift .
each lot shall be represented by five random samples each sampled and tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
the mean value of the sample strengths will be reported to the nearest pound per square inch .
num method of measurement cement treated base will be measured by the ton .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of cement treated base measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the cement treated base mixture complete in place including bituminous curing seal when required except that an adjustment will be made to the unit price paid for any lot represented by the mean value of the sevenday compressive strengths as shown in table num .
section num num table num mean compressive strength unit price adjustment pounds per square inch dollars per ton num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num less than num num material represented by lots attaining sevenday compressive strengths with a mean value less than num pounds per square inch will be evaluated as to acceptance .
the engineer will determine if the material can be left in place .
cementtreated base allowed to remain in place will be subject to the unit price adjustment .
cementtreated base not allowed to remain in place shall be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
section num lean concrete base num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing a lean concrete base in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
lean concrete base shall consist of a mixture of aggregate hydraulic cement water and admixtures .
num materials num hydraulic cement and water hydraulic cement and water shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num aggregate at the option of the contractor the aggregate for lean concrete base shall be either class num aggregate base material conforming to the requirements of subsection num or a combination of fine and coarse aggregate for portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
w hen class num aggregate base material is used it shall have a minimum sand equivalent value of not less than num when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num and the plasticity index requirements presented in subsection num will not apply .
w hen a combination of fine and coarse aggregate is used the coarse aggregate shall be standard size designation no .
num conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
fine aggregate shall have a minimum section num num sand equivalent of not less than num when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
num admixtures admixtures shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num curing compound curing compound shall be type num class a liquid membraneforming compound conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
num construction requirements num preparation of subgrade subbase or base lean concrete base shall be placed on a prepared subgrade subbase or base which shall have been constructed in accordance with the surface finish and grade tolerance requirements specified for the material involved .
the subgrade subbase or base shall be free of loose or extraneous material kept uniformly moist immediately prior to placement of lean concrete base and maintained in an acceptable condition throughout the placement operation .
any soft or yielding area of the subgrade shall be corrected prior to placement of lean concrete base .
num forming lean concrete base shall be constructed with slipform equipment .
forming shall conform to the requirements of subsections numa numb and numc .
num proportioning a mix design the contractor shall determine the mix proportions and shall furnish lean concrete base which shall contain not less than num pounds of hydraulic cement per cubic yard however the amount of cement in the mix may be reduced when fly ash is added as hereinafter specified .
the lean concrete baseshall attain a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at seven days .
the contractor shall submit a complete solidvolume mix design to the engineer for review prior to incorporating the proposed mix into the work .
mix designs submitted for review shall include the weights and volumes of all ingredients the brand type and source of hydraulic cement and admixtures the aggregate base or the coarse aggregate size number designation the source of aggregate the specific gravities of all ingredients and a code number to identify the mix design .
the section num num contractor may submit mix designs from previous or concurrent projects .
the contractor shall make no changes in the mix designs or code numbers without the review of the engineer .
a new mix design shall be submitted for the engineers review any time the contractor proposes a change in materials or material proportions .
the contractor shall prepare trial batches of lean concrete base for each mix design .
the number of trial batches required will be established by the engineer and the engineer may waive the requirements for trial batches at any time .
the contractor shall prepare trial batches using materials mixing equipment procedures and batch sizes which are the same as those to be used in the work .
the engineer will take test samples from the trial batches .
w hen test results indicate the proposed mix will not meet the specified compressive strength requirements the contractor shall submit a new mix design for review .
in no case will the engineers review or test of a mix design relieve the contractor of the responsibility to provide lean concrete base with the specified properties or material contents .
b cement water and aggregates cement water and aggregate shall be proportioned in accordance with the requirements of subsections numa b and c. c admixtures admixtures shall be proportioned in accordance with the requirements of subsection numd .
airentraining admixtures will be required for lean concrete base placed at elevations above num feet .
the amount of entrained air in the lean concrete mixture shall not be less than four percent nor more than seven percent by volume .
at elevations below num feet airentraining admixtures may be used at the option of the contractor however the amount of entrained air in the lean concrete mixture shall not exceed seven percent by volume .
an approved water reducing admixture shall be used .
a fly ash admixture may be used at the option of the contractor only when portland cement is used .
a maximum of num percent by weight of the portland cement may be replaced with fly ash .
a minimum of num pounds of fly ash shall replace each pound of portland cement .
num mixing section num num mixing shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num consistency the contractor shall furnish lean concrete base having a slump of num inches or less .
lean concrete base that fails to conform to this consistency requirement will be rejected .
tests for consistency will be performed in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
num weather limitations lean concrete base shall be constructed in accordance with the weather limitations of subsection num .
num joints there shall be no longitudinal or transverse weakened plane joints in lean concrete base .
transverse construction joints shall be constructed normal to center line of the pavement at the end of each days production and during other work interruptions as directed by the engineer .
w hen portland cement concrete pavement is to be placed over lean concrete base longitudinal construction joints in the lean concrete base shall be at least two feet from any subsequent longitudinal joint in the portland cement concrete pavement .
num placing and finishing lean concrete base shall be placed and finished in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection num except that subsection numf surface texturing is not applicable .
lean concrete base may be placed either for the full width in a single pass or in two or more passes provided that each pass is a minimum of num feet wide wherever possible .
longitudinal construction joints between passes shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the surface of the lean concrete base shall be finished to a smooth floated surface and the surface plane shall not vary by more than num inch in any direction when measured with a numfoot straightedge nor vary by more than num inch across any construction joint .
num curing curing of lean concrete base shall begin immediately after surface finishing operations .
liquid membraneforming compound shall be applied to the surface and sides of the lean concrete base at a rate of not less than one gallon per num square feet .
section num num the curing compound container shall be equipped with a calibrated sight glass for verification of quantities used .
num production lot the compressive strength and thickness of lean concrete base will be evaluated for each lot of production .
a lot shall consist of num square yards or fraction thereof of continuously placed lean concrete base on a daily basis .
num compressive strength the minimum average compressive strength of lean concrete base shall be num pounds per square inch for each lot at seven days .
each lot shall be represented by four random samples .
a strength test will consist of the average strength of two cylinders prepared with material taken from a single load of lean concrete base .
if any cylinder should show obvious evidence of improper sampling molding or testing it will be discarded and the strength test will consist of the strength of the remaining cylinder .
all test cylinders will be prepared in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
testing for compressive strength will be performed in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the mean value of the four compressive strength tests will be reported to the nearest pound per square inch .
the unit price paid for the lean concrete base in that lot will be adjusted in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
num opening to traffic no traffic or equipment will be permitted on lean concrete base until the material has attained the specified sevenday compressive strength .
however when lean concrete base is to be placed adjacent to previously constructed lean concrete base the paver and work bridges required for completing the new width will be permitted on the lean concrete base num hours after placement .
the contractor shall schedule its operations and route its equipment such that the base is subjected to minimal traffic .
w hen it is necessary for construction traffic to travel on lean concrete base which has attained the specified compressive strength the traffic shall comply with all legal load restrictions applicable to traffic on state highways .
no overloaded vehicles will be permitted to travel on the lean concrete base under any circumstances .
damage to the curing compound or to the lean concrete base which occurs as a result of the contractors construction activities shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department when so directed by the engineer .
num lean concrete base thickness section num num lean concrete base shall be constructed to the specified thickness .
tolerances allowed for base and subgrade construction and other provisions of the specifications which may affect thickness shall not be construed to modify the lean concrete base thickness requirements .
to determine thickness acceptability the contractor shall drill fourinch minimum diameter cores at the locations specified by the engineer .
the engineer will determine average core thickness in accordance with the provisions of aashto t num except that the measurements will be made to the nearest thousandth of an inch and the average of the measurements will be reported to the nearest hundredth of an inch .
w hen calculating average core thicknesses cores which exceed the specified thickness by more than num inches will be considered to have the specified thickness plus num inches .
the engineer may make field thickness measurements in lieu of measurements in accordance with aashto t num when an initial core taken from any unit exceeds the specified thickness however when the initial core is less than the specified thickness or when there is any question as to the unit thickness thicknesses will be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
to determine the acceptability of each lot of lean concrete base the following procedures will be followed an initial core shall be drilled in each lot and if the thickness of the core is not deficient by more than num inches the thickness of the lean concrete base in that lot will be considered acceptable .
if the thickness of the initial core is deficient by more than num inches but less than or equal to num inches two additional cores shall be drilled within that lot and the thickness of the three cores will be averaged .
the average of the three cores will be used to determine acceptability and the unit price paid for the lean concrete base in that lot will be adjusted as specified in subsection num .
if any core is deficient by more than num inches additional cores shall be drilled at intervals not to exceed num feet in each direction from the deficient core parallel to the roadway center line until one core is obtained in each direction which is not deficient by more than num inches .
the lean concrete base between these two cores will be evaluated separately from the balance of the lean concrete base in that lot and unless otherwise directed by the engineer shall be removed and replaced with lean concrete base of the specified thickness .
section num num at all locations where cores have been drilled the resulting holes shall be filled with lean concrete base or other similar material as approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement lean concrete base will be measured by the square yard .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of lean concrete base measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place except that an adjustment to the nearest cent in the contract unit price will be made in accordance with table num and table num when either the quality of concrete represented by the mean value of the four compressive strength tests is less than the specified seven day compressive strength or when the average lengths of cores indicates deficiencies in thickness by more than num inches but less than or equal to num inches .
table num adjustment in contract unit price for deficiency in thickness of lean concrete base average core length less than specified thickness inches unit price allowed percent of contract num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num greater than num num material represented by cores deficient by more than num inches in thickness andor represented by lots attaining sevenday compressive strengths with the mean value of the four compressive strength tests less than num pounds per square inch will be evaluated as to acceptance .
the engineer will determine if the material can be left in place .
lean concrete base allowed to remain in place will be subject to the unit price adjustments presented in tables num and num .
lean concrete base not permitted to remain in place shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
section num num table num adjustment in contract unit price for deficiency in compressive strength of lean concrete base mean compressive strength pounds per square inch unit price adjustment dollars per square yard num or more num num to num num num to num num num to num num less than num num material represented by cores deficient by more than num inches in thickness andor represented by lots attaining sevenday compressive strengths with the mean value of the four compressive strength tests less than num pounds per square inch will be evaluated as to acceptance .
the engineer will determine if the material can be left in place .
lean concrete base allowed to remain in place will be subject to the unit price adjustments presented in tables num and num .
lean concrete base not permitted to remain in place shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
the unit price adjustment will be multiplied by the design thickness of lean concrete base in inches the product divided by num and rounded off to the nearest num cents to determine the unit price for payment .
w here a deficiency exists in both the average length of cores and the average compressive strength the amount of the contract unit price allowed will be the appropriate percentage of contract unit price allowed from table num less the unit price adjustment from table num .
section num geogrid base reinforcement num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and placing a geogrid material within or below the aggregate base as shown on the project plans .
num materials num geogrid materials the geogrid material shall be supplied in accordance with and conform to the material requirements of subsections num and num .
num geogrid packaging handling and storage section num num the identification packaging handling and storage of the geogrid material shall be in accordance with astm d num .
geogrid rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping for protection from the elements primarily ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient to determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacturer shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
rolls will be stored on the site or at another identified storage location in a manner which protects them from the elements and any other factor which may cause damage to the material .
care should be taken to prevent mud wet cement epoxy and other contaminating materials which may permanently affix themselves to the grid material from coming into contact with the geogrid .
if stored outdoors geogrid rolls shall be elevated and protected with a light colored opaque waterproof cover .
at no time shall the geogrid material be exposed to ultraviolet light for a period exceeding num days or stored in temperatures below zero degrees f or in extreme heat .
torn damaged or defective geogrid will be rejected .
num construction requirements num weather limitations the geogrid shall not be placed when weather or surface conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable for placement .
this will normally be at times of wet and snowy conditions heavy rainfall extreme cold or frost conditions or extreme heat .
num equipment mechanical or manual laydown equipment shall be capable of laying the geogrid properly and smoothly according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num surface preparation if the geogrid material is to be placed directly on the subgrade the subgrade surface shall be compacted and finished according to subsections num num or num prior to placement of the geogrid .
if the geogrid material is to be placed within the aggregate base materials the aggregate base surface upon which the geogrid will be placed shall be compacted according to subsection num and finished according to subsection num before placement of the geogrid .
num geogrid placement the geogrid shall be rolled out along the alignment in the direction of advancing construction .
all wrinkles and folds shall be removed .
a numinch minimum overlap with securing pins is required at all joints both transverse and longitudinal .
longitudinal joints shall be located section num num according to the requirements shown in subsection num for pavement joints unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
at transverse joints the preceding roll shall overlap the following roll in the direction that the aggregate base will be placed .
securing pins shall be numinch steel bars pointed at one end and fabricated with a head to retain a steel washer having an outside diameter of not less than num inches .
ushaped pins shall be another option as approved by the engineer .
the length of the securing pins shall be fourinch minimum .
the geogrid shall be tensioned by hand and anchored to the ground at the edges including overlaps and in the center of the roll at numfoot intervals along the roll length at the corners if applicable or as directed by the engineer .
the use of securing pins may be reduced or eliminated by the engineer if it can be shown that by careful installation the geogrid is adequately tensioned by hand and anchored by the placed aggregate in a progressive installation process as recommended by the manufacturers representative .
care shall be taken to ensure that geogrid sections do not separate at overlaps during construction .
placement of geogrid around corners will require cutting of the geogrid product and diagonal overlapping of the same to make sure that excessive buckling of geogrid material does not occur .
num placing and compacting aggregate fill the aggregate shall be back dumped and spread in a uniform lift maintaining the design aggregate thickness at all times .
the aggregate material shall be bladed onto the geogrid in such a manner that the aggregate rolls onto the grid ahead by gradually raising the dozer blade while moving ahead .
if the underlying material is capable of supporting rubber tire trucks end and belly dumps they may drive over the grid at very low speeds less than five miles per hour and dump aggregate as they go .
sudden stops and turning by trucks shall be avoided while on the grid .
no tracked vehicles should be allowed on the grid until there is a minimum of six inches of material between the tracks and the grid .
any ruts which might develop during spreading or compacting the aggregate shall be filled with additional aggregate rather than bladed from surrounding areas .
placing additional aggregate into the rutted areas insures that the design aggregate thickness is maintained .
geogrid damaged after or during construction will be repaired in accordance with the manufacturers recommended procedure .
aggregate base shall be compacted as specified in subsection num .
aggregate base material shall not be mixed or processed on the geogrid .
the aggregate base material shall be premixed at the stockpile area or another location in a manner approved by the engineer .
aggregate base materials will be sampled for acceptance section num num after premixing and prior to placement on the geogrid material .
contamination and segregation of aggregate base materials prior to or during placement shall be minimized .
num method of measurement geogrid base reinforcement will be measured by the square yard inplace .
measurement will be to the nearest square yard .
no allowance will be made for material in laps .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of geogrid base reinforcement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor material and equipment and performing all operations in connection with placing the geogrid as shown on the project plans .
no payment will be made for geogrid base reinforcement rejected due to either contamination or damage due to either the fault or negligence of the contractor .
section num geocomposite edge drain num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor equipment and materials to install a pavement edge drain system .
the drainage system shall be installed in accordance with the specifications plans and manufacturers recommendations .
the purpose of the geocomposite edge drain is to provide drainage for the pavement base course while restricting loss of fines .
num materials num geocomposite edge drain the geocomposite edge drain material shall be supplied in accordance with and conform to the material requirements of subsections num and num .
num geocomposite packaging handling and storage the identification packaging handling and storage of the geocomposite edge drain material shall be in accordance with astm d num .
geocomposite edge drain material shall be furnished in rolls or in another acceptable manner wrapped with a suitable protective covering to protect the fabric from mud dirt dust debris or harmful ultraviolet light .
the edge drain material shall be free of defects or flaws which significantly affect its physical properties at the time of delivery and installation .
each roll or package shall be labeled or section num num tagged to provide product identification sufficient to determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacture shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
geocomposite edge drain materials shall be stored on the site or at another location approved by the engineer in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors the materials shall be elevated and protected with a light colored opaque waterproof cover .
at no time shall the edge drain material be exposed to direct sun light for a period exceeding num days .
num construction requirements num weather limitations the geocomposite edge drain shall not be placed when weather conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable to allow placement or installation .
this will normally be at times of wet and snowy conditions heavy rainfall extreme cold and frost conditions or extreme heat .
num equipment trenching equipment shall be capable of excavating the necessary trenches for the edge drain and outlet pipes .
mechanical or manual equipment shall be capable of properly installing the edge drain and lateral outlet pipes and backfilling according to the specifications plans and manufacturers recommendations .
num general the contractor will not be allowed to begin installation of the edge drain system unless a representative of the edge drain manufacturer or supplier is present .
the edge drain is to be placed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations in a trench having the dimensions as shown on the plans or as required by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
num construction method the trenches for the edge drain and necessary lateral outlet pipes shall be neatly cut through existing materials to the lines and dimensions shown on the plans or as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
the trenching method shall normally be by use of wheel cutter trenching equipment although an alternative method may be approved by the engineer .
the edge drain material including lateral outlet pipes shall be placed in accordance with the plans and the manufacturers recommendations .
the edge drain shall be placed so that the fabric on one side is in intimate contact with the aggregate base materials .
it may be necessary to use spacers or blocks to keep the edge drain up against the aggregate base during backfilling .
the trench with the edge drain in place may be backfilled with minustwoinch material that was excavated from the trench provided section num num that sharp rocks or other material which in the opinion of the engineer may damage the fabric are removed .
the soil backfill shall be placed in lifts not to exceed six inches of compacted depth with the backfill compacted to a density not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
care shall be taken during compaction to prevent damage to the edge drain material or lateral pipes .
the final two inches of the edge drain trench shall be filled with hot asphaltic concrete meeting the material requirements of section num and compacted .
the amount of trench excavated at any time shall not exceed the amount of pavement edge drain system which can be installed and the backfill completed in one working day .
backfill must be placed to the top of the edge drain trench if the asphaltic concrete will not be placed in the same working day .
all necessary splices and connections are to be made with kits furnished by the manufacturer and in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and directions .
num damage to pavement the contractor shall not damage the adjacent existing pavement during the excavation and placement operation .
any damage done to the pavement shall be repaired at no additional cost to the department in a method approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement geocomposite edge drain will be measured by the linear foot inplace .
measurement will be to the nearest foot .
no allowance will be made for laps or lateral pipes .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of geocomposite edge drain measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor material and equipment and performing all operations in connection with installing the geocomposite edge drain as shown on the project plans .
no payment will be made for geocomposite edge drain rejected due to either the fault or negligence of the contractor .
section num num section num portland cement concrete pavement num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing a pavement surface using portland cement concrete and shall include coring operations furnishing and placing dowels and tie bars furnishing and placing miscellaneous reinforcing steel and joint materials and constructing joints in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall proportion mix place finish and cure concrete in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num materials portland cement concrete for pavement shall consist of a mixture of hydraulic cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate water and admixtures .
unless otherwise provided portland cement concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of section num .
concrete shall be class p. materials for expansion joint filler and joint seal shall conform to the requirements of section num unless otherwise shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions .
materials for tie bars and dowel bars shall conform to the requirements of section num .
materials for dowel bars shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with type b coating except that the core material shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
w hen epoxy coated reinforcing steel is designated it shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
liquid membrane curing compound shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num construction requirements num general at least num days prior to paving the contractor shall furnish the following information for the engineers review for specification compliance a detailed sequence and schedule of concrete placement operations including but not necessarily limited to width of pavement to be placed proposed equipment production rates section num num working hours concrete hauling placement methods curing sawing and sealing methods .
a detailed staking plan for subgrade controls including offset requirements .
a traffic control plan for pavement construction operations which includes provisions for the placement and maintenance of barriers required to protect the pavement from traffic for a minimum of seven days after concrete placement .
mainline concrete pavement shall be constructed with slipform paving equipment however areas inaccessible to slipform paving equipment may be constructed with fixed side forms .
ramps and irregular pavement areas shall be constructed with either slipform paving equipment or fixed side forms .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the main roadway including concrete shoulders or distress lanes shall be placed in a single monolithic pass provided the finished surface of the pavement consistently conforms to the requirements for grade alignment and pavement smoothness as specified herein .
paving widths which are less than the full main roadway width shall be constructed with longitudinal construction joints that are located on the lane line or at the edge of the main roadway .
the contractor may submit an alternate paving plan for review by the engineer .
the alternate plan shall be submitted in writing at least num days prior to paving and the engineers approval shall be obtained prior to proceeding with alternate paving methods .
portland cement concrete pavement shall be constructed as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
num pavement base the surface of lean concrete base cement treated base or subgrade upon which the concrete pavement is to be placed shall conform to the finish and elevation requirements specified for the material involved .
the surface shall be free of all loose and extraneous material and the surface shall be uniformly moistened immediately prior to placing concrete .
w hen portland cement concrete pavement is constructed over lean concrete base curing compound shall be applied to the surface of the lean concrete base at a rate of not less than one gallon per num square feet .
the curing compound shall be type num with a class a vehicle conforming to the requirements of subsection num and the nonvolatile portion of the class a vehicle shall contain natural or petroleum waxes .
this curing compound shall be placed in addition to curing compound placed as part of lean concrete base construction and shall be applied no more than num hours prior to placement of portland section num num cement concrete pavement .
the curing compound shall be allowed to setup prior to placement of portland cement concrete pavement .
curing compound may be applied after placement of required load transfer dowel assemblies however uniform coverage with curing compound must be achieved under the dowel assemblies and spot spraying or additional applications of curing compound may be required to achieve uniform coverage .
if load transfer dowel assemblies are placed after application of curing compound the curing compound shall be allowed to setup prior to dowel placement .
curing compound membrane which is damaged during placement of load transfer dowel assemblies or during other operations shall be repaired with a reapplication of curing compound prior to placement of portland cement concrete pavement .
portland cement concrete pavement shall not be placed over lean concrete base or cement treated base for at least num days after placement of the lean concrete base or cement treated base unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num forming a general unless the project requires contractor surveying the engineer will place one stake for elevation control and alignment on each side of the roadway at numfoot intervals and at grade breaks in accordance with the contractors staking plan .
the contractor shall make any additional projections necessary to establish line and grade .
if the project requires surveying by the contractor the contractor shall place stakes for elevation control and alignment as specified above or as approved by the engineer .
b slipform method the contractor shall set taut guide lines to control both line and grade .
slipform equipment shall be equipped with automatic sensing and control devices and shall operate such that the machine automatically follows the guide line .
slipform paving equipment shall be equipped with traveling side forms designed to laterally support the concrete for a length of time which is sufficient to produce pavement of the required cross section .
no abrupt changes in longitudinal alignment of the pavement will be permitted .
the horizontal deviation from the alignment shown on the plans shall not exceed num feet .
c fixed formmanual method section num num forms shall be set to the required lines and grades well in advance of placing concrete and shall be as approved by the engineer prior to concrete placement .
forms shall be made of steel and have an approved section with a base width of at least four inches and a depth equal to or greater than the thickness of the pavement .
the forms shall be staked with steel stakes of appropriate lengths .
each form section shall have a stake pocket at each end and at intervals of not more than five feet .
the stake pockets shall have a device for locking the form to the steel stakes .
each form section shall be straight and free of bends and warps at all times .
the top of each form section shall not vary from a true plane by more than num inch in num feet and the inside face shall not vary more than num inch in num feet .
w ood or other rigid forms may be used in irregular areas as approved by the engineer .
forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled each time they are used .
before forms are placed the underlying material shall be finished to the required grade and shall be firm and smooth .
the forms shall be uniformly supported upon the subgrade or base and shall be placed to the required grade and alignment .
forms shall be supported so that they will not deviate more than num inch from the proper elevation during paving operations .
forms shall remain in place until the day after placing the concrete and shall be removed in a manner that will prevent damage to the pavement .
pry bars shall not be used between the forms and the pavement under any circumstances .
num placing and finishing a general w hen daytime ambient temperatures are expected to exceed num degrees f and when directed by the engineer concrete shall be placed only between the hours of num p.m. and num a.m .
immediately prior to placing concrete the contractor shall verify that the elevations of guide wires controlling slipform pavers and the elevations of fixed forms are such that the thickness and finished grade of the pavement will be in accordance with the requirements of the project plans and these specifications .
concrete shall be placed using methods that result in a minimum of handling and segregation and in a manner that will result in the concrete being distributed uniformly across the front of the paving machine .
section num num concrete placement shall be continuous between expansion or construction joints .
the concrete shall be struck off consolidated and floated by mechanical methods .
the contractor may with the approval of the engineer use a free floating oscillating screed device which is a minimum of num feet in length and attached to the paver in conjunction with or in lieu of tubular floats .
w hen pavement widths are less than num feet and where it is impractical to use mechanical methods manual methods may be used to finish the concrete surface .
if surface drying or cracking should occur prior to the application of curing material the entire surface of the concrete shall be kept damp by applying water with a nozzle that atomizes the flow so that a mist and not a spray is formed .
the water from the nozzle shall not be applied directly upon the concrete and shall not be allowed to accumulate on the concrete in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or wash the surface .
the contractor shall protect the base or subgrade when equipment is cleaned at the end of each days production .
all concrete deposited on the base or subgrade during the cleaning operation shall be removed from the base or subgrade immediately after cleaning is completed .
any damage to the base or subgrade shall be repaired as approved by the engineer prior to commencing paving operations .
w ater will not be permitted to pond on the roadway .
any concrete which is spilled splattered or scattered on existing pavement shall be removed before the end of each days paving operations .
it is important in the performance of the work and in the operation of equipment that no work shall lag and all operations shall be completed within the optimum or specified time therefore the engineer may order the work suspended if necessary to maintain proper balance of operations so as to insure satisfactory results .
b slipform method the equipment shall spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the concrete so that a minimum of hand finishing will be necessary and a well consolidated and homogeneous pavement is produced .
additional labor and equipment shall be supplied when paving beyond the limits of the side forms is required .
the machine shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the concrete .
such vibration shall be accomplished with vibrating tubes or arms working in the concrete and spaced not more than num inches centertocenter .
vibrators shall operate at a minimum of num impulses per minute .
concrete placement shall cease immediately if a vibrator fails to function and can not be immediately repaired replaced or supplemented with additional vibrators .
section num num the machine shall be operated with as nearly a continuous forward movement as possible and all mixing delivering and concrete spreading operations shall be coordinated to provide uniform progress .
if for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver the vibratory and tamping elements shall also be stopped simultaneously .
pavement edge slump in excess of num feet exclusive of edge rounding shall be corrected .
if correction is not possible while the concrete is plastic pavement with excessive edge slump shall be corrected by one of the following methods num the pavement shall be removed by sawcutting a distance not greater than one foot from the pavement edge between adjacent transverse joints .
tie bars shall be placed as specified in subsection num and the pavement shall be replaced as part of adjacent portland cement pavement construction .
num if excessive edge slump can not be corrected by method one num above then the pavement shall be removed for the full lane width between adjacent transverse joints and replaced as specified in subsection numc .
w hen concrete is being placed adjacent to previously constructed pavement work bridges for placing and finishing the pavement and the tracks on one side of the paver may be allowed on the new pavement provided that num the previously placed pavement has been placed for a minimum of num hours .
num pressure exerted on the pavement by the paver shall not exceed num pounds per square inch .
num tracks on the paver shall be equipped with protective pads or the surface of the existing pavement shall be protected so that the surface is not damaged .
num no part of the track shall be operated within one foot of the edge of the existing pavement .
any pavement which is damaged by the contractors equipment shall be repaired as approved by the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
w ith the exception of saws used for the construction of weakened plane joints no other contractors equipment will be allowed on the pavement until all the requirements specified herein have been met .
c fixed form method section num num three types of selfpropelled mechanical equipment the spreader the finisher and the float will be required however a single machine combining two or more of these operations may be used if it has been demonstrated that such a machine will accomplish satisfactory results .
all wheels of all machines that ride on finished concrete surfaces shall be equipped with rubber tires .
the concrete shall be spread uniformly between the forms immediately after it is placed by means of the spreading machine .
the spreader shall be followed by the finishing machine equipped with not less than two oscillating or reciprocating screeds .
the spreading machine or the finishing machine shall be equipped with vibrating equipment that will vibrate the concrete for the full paving width .
vibrators shall be used adjacent to the longitudinal edge of the pavement .
these vibrators shall be attached to the rear of the spreading machine or to the finishing machine .
vibrators shall not rest on new pavements or side forms or contact any tie bars and power to the vibrators shall be such that when the motion of the machine is stopped vibration will cease .
vibrators shall operate at a minimum of num impulses per minute .
the concrete shall be spread full width before being struck off by the finishing machine .
the concrete shall be struck off and consolidated so that the surface will conform to the finished grade and cross section shown on the project plans and at the same time leave sufficient material for the floating operation .
the spreading or finishing machine shall move over the pavement as many times and at such intervals as may be required to insure thorough consolidation .
after the pavement has been struck off and consolidated it shall be floated with an approved longitudinal float .
the contractor may use a longitudinal float composed of one or more cutting and smoothing floats suspended from and guided by a rigid frame .
the frame shall be carried by four or more wheels riding on and constantly in contact with the forms .
the contractor may use a longitudinal float which is worked with a sawing motion while being held in a floating position parallel to the roadway centerline and while passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
movements ahead along the centerline of the roadway shall be in successive advances of not more than one half the length of the float .
in lieu of using either type of longitudinal float a single machine which will affect satisfactory consolidating finishing and floating may be used .
this machine may be towed by a spreading machine .
this combination finishingfloating machine shall be equipped with screeds and vibrators as hereinbefore specified for finishing machines .
floating shall be accomplished with a nonoscillating float held in a suspended position from the frame .
section num num if any spreading finishing and floating equipment is not maintained in full working order or if the equipment used by the contractor proves inadequate to obtain results prescribed such equipment shall be improved or satisfactory equipment substituted or added .
d fixed formmanual methods manual methods may be permitted by the engineer in areas inaccessible to mechanical equipment .
w hen manual methods are permitted concrete shall be deposited spread and struck off to such an elevation that when properly consolidated the surface will conform to the required lines and grades .
the strike board shall be moved forward with a combined longitudinal and transverse motion so that neither end is raised from the side forms .
w hile striking off a slight excess of concrete shall be kept in front of the cutting edge at all times .
the concrete shall be consolidated by internal vibration .
vibrators shall operate at a minimum of num impulses per minute .
use of vibrators for shifting of the concrete mass will not be permitted .
after consolidation the concrete shall be tamped to the proper surface elevation and cross section with an approved tamping or screeding device or with a mechanical vibrating unit spanning the full width between forms .
a small surplus of concrete shall be kept in front of the tamper or vibrating unit .
tamping or vibrating shall continue until the required cross section is obtained and the mortar is flushed slightly to the surface .
other approved methods may be used to finish the concrete .
on grades in excess of five percent a second strike board shall follow behind the tamper or vibrating unit and shall be used in the same manner as the tamper to remove waves caused by the flow of concrete .
e joint finishing and edging the pavement edges and joints shall be edged in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
f surface texturing surface texturing of the plastic concrete shall begin immediately after placement and finishing of the concrete .
all excessive surface water shall be dispersed prior to commencing texturing operations .
texturing shall be performed by applying a longitudinal burlap drag followed by longitudinal texturing using steel tines .
w hen the pavement will be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic only a burlap drag is required .
section num num steel tines shall be supported by an independent selfpropelled rolling mechanical bridge .
the tines shall not be supported manually except in areas inaccessible to the bridge .
the rolling mechanical bridge supporting steel tines shall be equipped and operate with automatic sensing and control devices which follow the same control line as the slip form paver .
burlap shall not be supported on the rolling mechanical bridge used to support the steel tines .
burlap shall be in accordance with aashto m num class num and shall traverse the full width of the pavement to within num inches of the pavement edge .
the timing of the texturing operations is critical .
grooves that close following texturing will not be permitted and texturing shall be completed so that the surface is not torn or unduly roughened by the texturing operation .
hand tine brooms shall be provided and available at the job site at all times .
tine texturing shall be performed so that the grooves produced will be uniform in spacing depth and width .
texture shall be parallel to the center line of the roadway and shall extend over the entire roadway width to within three inches of the pavement edge .
swerving groove patterns will not be permitted .
texture grooves shall be num num inch in width and num num inch in depth .
the textured groove depth will be measured in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the centertocenter spacing of the grooves shall be num num inch .
if necessary hardened concrete shall be textured by any method that will produce the required grooves .
g curing curing compound shall be applied to the concrete within num minutes after surface texturing operations and before any drying shrinkage or craze cracks begin to appear .
in the event of surface drying or cracking application of water with an atomizing nozzle shall be started immediately and shall be continued until application of curing material is begun or resumed however curing compound shall not be applied over any resulting free standing water .
liquid curing compound shall be applied in one or more applications totaling not less than one gallon per num square feet .
the curing compound container shall be equipped with a calibrated sight glass for verification of quantities used .
section num num w hen the ambient temperature is above num degrees f as verified by a departmentfurnished calibrated thermometer the contractor shall fog the surface of the concrete with an atomized mist of water .
the surface of the pavement shall be kept moist until initial joint sawing is completed fogging done after curing material has been applied shall not begin until the curing compound has set sufficiently to prevent displacement .
w hen misting is required the entire surface of the concrete shall be kept damp by applying water with a nozzle that atomizes the flow so that a mist and not a spray are formed .
the moisture from the nozzle shall not be applied under pressure directly upon the concrete and shall not be allowed to accumulate on the concrete in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or wash the surface .
concrete curing shall be continued for not less than seven days and any damaged curing material shall be repaired immediately .
num joints a general requirements joints in concrete pavement will be designated as transverse expansion joints longitudinal or transverse construction joints or longitudinal or transverse weakened plane joints .
the faces of all joints shall be constructed perpendicular to the surface of the concrete pavement .
joints shall be constructed of the type to the dimensions and at the locations shown on the plans and as specified herein .
concrete placed in lanes adjacent to previously placed concrete shall have transverse weakened plane joints located to align with the weakened plane joints in the previously placed concrete .
b longitudinal joints longitudinal joints in the main roadway shall be weakened plane joints or construction joints .
w eakened plane joints shall be constructed by sawing .
longitudinal weakened plane joints shall be constructed between traffic lanes and also between traffic lanes and shoulders if concrete shoulders wider than five feet are specified .
longitudinal joints in ramps and tapers shall be either weakened plane joints or construction joints .
the location of longitudinal joints in ramps and tapers shall be as approved by the engineer .
section num num load transfer bars shall be provided as shown on the plans and shall be placed in all longitudinal construction and weakened plane joints by acceptable mechanical methods either while the concrete is still plastic or after the concrete has hardened .
bars placed in hardened concrete shall be anchored with an adhesive approved by the engineer .
bars placed in adjacent slabs of different thicknesses shall be placed within one inch of the middepth of the thinner slab .
c transverse joints transverse expansion joints shall be located at the junction of roadway pavement slabs and bridge approach slabs .
transverse expansion joints at locations other than bridge approaches shall be located as shown on the plans .
the joints shall be formed in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer .
transverse construction joints shall be constructed as shown on the plans and as specified herein .
they shall be placed at the end of each days production or when placement of concrete is discontinued for more than num minutes .
excess concrete shall not be placed beyond a construction joint at the end of a days production .
load transfer bars shall be provided as shown on the plans and shall be placed in all transverse construction joints by acceptable mechanical methods either while the concrete is still plastic or after the concrete has hardened .
bars placed in hardened concrete shall be anchored with an adhesive approved by the engineer .
bars placed in adjacent slabs of different thicknesses shall be placed within one inch of the middepth of the thinner slab .
transverse construction joints shall be formed perpendicular or skewed to the center line of the roadway as shown on the plans .
transverse weakened plane joints shall be formed by sawing and shall be constructed perpendicular or skewed to the centerline of the roadway as shown on the plans .
the location of transverse weakened plane joints shall be as shown on the plans .
num joint construction a sawed joints longitudinal or transverse weakened plane joints shall be sawed to the dimensions shown on the plans .
excess water from the sawing operation will not be permitted to stand on any subgrade to be paved .
the contractor shall provide and maintain acceptable methods to control the water used in the sawing so the subgrade is not damaged .
section num num sawed joints shall be constructed before uncontrolled pavement cracking occurs however joints shall not be sawed until the concrete has hardened enough to prevent excessive tearing or raveling during sawing operations .
the exact time when sawing will be done shall be determined by the contractor .
the contractor shall maintain an additional concrete span saw on the project site at all times during which sawed joints are being constructed .
the additional saw shall be maintained in good operating condition and shall be readily available as a substitute for the primary concrete saw .
any procedure used to saw joints which results in premature uncontrolled cracking shall be revised immediately .
the contractor shall repair damaged areas or random cracks as specified and as directed by the engineer .
if joints are sawed in stages the initial saw cut shall be of the minimum specified width and shall be sawed to the depth shown on the plans .
suitable guide lines or other devices shall be used to assure that joints are constructed at the locations shown on the plans .
after sawing the joints the following procedure shall apply num prior to applying the sealant each joint face shall be thoroughly cleaned .
the method of cleaning may be subject to regulation by state or local environmental quality enforcement agencies .
w hen not otherwise mandated by law or regulation the contractor shall clean the joints by sand blasting .
the joints shall then be further cleaned by use of high pressure air jets so that each face is clean dry and dust free .
the air used in cleaning shall be free of oil or water .
num the sealant used shall be silicone joint sealant conforming to the requirements of subsection num and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
all recommended manufacturers field testing shall be done by the engineer .
necessary repairs resulting from field testing shall be immediately repaired by the contractor cost to be considered incidental to the sealant pay item .
any sealant spilled on the concrete pavement shall be removed .
num immediately prior to applying joint sealant an expanded closed cell polyethylene foam backer rod approved by the engineer shall be inserted along the joint as shown on the plans .
the backer rod shall be compatible with the joint sealant to be applied .
section num num joints shall be sealed within num working days after the concrete has been placed and prior to opening the pavement to any traffic .
b construction joints longitudinal and transverse construction joints shall be formed in accordance with the details shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
w hen concrete is not finished textured and protected with curing material within one hour after placement the engineer may order the contractor to construct a transverse construction joint by sawing at the location established by the engineer .
all concrete placed beyond the construction joint shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor at no additional cost to the department prior to continuing paving operations .
c transverse expansion joints transverse expansion joints shall be formed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
num opening pavement to traffic pavement shall not be opened to traffic less than seven days after placement and until all joints are sealed and the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num pavement evaluation and remedial measures num pavement surface texture the depth of surface texture grooves will be measured in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
num pavement smoothness pavement smoothness shall be evaluated by testing with a profilograph .
profilograph equipment will be furnished by the department .
all profilograph measurements shall be made by a team composed of one department employee and one contractor employee .
the work shall be shared equally .
at the completion of each profilograph run both operators shall sign the profilogram certifying that they are in agreement that the equipment was found to be operating correctly and that the profilogram is a correct representation of the surface profile .
a pavement profile index shall be obtained as soon as possible after concrete placement .
section num num two profilograph readings shall be taken in each mainline traffic lane each distress lane and each ramp lane including tapers .
the profilograph readings shall be taken in the vehicle wheel paths three feet from each lane edge of traffic lanes or num inches from the lane edge or pavement edge of distress lanes .
the tested profile shall begin num feet prior to the concrete placed during any days production and shall end num feet before the end of the placed concrete .
the tested profile will include bridge approaches and num feet of any pavement which abuts the new pavement .
if during any days production less than num lanefeet of pavement is placed that pavement shall be tested with the subsequent days production .
the contractor shall broom the pavement or clean the pavement by other approved methods immediately prior to profilograph testing .
surface profiles will be evaluated by the department in accordance with the provisions of arizona test method num .
the profile index for a traffic lane will be the average of the two profile indexes obtained for that lane .
all mainline traffic lanes distress lanes ramp lanes and tapers shall have a profile index of nine inches or less per mile in any nummile section .
payment for mainline traffic lanes will be adjusted in accordance with subsection num based on the profile index of the traffic lanes .
profile indexes greater than nine inches per mile per nummile section shall be reduced to nine inches or less per mile per nummile section by grinding or pavement removal and replacement as specified herein .
w hen pavement will not be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic grinding of pavement which has a profile index of nine inches or less per mile per nummile section will only be permitted to correct deviations in excess of num inches in num feet mustgrinds as specified herein and when directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall remove high pavement areas with vertical deviations greater than num inches in num feet or less .
high pavement areas shall be removed with grinding devices or multiplesaw devices as approved by the engineer .
grinding machines shall be of the rotary type with a wheel base of at least num feet and with vertically adjustable grinding wheels .
bush hammers or other impact devices shall not be used .
after removal of high areas the affected nummile pavement section shall be reprofiled however if the original profile index for the pavement section was within the specified range only that portion of the pavement which originally contained high areas shall be reprofiled .
section num num evaluations of pavement depressions will be made based on the presumed correction of adjacent high areas .
w hen the pavement contains depressions greater than num inches in num feet or less the contractor shall grind adjacent pavement as directed by the engineer and the pavement shall be reprofiled as specified above .
w hen the pavement contains depressions greater than num inches in num feet or less the pavement shall be repaired as directed by the engineer .
such repairs may include additional grinding or fulldepth pavement replacement .
upon completion of repairs the pavement shall be reprofiled as required .
if after the repair of high andor depressed areas the pavement does not conform to the specified profile requirements additional pavement grinding and profile measurements shall be performed as directed by the engineer .
in addition to the surface profile index requirements the pavement surface will be tested with a numfoot straightedge .
the surface shall not vary in any direction by more than num inch except at longitudinal and transverse construction joints .
the surface shall not vary by more than num inch across any longitudinal or transverse construction joint .
grinding will be required to insure that these requirements are satisfied .
the pavement shall be ground in a manner that does not form a smooth or polished pavement surface .
all pavement profile repairs shall be made prior to pavement thickness evaluations .
remedial work required to correct pavement smoothness deficiencies shall be performed by the contractor at no additional expense to the department .
the contractor shall provide for the maintenance and protection of traffic during pavement profile repairs and subsequent pavement profile measurements as directed by the engineer and at no additional expense to the department .
num pavement cracks a general cracks penetrating the full depth of the pavement shall be repaired or the cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced as specified herein prior to opening the pavement to public traffic .
section num num w ithin num days after concrete placement and prior to acceptance of the work the engineer will perform a pavement crack survey .
the pavement shall be cleaned prior to the crack survey .
cracks which are visible without magnification and which require repair and pavement slabs which require replacement will be marked by the engineer and shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as specified and at no additional cost to the department .
cracks observed later than num days after concrete placement and prior to final acceptance of the work shall be repaired by the contractor as specified and the cost of such repairs will be shared equally by the contractor and the department .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with detailed information concerning the methods and materials to be used for crack repair and the contractor shall obtain the engineers approval of the proposed methods and materials prior to beginning the required repairs .
the contractor at its option and at no additional cost to the department may core cracked pavement as approved by the engineer to determine the extent of cracking .
b crack repair num general random cracks shall be repaired using the methods and under the conditions specified herein .
crack repair shall begin within seven days after completion of the pavement crack survey and shall be completed within num days after the start of repairs .
payment for pavement slabs which require repairs will be adjusted as specified in subsection num .
num crack repair requirements a cracks in jointed pavement constructed with loadtransfer dowel assemblies longitudinal cracks which occur more than num inches from a longitudinal joint or less than num inches from a longitudinal joint shall be repaired by the routingandsealing method .
transverse cracks shall be repaired by the epoxyinjection method after any immediately adjacent uncracked joints are deepened to num inch above the dowels .
section num num b cracks in jointed pavement constructed without loadtransfer dowel assemblies longitudinal cracks which occur more than num inches from a longitudinal joint or less than num inches from a longitudinal joint shall be repaired by the routingandsealing method .
w hen a transverse crack crosses or terminates in a transverse contraction joint the uncracked portion of the joint shall be filled with an approved gray colored epoxy and the crack shall be repaired by the routingandsealing method .
w hen a transverse crack approximately parallels and is within five feet of an uncracked contraction joint the uncracked joint shall be cleaned and filled with an approved gray colored epoxy and the crack shall be repaired by the routingandsealing method .
w hen a transverse crack is more than five feet from a transverse joint either cracked or uncracked the joint shall be resawed and resealed as originally specified and the crack shall be repaired by the routingandsealing method .
c cracks occurring within wheel path cracks occurring within the wheel paths which are exclusive of the areas defined under subsections a and b above shall be considered unrepairable and the pavement shall be removed and replaced in accordance with the requirements of subsection numc .
num crack repair methods a routingandsealing method w hen the routingandsealing crack repair method is specified the top of the crack shall be routed with a routing machine approved by the engineer to a depth of at least num inch and to a width not less than num inch or more than num inch .
the routing machine shall be capable of closely following the path of the crack and of widening the top of the crack to the required section without spalling or otherwise damaging the concrete .
loose and fractured concrete shall be removed and the routed crack shall be thoroughly cleaned and then sealed with an approved gray colored silicon sealant .
b epoxyinjection method w hen the epoxyinjection crack repair method is specified the crack shall be pressure injected with an approved gray colored epoxy .
pressure injection of epoxy shall be done only between the hours of num p.m. and num a.m .
section num num c pavement removal and replacement portland cement concrete pavement having cracks not repairable in accordance with subsection num b shall be removed and replaced as directed by the engineer .
cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced to the limits established by the engineer and will generally require removal of the full lane width of the slab over a length of at least six feet .
pavement slabs containing a single diagonal crack intersecting the transverse and longitudinal joints within num of the width and length of the slab from the corner shall be repaired by removing and replacing the smaller portion of the slab as directed by the engineer .
pavement slabs containing multiple cracks through the full depth of the slab separating the slab into three or more parts shall be entirely removed and replaced as directed by the engineer .
excessively cracked pavement shall be removed and replaced over the full pavement width as directed by the engineer .
pavement to be removed shall be cut fulldepth prior to removal .
in order to minimize overcutting fourinch diameter fulldepth cores shall be drilled at the corners of the pavement to be removed as directed by the engineer .
base material which is damaged as a result of pavement removal shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as approved by the engineer .
removed pavement and base material shall be disposed of by the contractor as approved by the engineer .
after removal of cracked pavement dowel bars shall be placed by drilling and anchoring using an approved epoxy at approximately middepth in the existing concrete pavement .
dowel bars placed in longitudinal construction joints shall be numinch long epoxycoated numinch diameter smooth dowels spaced at num inches centertocenter .
dowel bars placed in transverse construction joints shall be numinch long epoxycoated num inch diameter smooth dowels spaced at num inches centertocenter .
dowel bars shall be placed in construction joints which coincide with existing transverse weakened plane joints .
these dowel bars shall be numinch long epoxycoated num inch diameter smooth dowels placed at distances of num num num num num and num inches from the adjacent longitudinal joint which is nearest to the outside shoulder .
replacement concrete shall be placed finished and cured in accordance with the requirements specified for the original pavement .
num pavement thickness section num num concrete pavement shall be constructed to the specified thickness .
tolerances allowed for base and subgrade construction and other provisions of these specifications which may affect thickness shall not be construed to modify such thickness requirements .
pavement will be evaluated for thickness by the lot .
lot limits will be identical to those specified in subsection num for compressive strength of class p concrete .
the contractor shall obtain ten cores per lot in accordance with arizona test method num under the observation of an adot representative and at randomly selected locations designated by the engineer .
however the engineer may exclude certain locations from random sampling should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
the adot representative shall take immediate custody of the cores .
all cores will be measured by the department in accordance with the provisions of aashto t num except that measurements will be to the nearest thousandth of an inch and the average of such measurements will be to the nearest hundredth of an inch .
if any core indicates a deficiency of num inches or more from the specified thickness that core shall not be used for determining the thickness property of the lot and additional cores shall be drilled at intervals not exceeding ten feet in each direction from the deficient core location measured parallel to the center line until one core is obtained in each direction which is not deficient by num inches or more .
pavement between these two cores shall be considered as rejected .
the average of the measurements of the two cores will replace the measurement of the original deficient core in determining the thickness property of the lot .
at all locations where cores have been drilled the resulting holes shall be filled with concrete as approved by the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement portland cement concrete pavement will be measured by the square yard calculated from the dimensions shown on the plans and adjusted by the amount of any change ordered by the engineer .
any opening in excess of one square yard will not be measured for payment .
no allowance will be made for pavement placed in excess of the specified dimensions .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of portland cement concrete pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted as hereinafter provided and shall include full payment for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in constructing the pavement complete in place as shown on the plans and specified herein .
w hen load transfer dowel assemblies are specified separate payment for this work will be as specified in the special provisions .
section num num no separate payment will be made for joints the cost being considered as included in the contract item for portland cement concrete pavement .
cracked pavement slabs which require repair in accordance with the provisions of subsection num b will be paid for at num percent of the contract unit price for the pavement repaired as measured between the original longitudinal and transverse pavement joints abutting the repaired pavement however no adjustment to the contract unit price will be made for pavement slabs which contain only cracks which are observed later than num days after concrete placement .
unit price adjustments for cracked pavement slabs which require repair will be made independently of all unit price adjustments made for compressive strength pavement thickness and pavement smoothness .
payment for thickness and compressive strength will be by the lot .
lot limits are described in subsection num and subsection num .
for each lot pay factors will be determined for increasing or decreasing the unit price of the lot or rejection of the lot .
the percent of lot w ithin limits pw l for thickness and compressive strength shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of the specifications .
pay factors for thickness and compressive strength shall be determined by entering table num with pw l. table num pay factors for thickness and compressive strength pwl pay factor dollarssquare yard num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num below num reject pay factors for thickness and compressive strength will be determined and applied separately .
a total pay factor shall be determined for each lot by summing the individual pay factors for thickness and compressive strength .
any lot with a total pay factor less than minus num will be rejected .
any lot with a pw l below num for either thickness or compressive strength will be rejected .
section num num w hen pavement will not be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic the unit price paid for pavement on mainline traffic lanes and freewaytofreeway ramps which have a profile index less than or equal to num inches per mile per nummile section after correction of all deviations in excess of num inches in num feet mustgrinds will be adjusted in accordance with table num .
table num use when pavement will not be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic .
profile index p.i .
inches per mile per num mile section unit price adjustment num or less plus num x num p.i .
per square yard num maximum see notes num to num minus num per square yard num to num minus num per square yard notes num .
p.i .
profile index p.i .
rounded to the nearest whole number .
num .
the plus unit price adjustment will not be made for pavement placed within each nummile section which has grinding in excess of num percent of the area included in any traffic lane involved .
w hen pavement will be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic the unit price paid for pavement on mainline traffic lanes and freewaytofreeway ramps which have a profile index less than or equal to num inches per mile per nummile section will be adjusted in accordance with table num .
table num use when pavement will be overlaid with asphaltic concrete prior to opening to traffic .
profile index p.i .
inches per mile per num mile section unit price adjustment num or less plus num x num p.i .
per square yard num maximum see note num to num minus num per square yard num to num minus num per square yard note p.i .
profile index p.i .
rounded to the nearest whole number .
unit price adjustments for pavement smoothness will not be made for pavement in distress lanes shoulders service interchange ramps tapers cross roads or frontage roads .
section num num unit price adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made independently of all unit price adjustments made for pavement thickness compressive strength and cracked pavement slabs which require repair .
pavement rejected in accordance with this section or section num shall be removed and replaced with pavement meeting the requirements of both sections .
however within ten days of notification of rejected pavement the contractor may submit a written proposal to accept the pavement at a reduced unit price .
w hen the contractor has elected to rely on the results of core testing for compressive strength the ten days will commence upon notification of the results of core testing .
such proposal shall contain an engineering analysis of the anticipated performance of the pavement if allowed to remain in place .
the reduction in unit price shall reflect the commensurate reduction in life expectancy but in no case shall it be less than the total of the negative pay factors involved .
w ithin five working days after receiving the contractors proposal the engineer will determine whether or not to accept it and will so notify the contractor .
if the proposal is not accepted the pavement shall be removed and replaced as hereinbefore specified .
if the proposal is accepted the engineer will specify the conditions of acceptance .
section num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to repair portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the requirements of these specifications and as shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
the kind of portland cement concrete pavement repair may consist of one or a combination of the following spall repairs slab repairs pavement grinding pavement grooving joint and crack repair edge sealing num spall repairs num description the work shall consist of furnishing all materials and removing loose material and temporary bituminous patch material from potholes damaged joints and spalled areas thoroughly cleaning the repair area section num num and placing new patch material in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as specified herein and in reasonably close conformity with the existing pavement crosssection .
num material requirements a general patch materials shall attain compressive strength of num pounds per square inch within six hours .
the patch material shall attain the required compressive strength prior to opening to traffic .
b accelerated strength portland cement concrete patch material the patch material shall be an accelerated strength portland cement concrete mixture consisting of type iii portland cement and calcium chloride or other accelerators meeting aashto m num and shall attain a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch in six hours .
materials for the concrete mix shall conform to the requirements of section num for class s concrete .
the coarse aggregate shall be as designated for size no .
num in accordance with aashto m num .
c rapid setting patch material rapid setting patch material shall be a product approved by the engineer .
a list of approved patch materials is maintained on the departments approved product list .
d epoxy resin grout patch material epoxy resin patch material shall be a low modulus moisture insensitive epoxy mortar grout prepared in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
fine aggregate incorporated into the grout shall meet the fine aggregate gradation requirements specified in subsection num b .
the epoxy binder aggregate ratio shall be between num and num .
the epoxy binder materials shall meet the requirements specified in astm c num .
e flexible epoxy patching material num description the patching material shall be a mixture of a solventless medium curing time stress relieved flexible coating epoxy and num percent vulcanized granulated rubber .
num materials the epoxy shall be a two component low viscosity mixture and have a gray color when mixed .
the curing period shall be seven days at section num num standard laboratory conditions .
the cured epoxy shall meet the following physical requirements test method requirements test material astm d num tensile strength psi num minimum astm d num tensile elongation num minimum gardner impact resistance pounds direct reverse greater than num greater than num aashto t num tensile bond strength psi num minimum astm d num heat deflection temperature of num astm d num hardness shore d num minimum aashto t num slant shear strength psi num minimum the ground rubber shall be free of fabric wire or other contaminating materials .
num packaging and marking the ground rubber shall be introduced into each of the two components by the manufacturer at the place of production not at the job site .
each container of both components shall be labeled and legibly marked with the manufacturers name the trade name of the product component identification and the expiration date of the manufacturers shelf life warranty .
material that has exceeded the shelf life warranty expiration date shall not be used .
num certification requirements a certification of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num construction requirements a general spalled areas to be repaired will be designated by the engineer and shall be repaired prior to any required pavement grinding .
the extent of the repair area will be marked by the engineer and will be no less than three inches outside the area of delamination .
the engineer will be the final authority if questions arise in regard to the need for patching or the extent of a required patch .
spalled areas less than six inches in length and num inches in width which are adjacent to joints shall not be repaired under this specification .
patching material shall not be placed under conditions which will adversely affect the quality of work .
the engineer shall be the sole judge in determining the suitability of working conditions .
section num num concrete within the patch area shall be broken out to the minimum depth specified for the patch material being used with light to medium pneumatic tools until sound clean concrete is exposed .
if the depth of the spalled area exceeds half the thickness of the concrete pavement slab the affected pavement shall be removed and replaced as designated by the engineer and in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
asphaltic concrete shoulders adjacent to a patch shall be cut longitudinally to the depth of the patch and to a width of not more than num inches .
the cut shall extend one foot beyond both transverse limits of the patch to facilitate placement of form work .
shoulders shall be patched with material similar to the existing shoulder material .
prior to patching the exposed faces of the concrete shall be sandblasted free of loose particles oil dust traces of asphaltic concrete and other contaminates .
prior to placement of the bonding agent all sandblasting residue shall be removed with compressed air and high suction vacuums .
sand for sandblasting shall be sharp and clean and capable of passing a no .
num sieve and shall leave the exposed concrete face clean and dry .
the surface of the spalled area or breakup shall be clean and dry so that patching material will form a proper bond .
the area to be cleaned and patched shall be limited to the area designated by the engineer .
patching material shall be confined to the limits of the repair and shall not lap onto the surrounding pavement .
patch material shall be placed or consolidated to eliminate voids at the interface of the patch and existing concrete .
if a partial depth repair area abuts a working joint or crack which penetrates the full depth of the slab a temporary insert or other bondbreaking medium such as styrofoam strips shall be used to maintain the working joint or crack for the full depth of the patch and at the same width as the existing joint or crack while placing patch material .
repair material shall not bear on an adjacent slab .
the patch shall be finished to the crosssection of the existing pavement and textured with a stiff bristled brush .
texturing shall conform to that of the existing pavement .
the patch surface shall be struck off flush with the existing pavement surface .
b accelerated strength portland cement concrete pavement patch patch boundaries shall be saw cut and broken out to a depth of at least num inches .
following the removal and cleaning of the area to be patched and prior to placing patch material an approved bonding agent shall be applied to the patch area .
the bonding agent shall be applied in a thin coating section num num and scrubbed into the surface with a stiff bristled brush .
placement of patch material shall be delayed until the bonding agent becomes tacky .
c rapid setting patch rapid set patch materials shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
in order to assure proper mixing and placement a qualified manufacturers representative for the approved product shall be present at the start of spall repair operations and shall remain until the engineer is satisfied that the contractor is conforming to the recommended procedures .
patch boundaries shall be saw cut and broken out to a depth of at least num inches or as recommended by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
if recommended by the manufacturer the area to be patched shall be primed with a bonding agent compatible with the patch material being used .
d epoxyresin grout patch patch boundaries shall be saw cut and broken out to a minimum depth of num inches .
prior to placement of epoxyresin grout the contractor shall furnish a grout mix design for review and approval .
the epoxycomponents shall be mixed in strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations before aggregate is added to the mixture .
e flexible epoxy patch use of flexible epoxy materials shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the contractor shall remove the spall area to be replaced to a minimum depth of two inches or to a solid surface by saw cutting and chipping with a pneumatic hammer without damaging the underlying intact concrete .
all loose particles shall be removed before applying the flexible epoxy inlay .
the contractor shall mix only the amount of material that can be used before the expiration of the pot life for the material .
the two parts shall be thoroughly mixed in their own containers before combining the parts together as recommended by the manufacturer .
the contractor shall blend the mix thoroughly for the length of time recommended by the manufacturer making sure the material contains no lumps or streaks and carefully scraping the sides and bottom of the container .
section num num the material shall be placed in the area to be patched the surface leveled off even with the surrounding pavement and any excess material removed .
num method of measurement spall repairs will be measured by the square foot for all patches constructed .
each patch will be measured to the nearest onetenth square foot .
the total cumulative measurement of all patches will be rounded to the nearest square foot .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of spall repairs measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including removal and disposal of the old pavement and repair or replacement of shoulder material which is removed or damaged during spall repair work .
num full depth slab repairs num description the work shall consist of furnishing all materials and removing existing concrete pavement and constructing full depth patches of portland cement concrete pavement at the locations shown on the project plans as specified herein and in reasonably close conformity with the existing pavement crosssections .
num material requirements patching material shall be an accelerated strength portland cement concrete mixture which includes type iii portland cement and calcium chloride or other accelerator conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
the patch material shall attain a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch in six hours .
the contractor shall not place concrete patch material until the mix design has been tested and approved by the engineer .
materials for portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
concrete shall be class s with size num coarse aggregate as designated in aashto m num .
materials furnished for joint seal shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
materials furnished for tie bars shall conform to the requirements of section num .
section num num materials furnished for dowel bars shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with type b coating except that the core material shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
liquid membraneforming curing compound shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num construction requirements areas to be repaired will be designated by the engineer and shall be repaired before any specified pavement grinding .
the engineer shall be the final authority if questions arise with regard to the need for patching or the extent of the patch .
patching material shall not be placed under any conditions which will adversely affect the quality of the work .
if these conditions arise the engineer will determine whether or not the operation should cease .
the engineer shall be the sole judge in determining the suitability of working conditions .
pavement slabs containing multiple cracks through the full depth of the slab separating the slab into three or more parts and other slabs designated by the engineer shall be entirely removed and replaced .
pavement slabs containing a single diagonal crack intersecting the transverse and longitudinal joints within num of the width and length of the slab from the corner shall be repaired by removing and replacing the smaller portion of the slab .
areas to be patched shall have the configuration and minimum dimensions shown in the plans .
the area shall be saw cut to the full depth of the slab .
an additional full depth saw cut shall be made interior to one of the initial transverse saw cuts and shall be made such that a wedge tapering from four inches to six inches from the initial cut is created .
the area inside the wedge shall be removed with light to medium weight jackhammers or other approved equipment prior to removing the larger remaining pavement section .
the remaining pavement shall be lifted out in a manner approved by the engineer .
any disturbed granular subbase shall be removed and replaced with concrete patch material and any spalls which are caused by the removal operations and which are greater than one inch wide or one inch deep shall be repaired by resawing full depth and full width of the traveled lane or repaired as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
w hen the patch boundary is at an existing contraction joint the new joint shall be formed with plain round dowel bars num inches in diameter and num inches in length .
dowel bars shall be placed as shown in the plans and shall be placed at middepth of the existing slab .
holes drilled for the dowel bars shall not be less than num inches in diameter and shall extend nine inches into the existing slab .
the bars shall be anchored into the existing concrete with an approved high section num num viscosity epoxy .
prior to concrete placement for the replacement slab the nineinch long free end of the dowel bar shall be uniformly coated with a thin film of heavy waterproof grease .
w hen the patch boundary is at an existing longitudinal joint the patch shall be tied to existing concrete with twofoot long no .
num deformed steel tie bars placed in the joint at numinch intervals as shown on the plans .
holes drilled in the existing slab shall be one foot deep and of a diameter sufficient to accommodate the tie bars .
the tie bars shall be anchored into the existing slab using an approved high viscosity epoxy .
w hen the patch boundary is located near mid slab the patch shall be tied to existing concrete with twofoot long no .
num deformed steel tie bars placed in the transverse joint at numinch intervals and no .
num deformed steel tie bars placed in the longitudinal joint at numinch intervals as shown in the plans .
holes drilled in the existing slab shall be one foot deep and of a diameter sufficient to accommodate the tie bars .
the tie bars shall be anchored into the existing slab using an approved high viscosity epoxy .
patch material shall be placed and consolidated to eliminate voids at the interface of the patch and existing concrete .
a new sealant reservoir shall be sawed or formed at the interface of the patch and existing concrete as shown on the plans .
the patch shall be finished to the crosssection of the existing pavement and textured with a stiff bristled brush to match the existing pavement .
the patch surface shall be within num inch of the existing pavement surface .
no texturing will be required if pavement grinding or grooving is to be done after patching .
num method of measurement slab repairs will be measured by the square yard of pavement repaired .
each patch will be measured to the nearest onetenth square foot .
the total cumulative measurement of all pavement repaired will be rounded to the nearest square yard .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of slab repairs measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including the removal and disposal of existing materials the excavation and subsequent backfilling or repairs to subbase materials incidental to the removals and the repair or replacement of shoulder materials which are damaged or removed during the work .
num pavement grinding num description section num num the work shall consist of furnishing all materials and grinding the surface of existing concrete pavement at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num blank num construction requirements a general prior to grinding spalled areas shall be repaired as specified .
grinding shall be done prior to any specified sawing and sealing of existing transverse and longitudinal joints .
pavement surfaces shall be ground longitudinally .
the contractor shall grind a test section of pavement where designated by the engineer to determine that the equipment proposed for use on the project will provide the specified surface texture .
the entire area of pavement designated to be ground shall be ground in a manner that results in a uniform surface appearance .
grinding shall continue for the full lane width until the pavement surface on both sides of all transverse joints and all cracks is in the same plane .
longitudinal ridges in adjacent passes of the grinding equipment shall not exceed num inch in depth .
in any one lane a maximum distance of num linear feet of unfinished work area between the lead grinder and the last grinder in that lane will be allowed at the end of any work shift .
ground surfaces shall not be smooth or polished and shall have a wet arizona mumeter number of not less than num at num miles per hour .
the surface shall have a finished texture that has grooves between num and num inches wide spaced num to num inches apart and not less than num inches or more than num inches in depth .
the ground area of any selected twofoot by numfoot longitudinal area of pavement specified to be ground shall not be less than num percent of the selected area .
this selected area will be within the center eleven feet of a traffic lane .
residue and excess water resulting from grinding shall be removed from the roadway by vacuuming or any other method approved by the engineer .
the residue shall be removed prior to opening the lane to traffic .
residue and water from grinding operations shall not be permitted to flow across lanes occupied by traffic onto roadway shoulders or areas containing vegetation or to flow into gutters or section num num other drainage facilities .
dried residue shall be broomed with a pickup or power broom prior to allowing traffic over the opened work area .
after grinding has been completed the pavement surface will be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
two profilograph readings shall be taken in the vehicle wheel paths three feet from the edge of the traffic lane .
to be acceptable a profile index shall not exceed num inches per mile in any nummile section .
in addition all areas representing high points having deviations in excess of num inches in num feet shall be reground until such deviations as indicated by reruns of the profilograph do not exceed num inches in num feet .
additional grinding shall be performed if necessary to reduce the overall profile index as measured by the profilograph to num inches per mile in any nummile section or remaining portion thereof along any line parallel to the edge of the pavement .
in any areas requiring regrinding the regrinding shall be done over the full lane width .
the contractor shall broom the surface of the concrete so that profilometer readings can be taken .
profilograph measurements shall be the responsibility of the contractor on all but the final acceptance measurement .
the contractor shall bear all costs of profilograph measurements .
traffic control for the final acceptance measurements shall be provided by the contractor .
b equipment and procedures grinding shall be done with diamond blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine that has been designed for grinding and texturing of pavements .
the equipment shall be designed such that it will not cause strain or damage to the underlying surface of the pavement .
grinding equipment that causes excessive ravels aggregate fractures spalls or disturbances of the transverse andor longitudinal joints shall not be used .
all grinding machines used in the crosssection of a lane shall have the same wheel or grinding head configuration .
overlapping of grinding passes will not be allowed .
the noise level created by any one machine shall not exceed num dba at a distance of num feet normal to the direction of traffic .
no equipment will be allowed within three feet of a traffic lane open to the public .
maintenance and protection of traffic shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num method of measurement section num num pavement grinding will be measured by the square yard of pavement ground and accepted .
the quantity will be determined by multiplying the width by the length of the ground area .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of pavement grinding measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete as specified .
num pavement grooving num description the work consists of furnishing all materials and grooving the surface of existing portland cement concrete pavement at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num blank num construction requirements a general the pavement surface shall be grooved longitudinally .
the methods used and tolerances employed shall provide a surface which will provide good wet or dry driving characteristics .
longitudinally grooved areas shall begin and end at lines normal to the pavement center line and shall be centered within the lane width .
no equipment shall be allowed within three feet of a traffic lane open to the public .
maintenance and protection of traffic shall be in accordance with section num .
removal of all slurry or residue resulting from the grooving operation shall be continuous .
residue from grooving operations shall not be permitted to flow across shoulders or lanes occupied by public traffic or to flow into gutters or other drainage facilities .
dried residue resulting from grooving operations shall be removed from pavement surfaces with a pick up or power broom before such residue is blown by the action of traffic or wind .
the noise level created by any one machine shall not exceed num dba at a distance of num feet normal to the direction of traffic .
b equipment and procedures section num num grooving shall be done with diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on a selfpropelled machine which has been built for grooving of pavements .
the groover shall have a depth control device which will detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting head height to maintain the specified groove depth .
the grooving machine shall have alignment control devices .
flailing type grooving will not be permitted .
at the beginning of each work shift all grooving machines shall be equipped with a full complement of grooving blades that are capable of cutting grooves of the specified width depth and spacing .
if during the course of work a single grooving blade on any individual grooving machine becomes incapable of cutting a groove work will be permitted to continue for the remainder of the work shift and the contractor will not be required to otherwise cut the groove omitted because of the failed blade .
should two or more grooving blades on any individual grooving machine become incapable of cutting grooves the contractor shall cease operations .
the grooved area of any selected twofoot by numfoot longitudinal area of pavement specified to be grooved shall not be less than ninety percent of that area .
ungrooved pavement within the selected area shall be limited to that which occurs as a result of pavement irregularities .
c tolerance longitudinal grooving shall begin six inches from the outside edge of pavement or reflective marker and run in a continuous pattern across the lane surface to within six inches of the longitudinal joint .
the groove pattern shall be num inches in width by num inch in depth with a centertocenter spacing of num inch .
the groove spacing tolerance shall be plus or minus num inch .
the width of the groove shall have a tolerance of plus or minus num inches .
the depth of the groove shall have a tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
on curves andor superelevations the width of the groove may exceed the above dimensions as approved by the engineer .
if the pavement profile is very uneven the engineer may permit a variation in maximum groove depth in areas adjacent to rutted pavement andor faulted joints .
grooving shall be terminated a minimum of one foot from any device in place in the pavement such as manholes inlet casting valve boxes etc .
num method of measurement pavement grooving will be measured and accepted by the square yard of grooved pavement .
the quantity of grooved pavement will be section num num determined by multiplying the width times the length of the grooved area .
no deduction will be made for grooving omitted at joints manholes inlets or other similar installations in the pavement surface .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of pavement grooving measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for the work complete as specified herein .
num joint and crack repair num description the work shall consist of furnishing all materials and renovating longitudinal and transverse contraction control joints and routing and sealing random cracks in existing portland cement concrete pavement as specified herein detailed on the project plans and as directed by the engineer .
num material requirements joint sealant shall conform to the requirements of section num .
grout for filling wide joints shall be a low modulus moisture insensitive epoxyresin grout of a viscosity suitable for flowing into the irregular cracked portion of the joint .
the ratio of epoxyresin sand shall be between num and num or as specified by the epoxy manufacturer .
epoxy binder material shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
sand used in epoxy grout shall conform to the requirements of subsection num b except that the gradation shall be as follows sieve size percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num a rapid set portland cement concrete pavement patching material may be substituted for epoxy grout as approved by the engineer .
num construction requirements a general joint and crack repairs shall be accomplished by first removing old sealant and joint inserts then refacing and cleaning the joints and section num num cracks followed by installation of a backer rod if required and installation of new sealant .
b joint and crack preparation cracks shall be sawed or routed to the dimensions shown on the plans .
inserts shall be removed from insert formed joints by sawing to provide a clean vertical face .
the width and depth of the saw cuts shall be sufficient to insure complete removal of the insert and to provide a finished joint of the dimensions specified for the sealant material to be used .
if the insert is not vertical additional parallel saw cuts shall be provided as required to insure full removal of the inserts .
joints that are not insert formed shall be sawed to the widths and depths specified herein .
joints previously sawed and sealed will be inspected to assure the proper dimensions and shall be resawed to the proper widths and depths when required .
joints shall be sawed as follows initial joint width w inches sawed width inches sawed depthd inches num w num num d num num w num num d num num w num no sawing required d numw num num d is distance from pavement surface to bottom of backer rod .
immediately after saw cutting a joint or routing a crack old sealant shall be removed and the internal surfaces of the joint or crack shall be thoroughly cleaned by sandblasting .
sand for sandblasting shall be sharp and clean and shall be capable of passing a no .
num sieve .
the amount of compressed air and the nozzle pressure shall be such that the joints and cracks will be thoroughly cleaned and the edges will have etched surfaces .
c dowel placement dowel bars shall be placed in transverse joints when the initial joint width is greater than num inches .
slots for dowel bar placement shall be made with two saw cuts perpendicular to the joint and num num inches apart .
saw cuts shall be one half the depth of the slab plus num inch .
concrete shall be removed between the saw cuts and smooth epoxy coated dowels which are num inches in diameter and num inches long shall be inserted into the formed slot .
dowels shall be supported above the bottom of the slot so that epoxy grout can flow around the circumference of the dowel .
dowels shall be placed so that the dowel is embedded equal distance into the two slabs .
dowel bars shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with type b coating except that the core material shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
dowel bars shall be placed as shown on the section num num plans and shall be placed at approximately middepth of the existing slab .
the bar shall be thoroughly and uniformly coated with a waterproof grease prior to placement into the slot then covered with an approved epoxy grout .
a numinch thickness of preformed joint filler shall be placed next to one edge of the joint such that a one numinch deep sealant reservoir can be formed at the top as shown on the plans .
the wide joint shall be filled with epoxy grout .
on longitudinal joints where the joint opening exceeds num inches the saw cuts for placement of tie bars perpendicular to the joint shall be num inch apart so that a no .
num deformed tie bar num inches long can be inserted into the slot .
this numinch tie bar shall be placed at mid slab depth and equal distance into each slab then covered with an approved epoxy grout .
the bars shall be at numinch spacing .
the wide joint shall also be filled with epoxy grout .
d cleaning prior to sealing prior to sealing all foreign or loosened particles shall be removed from the joints to the full depth of the original sawed joints .
the removal of all foreign or loosened particles shall be accomplished with compressed air or by other methods approved by the engineer .
air compressors shall be capable of furnishing a sufficient amount of compressed air to clean the joints properly .
e separating or blocking medium backer rod immediately following the cleaning of joints and prior to the application of sealant a backer rod composed of an inert compressible material shall be inserted along the lower portion of the joint groove at a uniform depth as shown on the project plans .
the backer rod shall be compatible with the sealant in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the product shall be clean free of scale foreign matter oil or moisture and shall be nonabsorbing .
the engineer shall be assured that the material proposed for use has been used successfully in similar installations .
backer rod sizes shall be as follows joint width inches backer rod diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num f installation of sealant section num num sealant compound shall not be placed unless the joint is dry clean and free of dust .
the face of the joint shall be surface dry and the ambient and pavement temperatures shall both be at least num degrees f at the time of application of the sealant .
installation of the sealant shall be such that the inplace sealant shall be well bonded to the concrete and free of voids or entrapped air .
the joints shall be sealed in a neat and workmanlike manner so that upon completion of the work the surface of the sealant material will be num num inch below the adjacent pavement surface .
the contractor shall refill all low joints before final acceptance .
any excess material on the surface of the pavement shall be removed and the pavement surface shall be left in a clean condition .
vehicular or heavy equipment traffic shall not be permitted on the pavement in the area of the joints during the curing period .
num method of measurement joint and crack repairs will be measured by the linear foot .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of joint and crack repairs measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place .
num edge sealing num description the work shall consist of furnishing all materials and sawing or routing and sealing the joints between the portland cement concrete pavement and the asphaltic concrete distress lane .
this work shall be done after the completion of any specified pavement grinding and after any specified rehabilitation of the distress lane or outside shoulder .
the work shall be accomplished in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as specified herein .
num materials a general the sealant to be used shall be any one of the following a mixture of asphalt and num percent vulcanized granulated rubber .
premixed block material consisting of asphalt and num percent vulcanized rubber .
b ground rubber section num num all material shall meet the requirements of these specifications and the contractor shall submit a certificate of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
rubber shall be free of fabric wire or other contaminating materials .
no more than four percent by weight calcium carbonate may be included to prevent the particles from sticking together .
rubber shall meet the following requirements when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
sieve size asphalt rubber vulcanized passing premixed asphalt rubber num vulcanized passing no .
num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num the rubber shall have a specific gravity of num num .
c asphalt cement num asphaltrubber vulcanized type a asphalt cement shall be an asphalt binder performance grade pg num conforming to the requirements of section num .
type b asphalt cement shall be an asphalt binder performance grade pg num conforming to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements a material mixing requirements the methods used to combine the materials and the design of the equipment shall be such that the engineer can readily determine the percentages by weight of the materials being incorporated into the mixture .
num asphaltrubber vulcanized the mixture shall consist of num num percent asphalt and num num percent rubber by weight .
the materials shall be combined as rapidly as possible for such a time and at such a temperature that the consistency of the mixture section num num approaches that of a semifluid material .
since the time required to achieve this state is a function of the temperature of the asphalt the time may vary and shall conform to that recommended by the manufacturer .
b equipment requirements the equipment used in the application of the asphaltrubber material shall have a mixing system in the heating unit in order to maintain a consistent uniform homogeneous mixture throughout the crack sealing operation .
the equipment shall be designed to provide a continuous supply so that operations may proceed without delays .
c weather the asphaltrubber mixture shall not be placed during wet weather or under other conditions which will adversely affect the operations .
the sealant shall not be placed in cracks which are wet .
if adverse weather conditions are such as to affect the operations the engineer will determine whether or not the operations should cease .
d application of asphaltrubber sealant the joint shall be sawed in the asphaltic concrete directly adjacent to the edge of the portland cement concrete pavement and shall be at least num inch wide and one inch deep .
immediately prior to placement of the sealant the joints shall be cleaned as approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement edge sealing will be measured by the linear foot of longitudinal edge joint sealed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of edge sealing measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of edge seal complete in place .
section num asphaltic concrete hot plant requirements num description w hen referenced in individual specifications the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall meet the requirements specified herein .
num requirements section num num mixing plants shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except as modified herein .
mineral admixture shall be proportioned by weight .
the mineral admixture shall be added and thoroughly mixed with the mineral aggregate by means of a mechanical mixing device prior to the mineral aggregate and mineral admixture entering the dryer .
the moisture content of the combined mineral aggregate shall be a minimum of three percent by weight of the aggregate during the mixing process .
the mineral admixture shall be weighed utilizing an approved weigh system with a weight totalizer prior to entry into the mechanical mixing device .
the mechanical mixing device shall be a pugmill type mixer which is in good working condition and which consists of at least two motorized shafts with mixing paddles .
the mixing device shall be designed such that the mixture of aggregate and admixture is moved in a near horizontal direction by the mixing paddles without the aid of conveyor belts for a distance of at least three feet .
the rate of aggregate feed shall not exceed the mixing devices rated capacity in tons per hour .
the mixer shall be constructed to minimize the loss of mineral admixture .
the mixer shall be located in the aggregate delivery system at a location where the mixed material can be readily inspected on a belt prior to entry into the dryer .
the mixing device shall be capable of effective mixing in the full range of asphaltic concrete production rates .
a positive signal system shall be provided and utilized during production whereby the mixing shall automatically be stopped if the mineral admixture is not being introduced into the mineral aggregate .
the plant will not be permitted to operate unless the signal system is in good working condition .
the contractors plant and equipment shall be constructed and operated so that there is not a significant loss of mineral admixture through the dust collection system of the plant .
for mixing plants other than batch plants bituminous material and mineral aggregate shall be proportioned by either volume or weight .
w hen a batch plant is used bituminous material and mineral aggregate shall be proportioned by weight .
w eighing shall be performed with all receptacles and scales insulated against the vibration or movement of the rest of the plant .
the insulated receptacles and scales shall be such that the error in weighing while the entire plant or any part of the plant is operating shall not exceed two percent for the bituminous material and the individual mineral aggregate components or num percent for any batch .
w eighing of bituminous material shall be done in a heated insulated bucket suspended from a springless dial scale system .
section num num mineral aggregate from each individual stockpilehot bin shall be properly proportioned and introduced into the asphaltic concrete .
a positive signal system shall be provided and utilized during production to indicate the low level of mineral aggregate in the bins .
the plant will not be permitted to operate unless the signal system is in good working condition .
each bin shall have an overflow chute or a divider to prevent material from spilling into adjacent bins .
the introduction of bituminous material shall be controlled by an automated system fully integrated with the controls for mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the contractor shall provide daily documentation of the proportion of each individual component mineral aggregate mineral admixture and bituminous material incorporated into the mix .
the production of the plant shall be governed by the rate required to obtain a thorough and uniform mixture of the materials .
drying and heating shall be accomplished in such a manner as to preclude the mineral aggregate from becoming coated with fuel oil or carbon .
a continuous recording pyrometer sensitive to a rate of temperature change not less than num degrees f per minute shall automatically record the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate at the discharge chute of the dryer .
a copy of the pyrometer reading shall be provided to the engineer daily .
if the asphaltic concrete is discharged from the mixer into a hopper the hopper shall be constructed so that segregation of the asphaltic concrete will be minimized .
num measurement and payment no measurement or direct payment will be made for providing a hot plant meeting the requirements specified herein the cost being considered as included in the respective contract items .
section num bituminous treatments num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing or applying a single or multiple course bituminous treatment in accordance with the requirements of these specifications and in reasonably close conformity to the lines shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
section num num the kind of bituminous treatment may consist of one or a combination of the following prime coat tack coat fog coat chip seal coat num materials num bituminous materials the bituminous material shall be of the type and grade specified in the special provisions and shall conform to the requirements of the following subsections asphalt cement num liquid asphalt num emulsified asphalt num emulsified asphalt special type num recycling agents num emulsified recycling agents num application temperatures of bituminous materials shall conform to the requirements of table num .
num aggregate materials a general there is no departmentfurnished source of aggregate material .
the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num .
aggregate material will be sampled for gradation acceptance in the final stockpile before incorporation into the work .
the aggregate material will be deemed to be acceptable when the test values for each specified aggregate characteristic are within the specified limits .
b blotter material blotter material shall be a natural sand crushed sand volcanic cinders or other approved material and shall be free of deleterious amounts of foreign substances .
the grading shall meet the following requirements when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num section num num sieve size percent passing num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num c cover material aggregate for cover material shall be of clean sand gravel or crushed rock and shall be free from lumps or balls of clay and shall not contain calcareous or clay coatings caliche synthetic materials organic matter or foreign substances .
the gradation shall meet the following requirements for the class specified in the special provisions when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
percent passing sieve size class num class num num inch num num inch num num num num inch num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num cover material shall meet the following requirements aggregate characteristics test method requirement abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
max num carbonates arizona test method num maximum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num at least two fractured faces and minimum num at least one fractured face determined on plus no .
num material flakiness index arizona test method num maximum num bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num w ater absorption arizona test method num num num section num num num construction requirements num weather limitations bituminous material used in chip seal coats shall be applied to an existing bituminous surface only between the dates shown in subsection num for the average elevation of the project when the existing bituminous surface is dry the pavement surface temperature is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of the application of bituminous material is at least num degrees f and rising .
the application of bituminous material shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
bituminous material used in prime coats shall normally be applied to an existing aggregate surface only when the ambient air temperature in the shade is at least num degrees f and when the existing aggregate surface is slightly damp .
at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event that weather conditions either existing or expected are anticipated to have an adverse effect upon the bituminous treatment .
num equipment a distributor truck distributor trucks shall be so designed equipped maintained and operated that bituminous material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface at readily determined and controlled rates of from num to num gallons per square yard with uniform pressure and with an allowable transverse variation from any specified rate not to exceed num percent or num gallons per square yard whichever is less .
distributor equipment shall include a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of the tank contents .
distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump and a spray bar which is adjustable laterally and vertically .
the distributor shall provide for continuous circulation of the bituminous material through the tank and spray bar .
prior to the spreading of bituminous material all distributor trucks proposed for use shall have been tested for rate of transverse spread in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num and certified within num months from the date of spreading .
however the engineer may at any time require that each distributor truck be tested to determine the rate of the transverse spread .
equipment which fails to provide an acceptable application of bituminous material shall be removed from the project .
b power brooms section num num power brooms shall be of the rotary type equipped maintained and operated so that the bristles are of reasonably uniform length and capable of cleaning without gouging or tearing the surface .
c rollers rollers shall be of the oscillating type having a width of not less than four feet with pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter .
w obblewheel rollers will not be permitted .
the tires shall be spaced so that the gaps between adjacent tires will be covered by the following tires .
the tires shall be inflated to num pounds per square inch or such lower pressure as designated by the engineer and maintained so that the air pressure will not vary more than five pounds per square inch from the designated pressure .
pneumatictired rollers shall be constructed so that the total weight of the compactor can be varied to produce an operating weight per tire of not less than num pounds .
the total operating weight of the roller shall be varied as directed by the engineer .
d aggregate spreaders the application of cover material shall be accomplished by means of a calibrated spreader .
the spreader shall be a selfpropelled computerized ratecontrolled unit capable of an application width of num feet or greater .
the spreader shall be in good mechanical condition and capable of applying aggregate uniformly across the spread width .
the application of blotter material shall be accomplished by means of a sand slinger or other equipment approved by the engineer .
aggregate application rates are expected to vary from four to num pounds per square yard depending on the type of construction .
num traffic control in the construction or application of a bituminous treatment the treated roadway surface shall not be used by the contractor its agents or others until it has been established to the satisfaction of the engineer that the treated roadway surface will not be damaged or marred under the action of traffic .
no traffic of any description shall be allowed on any bituminous application until approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall erect and maintain approved barricades signs and other traffic control devices and shall use every possible means to protect the work and to exclude traffic from the roadway surface for as long a time as may be required .
traffic shall be handled in the manner most convenient to the traveling public .
w hen traffic is handled on a oneway basis the contractor shall provide such flaggers and pilot trucks as deemed necessary to insure adequate protection for the roadway surface .
traffic may be detoured around the work provided that detours are constructed and maintained in a satisfactory manner and properly signed .
w hen it is necessary to provide for traffic across section num num a bituminous treated surface the crossing shall be blotted with material as directed before the crossing is opened to traffic .
num preparation of the surface the surface to be treated shall be thoroughly cleaned to the satisfaction of the engineer prior to applying the bituminous material .
w hen the work consists of a chip seal coat or when blotter material is applied selfpropelled rotary power brooms along with hand brooms if necessary shall be used immediately in advance of applying the bituminous material .
w hen a bituminous treatment is to be applied to an existing aggregate surface the surface shall be uniformly smooth firm and reasonably true to grades and cross sections as shown on the project plans and shall be so maintained throughout the placing of the bituminous treatment .
in no event shall a bituminous treatment be placed on a soft uneven base .
any holes depressions or irregularities shall be repaired .
all loose and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced by suitable material which shall be compacted to produce a dense surface conforming to the adjacent area .
uniformity of surface texture is of the utmost importance .
w hen required the existing aggregate surface on which the bituminous treatment is to be placed shall be lightly bladed watered and compacted immediately prior to the application of bituminous material .
in extremely dry areas additional light applications of water may be required prior to the application of the bituminous material to facilitate penetration of the bituminous material .
num application of bituminous material the types grades and approximate rates of application of bituminous material will be as specified herein .
the engineer will specify the exact rates based on the surface to be treated and the characteristics of the aggregate material .
the rates to be applied may vary substantially because of different surface conditions within the project limits .
the actual bituminous material application shall not vary more than num percent from the application rate specified by the engineer .
the bituminous material shall be uniformly applied to the prepared surface at the rate specified by the engineer and in one application .
the various types or grades of bituminous materials shall be mixed with materials or applied at temperatures within the limits given in table num and at no time shall the contractor increase the temperature of the bituminous material above the higher limit specified .
section num num in order to obtain uniform distribution the distribution shall be promptly started or stopped at the junction of two applications in a manner that will not result in overlaps or gaps in the applications .
the distribution shall be promptly cut off prior to the decrease in uniform flow caused by the distributor tank becoming empty when there is a decrease in uniform flow due to any reason whatever or when the forward movement of the distributor slows down or stops .
in the event that any spots are missed in the application or any areas develop that do not have a uniform spread or penetration such areas shall be remedied without unnecessary delay as directed by the engineer .
care shall be taken to prevent the spraying or splattering of bituminous material on adjacent pavements structures curb guardrail trees and shrubbery or any other object outside of the area designated for spraying .
unused bituminous material shall not be disposed of within the rightofway lines .
num application of cover material cover material shall be immediately and uniformly spread over the freshly applied bituminous material .
any oversize aggregate or foreign material picked up during stockpiling or loading operations shall be eliminated before entering the aggregate spreader hopper .
supplemental spreading and smoothing shall be done by hand methods where necessary .
w hen emulsified asphalt is used the cover material shall be wet but free of running water at the time of spreading .
w hen bituminous material other than emulsified asphalt is used the cover material at the time of spreading shall be at least as dry as the material dried to a saturated surfacedry condition in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
num rolling cover material following the spreading of cover material the surface shall be promptly rolled with selfpropelled pneumatictired compactors .
a sufficient number of compactors shall be provided to cover the width of the material spread in one pass of the compactors and this rolling shall continue until a minimum of three passes has been completed .
num removing of loose cover material all loose cover material shall be removed from the paved surface by brooming in not less than num hours nor more than num hours after application however if because of weather conditions temperature or section num num other reasons the engineer determines that conditions are not conducive to obtaining the best results brooming shall be discontinued until the engineer has considered all conditions and has determined the best time for the removal of the cover material .
the cover material shall be removed by means of a power broom which shall be in good condition and of a design suitable for the work .
the action of the broom shall be such that particles which are stuck to the bituminous material will not be dislodged .
num application of blotter material the approximate amount of blotter material when required as a part of a bituminous treatment will be specified in the special provisions however the engineer will specify the exact rate to be applied based on the characteristics of the bituminous treated surface .
blotter material at the time of spreading shall be wet but free from running water .
blotter material shall be uniformly spread .
any oversize aggregate or foreign material picked up during stockpiling or loading operations shall be eliminated before entering the spreader .
supplemental spreading or smoothing shall be done by hand methods where necessary .
prior to final acceptance and when ordered by the engineer the contractor shall remove and dispose of any excess blotter material .
the method of removal and the disposal of any excess blotter material shall be the contractors responsibility .
num joints transverse joints with the preceding work at intersections and at all existing pavements and structures shall be made by a method approved by the engineer prior to the start of the work .
longitudinal joints shall be butt joints .
joints shall be cleaned as deemed necessary by the engineer prior to the application of bituminous material in the adjacent strip .
regardless of the width of the roadway to be sealed the number of longitudinal joints shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located to the greatest degree possible so that they will coincide with painted lines between traffic lanes .
num prime coat the type of bituminous material and the approximate application rate shall be as specified in the special provisions .
section num num w hen it is deemed necessary areas having excess bituminous material shall be blotted with material as directed .
w hen so directed the surface of the completed prime coat shall be rolled with a pneumatictired roller .
the integrity of the prime coat shall be maintained at all times until the next course is placed or until final acceptance .
in the event traffic has caused holes or breaks in the surface such holes or breaks shall be satisfactorily repaired by the contractor .
num tack coat tack coat shall be applied prior to placing a bituminous mixture on a primed surface an existing bituminous surface or an existing portland cement concrete pavement surface .
tack coat shall also be applied between layers of bituminous mixtures .
the material to be used for bituminous tack coat will be specified by the engineer and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the type grade or designation and the rate of application for the specific usage will be specified by the engineer .
the following table shows the various types of material from which the engineer may select the tack coat and the approximate application rates type grade or approximate application rates gallons square yard payment designation prior to placing acfc aracfc or arac all other tack coats factor emulsified asphalt special type num num emulsified asphalt other than special type num num asphalt cement grade specified by engineer num to num num num if emulsified asphalt of any designation or type is used it shall have broken before asphaltic concrete is placed .
if emulsified asphalt of any designation or type is held over night it shall be reheated and agitated prior to further application .
the engineer may either reduce the rate to be applied or except as specified below eliminate the use of tack coat in any part of the work if in the engineers judgment the bituminous mixture to be placed will be effectively bonded to the underlying surface .
for asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber or section num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber application of asphalt cement tack coat immediately prior to placing such pavements shall not be eliminated although the engineer may adjust the application rate within the above stated limits .
bituminous material shall be applied only as far in advance of the placement of the bituminous mixed materials as is necessary to obtain the proper condition of tackiness .
in no event shall more bituminous material be applied in one day than will be covered by bituminous mixed materials during that same day .
num fog coat the type of bituminous material and the approximate application rate shall be as specified in the special provisions .
the material shall be diluted with one part water to one part bituminous material .
blotter material shall be applied to the treated surface in one or more applications for a total application as specified in the special provisions at a time specified by the engineer and before opening to traffic .
num chip seal coat the design quantities of cover material and bituminous material for chip seal coat shall be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
the type of bituminous material shall be crsnum .
the approximate application rate shall be as specified in the special provisions .
cover material shall be applied at the rate of approximately num cubic yards per square yard however the engineer will specify the exact rate to be applied based on the characteristics of the aggregate material and the surface to be treated .
the contractor shall submit a minimum numpound sample of cover material to the engineer at least num calendar days prior to beginning application of the cover material for testing .
chip seal coat shall be placed between the dates shown below for the average elevation of the project .
average elevation of project feet beginning and ending dates num num num num num num num and over march num may num september num october num may num september num june num august num section num num the minimum trafficfree period for a newly applied chip seal coat shall be three hours however the contractors hauling equipment may use the new seal coat during the traffic free period at a speed not to exceed num miles per hour .
after the traffic free period but prior to removing the loose cover material all traffic allowed by the engineer shall be limited to a speed not to exceed num miles per hour .
num method of measurement bituminous materials will be measured by the ton .
bituminous material that is required to be diluted prior to application will be measured by the ton of diluted material .
cover material when specified will be measured by the cubic yard .
cover material will be weighed and the amount in tons of dry material will be converted to cubic yards .
the weight of all moisture contained in the cover material will be deducted prior to the conversion of the weight in tons to the volume in cubic yards .
the dry weight per cubic yard will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
the contractor shall be responsible to determine the amount of cover material that will be required to complete the work from the source or sources from which the cover material is obtained .
blotter material when required will be measured by the ton .
measurement for payment will be made only for the quantity of bituminous material and for the quantity of aggregate material used in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
time to apply tack coat is defined as the hours within a work shift that an approved distributor truck containing the specified bituminous material is required by the engineer to be at the work site .
the time which is required to apply tack coat will be measured to the nearest hour for the actual number of hours required in any one work shift however when the time required is less than four hours in any workday the time will be measured as four hours .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of bituminous treatments complete in place measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price except the contract unit price for bituminous material will be adjusted for quantities of material represented by the corresponding test results .
adjustments will be made in accordance with table num .
section num num payment for all measures necessary to direct and escort traffic through the area being bituminous treated will be made as specified under section num .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for rolling .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for furnishing applying and removing blotter material furnished in conjunction with the application of a prime coat .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for the maintenance or repair of a prime coat surface .
the bidding schedule quantity for tack coat is based on an estimated application rate of num gallons per square yard for each application shown on the project plans .
the unit price for bituminous tack coat is deemed to be the cost to furnish transport and store asphalt cement or emulsified asphalt at the project location .
payment for bituminous tack coat will be made at the unit price multiplied by the respective payment factor listed under subsection num and adjusted to the nearest dollar .
unless otherwise specified the accepted quantity of bituminous tack coat measured as provided above will be paid at the contract unit price per ton adjusted as provided above which price shall be full compensation for furnishing transporting and storing the exact type grade or designation of bituminous tack coat specified by the engineer .
unless otherwise specified the accepted quantity of time to apply bituminous tack coat measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour which payment shall be full compensation for applying bituminous tack coat .
section num road mix bituminous pavement num description the work under this section shall include furnishing all materials and placing an aggregate material combined with a bituminous material mixed and placed by the road mix method to form a base or surface course or for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials aggregate shall conform to the requirements specified in the special provisions .
section num num bituminous material shall be liquid asphalt conforming to the requirements of section num for the grade specified in the special provisions .
num construction requirements num general prior to placing road mix bituminous pavement over an existing bituminous surface or a primed base all loose dirt and other objectionable material shall be removed from the existing surface .
if so directed such cleaning shall be done with a rotary power broom .
prior to placing road mix bituminous pavement over a base course the base surface shall be smooth and firm and in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions required and shall be so maintained throughout the period of placing the road mix bituminous pavement .
num placing aggregate aggregate shall be deposited upon the prepared base or existing pavement and shaped into uniform windrows or shall be uniformly spread by an approved spreading device in the amount necessary to provide a surface of the required width and thickness .
w hen a traveling mixing plant is used the loose material shall be placed in windrows or in a blanket of uniform cross section and of such size that all the material in the windrow or blanket can be passed through the mixing plant at each mixing operation .
num application of bituminous material bituminous material shall be applied to the aggregate at a temperature conforming to the range of temperatures specified in table num .
bituminous material shall be applied only when the atmospheric temperature in the shade is above num degrees f. application of bituminous material shall not be made when the aggregate contains more than num percent moisture however in special cases when the aggregate is unusually porous a moisture content in excess of num percent may be permitted at the discretion of the engineer .
the approximate amount of bituminous material to be used will be specified in the special provisions however the exact amount will be determined by the engineer at the time of application .
section num num the total bituminous material required shall be applied to the aggregate uniformly in two or more applications .
application shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num mixing a general requirements the aggregate and the bituminous material shall be mixed by means of a motor grader or shall be mixed by means of a traveling mixing plant supplemented by motor grader mixing if necessary .
during the mixing operations care shall be taken to avoid cutting into the underlying course or contaminating the mixture with earth or other extraneous matter .
should the mixture show an excess deficiency or uneven distribution of bituminous material the condition shall be corrected by the addition of aggregate or bituminous material as required and remixing .
b motor grader mixing immediately following each application of bituminous material sufficient mixing shall be done to absorb partially the bituminous material and prevent the formation of pools .
after the final quantity of bituminous material has been applied and the materials partially mixed the entire volume of loose material shall be moved into a windrow in the center or side of the road .
the windrow shall then be processed until all particles of the mixture are thoroughly and uniformly coated with bituminous material .
during this operation the blade shall be set so as to cause a revolving motion of the mixture .
the amount of mixing required will be determined on the basis of uniform color and consistency of the mixture .
c traveling plant mixing the plant used for mixing shall be so constructed that it will readily and cleanly pick up all the aggregate without damage to the base and will feed the aggregate to the mixing chamber at a uniform rate .
the bituminous material feed shall be readily adjustable and be mechanically synchronized with the flow of aggregate to the mixer .
manual controls of the flow of bituminous material will not be permitted .
each time mixing commences or ends the starting or stopping of the bituminous material application shall be so timed as to avoid the formation of rich or lean spots in the mixture .
the materials shall be mixed until a uniform product is obtained with all particles of aggregate thoroughly coated with bituminous material .
num spreading section num num the mixture shall be thoroughly aerated before spreading in order to reduce the solvents .
the completely mixed material shall be spread only by skilled operators .
spread lengths shall be limited in order that the finishing and compacting can be completed within the same day .
the motor grader used to spread the mixture shall have a blade not less than num feet long and a wheel base of not less than num feet and shall be free from lost motion in the blade control .
after spreading on the road bed if necessary the moisture content shall be reduced by blading and reblading the mixture and allowing it to dry before final spreading .
if the thickness of the material to be compacted is greater than two inches after spreading as specified above approximately the upper one half of the material shall be removed and placed in windrows of equal size on each side .
the windrows shall be so placed that earth or shoulder material will not become mixed with the windrowed material .
the area between the windrows shall then be thoroughly rolled with pneumatictired rollers after which the windrows shall be moved and the areas occupied by the windrows shall be rolled .
then the windrowed material shall be evenly spread over the lower compacted layer and shall be shaped and rolled to the finished grade and cross section .
other methods of spreading the material may be used if approved by the engineer .
num compacting compacting equipment shall consist of pneumatic tiredcompactors and tandem power steel wheel compactors .
compactors shall be selfpropelled .
the position of the seat or seats or the placement of the mirrors shall be such as to enable the operator to have the edge of the pavement against which the bituminous road mix is being compacted in the operators full view at all times .
at its option the contractor may furnish either pneumatictired compactors of the type that are equipped with means for increasing or decreasing the air pressure in the tires while in operation or compactors of the conventional type .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be designed so that they are capable of turning or reversing direction on the bituminous road mix surfaces without scuffing or displacing the material .
steel wheel compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons and shall be rated according to the manufacturers rating in tons .
sufficient rolling equipment shall be furnished to compact and finish satisfactorily the amount of mixture being placed .
section num num rolling with pneumatictired rollers shall be continuous throughout the spreading operations .
tandem power rollers shall be used for final compaction and finish rolling .
final rolling shall be done longitudinally beginning at the outer edge and progressing toward the center except that on superelevated curves the engineer may require that rolling progress from the lower to the upper edge .
under no circumstances shall the center of the road be rolled first .
each passage of the roller shall overlap the preceding passage not less than one half the width of the roller .
rolling shall continue until the surface is smooth and uniformly and thoroughly compacted .
num surface requirements and tolerances an acceptable surface shall not vary more than num inch from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge when the straightedge is placed parallel to the center line of the roadway .
w hen deviations in excess of the above tolerances are found such places as humps or depressions shall be corrected .
num inaccessible areas at locations where bituminous road mix is to be placed over areas inaccessible to conventional mixing spreading or compacting equipment the material may be mixed at other locations and spread and compacted by other approved methods .
num method of measurement road mix bituminous pavement will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of aggregate and bituminous material .
measurement will include any weight used to construct intersections turnouts curbs spillways and spillway inlets ditches catch basin entrances median strips sidewalks or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
bituminous material of the type specified will be measured by the ton in accordance with the requirements of section num .
measurement for payment will be made only of the quantity of bituminous material used in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num basis of payment section num num the accepted quantities of road mix bituminous pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including compaction and necessary surface preparation .
payment for bituminous material will be made by the ton .
adjustments in the contract unit price in accordance with the requirements of section num will be made for the quantities of material represented by the corresponding test results .
section num asphaltic concrete num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and an asphalt cement to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
it is the intent of this specification that the contractor acquire and make all arrangements for a source or sources of material that it furnish certificates of compliance as hereinafter specified that it furnish a mix design which will meet the design criteria specified hereinafter and that it provide all the equipment materials and labor necessary to furnish and place the asphaltic concrete in accordance with the requirements specified herein .
num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria mix designs shall be developed by the contractor on the basis of the following criteria and tested in accordance with the requirements of the following test methods section num num criteria requirements arizona test num inch mix base mix method num .
voids in mineral aggregate range num num num num num num .
effective voids range note num note num num num .
absorbed asphalt range num num num num num num .
index of retained strength min .
num num num num num .
w et strength psi minimum num num num num .
stability pounds minimum num num num num .
flow num inch range num num num num num num .
mix design grading limits num percent passing sieve num inch mix base mix size without admixture with admixture without admixture with admixture num inch num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num notes num as specified in the special provisions .
num for interstate roadways if the average elevation of the project is above num feet the index of retained strength shall be a minimum of num percent .
the ratio of the mix design composite gradation target for the no .
num sieve including mineral admixture to the effective asphalt content shall be within the range specified in the special provisions .
num materials num mineral aggregate the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num except that subparagraph num under subsection num b shall not apply .
section num num coarse mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert material with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate shall be obtained from crushed gravel or crushed rock .
all uncrushed material passing the no .
num sieve shall be removed prior to the crushing screening and washing operations necessary to produce the specified gradation .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of num hours in advance of crushing the material to be used as mineral aggregate so all crushing operations can be inspected .
existing stockpile material which has not been inspected during crushing will not be permitted for use unless the contractor is able to document to the engineers satisfaction that the mineral aggregate has been crushed .
any material inspected by the department as crushed material for the project shall be separated from the contractors other stockpiles and reserved for use throughout the project duration .
the contractor may blend uncrushed fine aggregate up to a maximum of num percent of the total aggregate provided that the composite of uncrushed fine aggregate and crushed fine aggregate meets the requirement for uncompacted void content .
the uncrushed fine aggregate shall be num percent passing the num inch sieve and contain not more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
should the contractor modify the method of producing either the uncrushed or crushed fine aggregate the engineer shall be immediately notified and the materials sampled and tested for determination of uncompacted void content .
aggregates shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other material that prevent the thorough coating with the asphalt cement .
mineral aggregate shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
section num num mineral aggregate characteristics test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num sand equivalent aashto t num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
max num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num with at least two fractured faces and minimum num with at least one fractured face plus no .
num material uncompacted void content arizona test method num minimum num carbonates only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
arizona test method num maximum num tests on aggregates outlined above except for abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed separately on materials from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
mineral aggregate from a source or combination of sources which does not meet the requirements according to the contractors mix design proposal for combined bulk specific gravity andor combined water absorption up to a maximum of num percent but meets other specified requirements will be further considered for acceptance by the engineer if a the total estimated cost of all asphaltic concrete components using the mix design unit weight asphalt cement content and mineral admixture percentage does not exceed the total amount bid for these items by more than num percent or b a supplemental agreement is executed adjusting the unit prices of asphaltic concrete components section num num such that the total estimated cost does not exceed the total amount bid by more than num percent .
num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount used shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate unless testing demonstrates that additional admixture is required in order to meet the mix design criteria for w et strength and index of retained strength .
a maximum of num percent admixture will be permitted .
the exact amount of admixture required shall be specified in the mix design .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the following requirements .
material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material asphalt cement shall be a performance grade pg asphalt binder conforming to the requirements of section num .
the type of asphalt binder shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the percent of asphalt cement used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphalt cement mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the contractor shall provide the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges to the mix design laboratory for each pg asphalt binder used for mix design purposes .
the laboratory mixing temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity of num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the laboratory compaction temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity of num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the testing required in aashto t num shall be performed at num of and num of and a viscositytemperature curve developed in accordance with astm d num .
the viscositytemperature curve shall be included in the mix design report .
for pg asphalt binders that have a maximum laboratory mixing temperature exceeding num of or a maximum laboratory compaction temperature exceeding num of the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges shall be specified in writing by the asphalt binder supplier .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing compaction temperatures used shall be reported on the mix design .
the contractor shall ensure that the asphalt binder section num num supplier information required in this paragraph is provided to all appropriate parties in a timely manner and that copies are included in the mix design report .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures are for mix design purposes only .
field mixing and compaction temperatures are specified in subsection num and num .
num mix design utilizing mineral aggregate which has been crushed processed separated and stockpiled a mix design shall be formulated and submitted by the contractor to the engineer .
the mineral aggregate samples used for mix design purposes shall be representative of aggregate materials to be used during production .
the mix design shall be based on the mix design criteria and other requirements hereinbefore specified utilizing asphalt cement and mineral admixture of the type and from the sources proposed for use in the production of asphaltic concrete .
the mix design shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a professional engineer experienced in the development of mix designs and mix design testing .
the mix design shall be provided in a format that clearly indicates all the mix design requirements and shall be sealed signed and dated by the mix design engineer .
the mix design shall be prepared by a mix design laboratory that has met the requirements of the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
the contractor may purpose the use of a mix design that has been developed for a previous project .
the proposed mix design shall meet the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the asphalt cement and mineral admixture type and source of supply and the source and methods of producing mineral aggregate have not changed since the formulation of the previous mix design .
the contractor shall also provide current test results for all specified characteristics of the mineral aggregate proposed for use .
the engineer will either approve or disapprove the proposed mix design .
should the engineer disapprove the use of the previously used mix design the contractor shall prepare and submit a new mix design proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
a previously used mix design older than two years from the date it was formulated sealed signed and dated shall not be allowed for use .
any previously used mix design that is older than one year but less than two years shall not be allowed for use unless the contractor provides verification testing results .
such testing shall be onepoint verification at the design asphalt content using the proposed mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
once approved for use on a project a mix design may be used for the duration of the project .
section num num the mix design shall contain as a minimum num the name and address of the testing organization and the person responsible for the mix design testing .
num the specific locations of the sources of mineral aggregate .
num the supplier refinery type of asphalt cement and any modifiers including polymers .
the source and type of mineral admixture .
the percentage of asphalt cement and mineral admixture to be used .
num the anticipated mineral aggregate gradation in each stockpile .
num mix design gradation .
the mix design shall contain the mineral aggregate gradation and also the gradation with mineral admixture .
num the results of all testing determinations etc .
such as specific gravity of each component water absorption sand equivalent loss on abrasion fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content percent carbonates if required immersion compression results index of retained strength wet and dry strengths marshall stability and flow asphalt absorption percent air voids voids in mineral aggregate and bulk density .
num viscositytemperature curve along with the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures used .
test results used in the formulation of the mix design shall be from testing performed no earlier than num days prior to the date the mix design is signed by the mix design engineer .
historical abrasion values may be supplied on sources provided the testing was conducted within the past two years .
the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer under a cover letter signed by an authorized representative of the contractor .
a copy of the mix design and representative samples of the mineral aggregate mineral admixture and asphalt cement used in the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer for calibration of the ignition furnace and for the determination of sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content .
the engineer shall witness the sampling of the mineral aggregate .
the mix design and samples shall be submitted to the engineer at least five working days prior to the start of asphaltic concrete production .
section num num the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content shall meet the requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the uncrushed and crushed fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing either fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet the requirements specified herein asphaltic concrete production shall not commence and the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design which is representative of the materials produced or correct the deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
the engineer will review the mix design to assure that it contains all required information .
if it does not it will be returned within two working days of receipt of all samples and mix design information for further action and resubmission by the contractor .
if the contractor elects to change its source of material the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a new mix design which meets the requirements specified hereinbefore .
the contractor may make selfdirected target changes to the approved mix design within the limits shown below .
requests for selfdirected target changes shall be made in writing and acknowledged by the engineer prior to start of production for a lot .
the selfdirected target change shall meet contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
measured characteristics allowable selfdirected target changes gradation num inch sieve num from mix design target value no .
num sieve num from mix design target value no .
num sieve num from mix design target value no .
num sieve none asphalt cement content num from mix design target value effective voids none the contractor may propose target changes to the approved mix design for the engineers approval .
the engineer will determine if the proposed target change will result in mix production that meets the contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
for acceptance purposes target changes will not be retroactive .
should a mix design prove unsatisfactory to the contractor during production the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a revised mix design .
for acceptance purposes the revised mix design will not be retroactive .
num contractor quality control section num num the contractor shall perform the quality control measures described in subsection numc .
at the weekly meeting the contractor shall be prepared to explain and discuss how the following processes will be employed .
a aggregate production including crusher methods pit extraction and washing .
b stockpile management including stacking methods separation technique plant feed technique stockpile pad thickness and segregation prevention .
c proportioning and plant control including plant scale calibration mix temperature control storing method and addition of admixture .
d transporting and placing including hauling distance and temperature control segregation and nonuniform placement control and joint placement and technique .
e compaction including types and weight of rollers establishing and monitoring of roller patterns and temperature controls .
the contractor shall obtain samples and perform the tests specified in the following table section num num contractor quality control testing requirements type of test test method sampling point minimum testing frequency mineral aggregate for asphaltic concrete gradation ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per stockpile per day sand equivalent aashto t num fractured coarse aggregate particles ariz num uncompacted void content ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per num tons of total aggregate num asphaltic concrete gradation ariz num or num cold feed hot bins roadway or plant num per num tons asphalt content ariz num num or other approved methods roadway or plant num per num tons voids ariz num num num roadway or plant num per num tons each day .
maximum of num per day .
compaction ariz num roadway num per num tons note num prior to the completion of the mix design quality control tests on mineral aggregate shall be performed based on the anticipated percent use of each stockpile .
samples taken from individual stockpiles may be composited prior to performing the required tests or testing may be performed on material from each stockpile and the composite test result for each required test determined mathematically .
num construction requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the proportioning of all materials for the hauling placing loading spreading and finishing of asphaltic concrete and for the applying of bituminous material such as tack coats prime coats and provisional seals all in accordance with the appropriate portions of the specifications .
section num num the contractor shall be responsible for the material spread rate and thickness control .
the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the drier shall not exceed num of unless a higher temperature is recommended in writing by the asphalt binder supplier and approved by the engineer .
all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
pavers shall be equipped with a screed for the full width being paved heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing all courses of asphaltic concrete .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors for either or both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals which operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the placing of asphaltic concrete .
the base or subgrade upon which asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be prepared and maintained in a firm condition until asphaltic concrete is placed .
it shall not be frozen or excessively wet .
at any time the engineer may require the work to cease or that the workday be reduced in the event of weather conditions either existing or expected which would have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
all wheels and tires of compactors and other equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of objectionable material .
longitudinal joints of each course shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of any immediate underlying course .
w hen surfacing courses are placed on num foot or wider shoulders which are to receive rumble strips the contractor shall place any longitudinal section num num joints approximately one foot away from the travel lane side of the rumble strip .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the center of a lane or within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
joints shall be formed by a slope shoe or hotlapped and shall result in an even uniform surface .
before a surface course is placed in contact with a cold transverse construction joint the cold existing asphaltic concrete shall be trimmed to a vertical face by cutting the existing asphaltic concrete back for its full depth of the lift and exposing a fresh face .
after placement and finishing of the new asphaltic concrete both sides of the joint shall be dense and the joint shall be well sealed .
the surface in the area of the joint shall conform to the requirements hereinafter specified for surface tolerances when tested with the straightedge placed across the joint .
all locations where plate samples are taken from the roadway shall be immediately repaired by the contractor utilizing hot asphaltic concrete .
all holes where cores are taken shall be repaired within num hours after coring using material approved by the engineer .
all holes shall be in a dry condition prior to repair .
the patching material shall be thoroughly compacted in the holes by the contractor .
the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
a light coat of bituminous material shall be applied as directed to edges or vertical surfaces against which asphaltic concrete is to be placed .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete immediately behind the paver shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
num acceptance num general in addition to the random acceptance samples taken from each lot the engineer may sample and reject material which appears to be defective .
such rejected material shall not be used in the work .
the results of tests run on rejected material will not be included with the lot acceptance tests .
section num num acceptance will be on the basis of the following sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content gradation asphalt cement content effective voids stability compaction smoothness num sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content of mineral aggregate during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for the determination of the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content .
samples shall be obtained from the cold feed belt prior to the addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
mineral aggregate will be acceptable for sand equivalent if it meets the minimum requirements specified in subsection num and the running average of three sand equivalent tests is at least num percent and no single test is less than num percent of the sand equivalent result contained in the contractors mix design .
the fractured coarse aggregate particles shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
the uncompacted void content shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the uncrushed and crushed fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing either fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet these requirements operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the options of submitting a revised mix design conforming to the requirements of subsection num or correcting deficiencies in its aggregate stockpiles .
num blank num gradation asphalt cement content effective voids and stability a lot shall be considered to be one shifts production .
in the event a shifts production is less than num tons multiple shifts may be combined to form a lot .
w hen a lot consists of production from more section num num than one shift the following conditions apply at least one sample shall be taken each shift at least one sample shall be taken every num tons and no mix or target value changes shall be made within the lot .
if changes are made in the mix design or target values new lots will be established .
four samples of the asphaltic concrete shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer at random locations designated by the engineer .
samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of section num or num of arizona test method num and delivered to the engineer immediately after being taken .
the minimum weight of the sample shall be num pounds .
the engineer will split the sample and save onehalf for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
the material will be tested by the engineer for asphalt cement content gradation marshall density and stability and maximum theoretical density .
asphalt cement content and gradation shall be tested in accordance with arizona test method num using an ignition furnace .
a new calibration of the ignition furnace shall be performed for each mix design and at any other time the engineer directs .
marshall density and stability and maximum theoretical density shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num and num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
for plants providing asphaltic concrete exclusively for this project the difference between the asphalt cement content as measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphalt cement content shall be determined for the first five lots of asphalt concrete produced for each mix design .
if approved by the engineer a plant may be considered exclusive to the project if an asphalt cement tank is dedicated for the shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the determination of the actual asphalt cement content may include weighing of asphalt cement deliveries invoice quantities volumetric tank measurements using a calibrated rod tank stickings corrected for temperature computerized massflow meter and accounting for wasted materials .
if a computerized massflow meter is used documentation of its calibration shall be submitted to the engineer prior to asphaltic concrete production .
at any time during asphaltic concrete production the engineer may require that a new calibration of the massflow meter be performed .
if there is a difference of greater than num percent asphalt cement content between the asphalt cement content measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphalt cement content the contractor may request that a correction to the asphalt cement content by ignition furnace testing shall be made .
the contractor must make such a request in writing within two working days after receiving the test results for the fifth lot of asphaltic concrete production .
if referee testing is performed on a lot of asphaltic concrete for which a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the asphalt cement content by ignition furnace testing referee testing shall not apply to the determination of asphalt cement content .
the correction once documented and approved by the engineer shall be section num num applied to test results from the beginning of asphaltic concrete production through the remainder of asphaltic concrete production using that mix design .
if the contractor submits a new mix design a new correction must be established and applied as specified above .
for other plants no correction will be made to asphalt cement content values measured by ignition furnace testing .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of samples by the engineer .
in the event the contractor elects to question the test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the referee testing shall be performed in an independent approved laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the samples will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the tests results by the department or the mix design targets for gradation and effective voids .
the asphaltic concrete samples previously saved will be tested for marshall density and stability and maximum theoretical density in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num and num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the samples shall also be tested in accordance with arizona test method num for asphalt cement content by ignition furnace and gradation of the mineral aggregate .
new pts will be determined for all characteristics with the exception of asphalt cement content if a correction to the ignition furnace test value was made as specified above .
w hen referee testing is performed on a mixtureproperties lot the referee test result for the average maximum theoretical density will be used to determine a new pt for compaction .
the results of these determinations will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the total pay factor of the lot does not improve or is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
a mixture properties lot placed with an average stability below num pounds for base mixes or num pounds for num inch mixes shall be rejected and shall be subject to an engineering analysis of anticipated performance in accordance with subsection nume .
production shall cease until the contractor proposes a corrective action the engineer finds acceptable .
if the engineer rejects the proposed corrective action the contractor shall submit a revised mix design .
the target values for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids are given in the contractors mix design .
the upper limits ul and lower limits ll of acceptable production of each of the measured characteristics are as follows section num num measured characteristics ll ul gradation sieve size num inch see note num below tv num tv num no .
num tv num tv num no .
num tv num tv num no .
num tv num tv num asphalt cement content tv num tv num effective voids tv num tv num notes num the limits are used in the statistical calculations for quality index .
acceptance is controlled by the variability of the produced material and every effort should be made to strive for the applicable target value tv .
num in the case of num inch sieve requirement for the base mix only the lower limit shall be the target value minus num and the upper limit shall be the target value plus num .
the engineer will determine the pt of each measured characteristic in accordance with subsection numi and utilizing table num will determine pay factors for each measured characteristic .
num compaction a courses num inch or less in nominal thickness num general requirements asphaltic concrete shall be placed only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of placement is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
asphaltic concrete immediately behind the laydown machine shall be a minimum of num degrees f. all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
num equipment compacting and smoothing shall be accomplished by the use of self propelled equipment .
compactors shall be pneumatic tired andor steel wheel .
compactors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
compactors shall be designed and properly maintained so that they are capable of accomplishing the required compaction .
section num num steel wheel compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be the oscillating type with at least seven pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter .
w obblewheel compactors will not be permitted .
the tires shall be spaced so that the gaps between adjacent tires will be covered by the following tires .
the tires shall be capable of being inflated to num pounds per square inch and maintained so that the air pressure will not vary more than num pounds per square inch from the designated pressure .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be constructed so that the total weight of the compactor will be varied to produce an operating weight per tire of not less than num pounds .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be equipped with skirttype devices mounted around the tires so that the temperature of the tires will be maintained during the compaction process .
num rolling method procedure compaction shall consist of an established sequence of coverage using specified types of compactors .
a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
the rolling sequence the type of compactor to be used and the number of coverages required shall be as follows rolling type of compactor no .
of coverages sequence option no .
num option no .
num option no.num option no .
num initial static steel vibrating steel num num intermediate pneumatic tired vibrating steel num num num finish static steel static steel num num num num based on the roller pattern which exhibits the best performance .
the engineer shall select the option for compaction and when pneumatic tired compactors are used will designate the tire pressure .
one pneumatic tired roller shall be furnished for each num tons of asphaltic concrete per hour .
steel wheel compactors shall not be used in the vibratory mode for courses of one inch or less in thickness nor when the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num f. initial and intermediate compaction shall be accomplished before the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num f. section num num compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated as specified and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
b courses greater than num inch in nominal thickness compaction control shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the number and types of rollers shall be the contractors responsibility and shall be sufficient to meet these requirements .
all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
a lot for compaction purposes shall be identical to the lot described in subsection num .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection numd .
each lot shall be tested for acceptance .
twenty cores shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer .
the engineer will designate num random locations within the lot and the contractor shall take two cores each location however if more than one shift constitutes a lot two cores shall be taken from a minimum of two random locations each shift or as directed by the engineer .
the engineer will save one core from each location for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest one foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
w hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
areas excluded from testing will be compacted in accordance with subsection numa .
cores shall be taken utilizing mechanical coring equipment in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num section num .
cores shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and shall be taken not later than two working days after the lot or sublot placement .
the cores shall be delivered to the engineer immediately upon being taken .
the cores will be tested for acceptance by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of cores by the engineer .
in areas where more than one lift is placed in the same lot coring shall be accomplished through the full depth of the lifts after the final lift is placed and the compaction density shall be based on the full depth of the lifts .
the target value for compaction shall be num percent inplace air voids .
inplace air voids shall be determined using arizona test method num .
section num num the maximum theoretical density used in determination of air voids will be the average of the four maximum theoretical densities determined in subsection num .
the upper limit ul is num percent inplace air voids and the lower limit ll is num percent inplace air voids .
the engineer will determine the pt for compaction in accordance with subsection num numi and utilizing table num will determine the compaction pay factor .
in the event the contractor elects to question the core test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the cores previously saved will be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num in an independent testing laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the cores will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the test results by the department or the density target .
using the referee test results the engineer will determine a new pt for compaction .
the result of this determination will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the compaction pay factor of the lot does not improve is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
num smoothness and surface tolerances asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met num the surface of the final lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num the surface of any lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications other than the final lift shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
section num num num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the asphaltic concrete actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
measurement will include any quantity used in construction of intersections turnouts or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
asphalt cement will be measured by the ton on the basis of the asphalt cement content determined in accordance with subsection num for each lot of asphaltic concrete accepted .
the average asphalt cement content will be multiplied by the number of tons of asphaltic concrete in that lot to determine the amount of asphalt cement .
if the contractor has requested referee testing the average asphalt cement content will come from the independent testing laboratory results unless a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the ignition furnace test value as allowed in subsection num .
if a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the ignition furnace test value the average asphalt cement content determined from the departments acceptance testing will be used .
at the discretion of the engineer asphalt cement may be measured by invoice quantities adjusted as necessary for waste .
in no case shall the measured amount of asphalt cement for payment be greater than the total of the invoice quantities adjusted for waste .
mineral admixture will be measured by the ton for the mineral admixture actually used in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted by the appropriate total pay factor as hereinafter provided .
for the purpose of determining acceptability and appropriate total pay factors each unit of asphaltic concrete will be included in two separate lots a mixture properties lot and a compaction lot .
the total unit price for any unit of accepted asphaltic concrete will be the contract unit price adjusted by the applicable mixture properties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor .
the engineer may exclude certain locations from the mixture properties lot quantity andor the compaction lot quantity and from the random sampling used in determining the mixture properties lot pay factor andor the compaction lot pay factor should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
a blank section num num b mixture properties lot pay factor the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined in accordance with the following procedure num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids shall be determined as set forth in subsection num .
num a single pay factor shall be determined for gradation and asphalt cement content .
that pay factor shall be the lowest pay factor for the individual measured characteristics for gradation and asphalt cement content .
num if no individual pt value in num above is less than num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be the sum of the pay factor determined in num above and the effective voids pay factor .
the negative pay factor for mixture properties shall not exceed num per ton .
if any individual pt value is less than num the lot is in reject and the provisions in subsection nume shall apply .
c compaction lot pay factor the compaction lot pay factor shall be the compaction pay factor determined as set forth in subsection numb .
d determination of lot pay factors on contracts involving multiple projects w hen more than one project is included in a single contract placement during a shift or half shift of production may encompass more than one project .
in such case the applicable mixture properties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor for each project shall be determined as follows num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids will be determined from the results of the random samples taken and tested in accordance with subsection num regardless of which projects the samples fall within .
num pt values and pay factors for compaction for those areas subject to subsection numb shall be determined from separate sets of core samples for each project utilizing the procedure set forth in that subsection .
num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with section num num subsection numb utilizing the individual pay factors determined in num above .
num the compaction lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numc utilizing the pay factor determined in num above .
e acceptability asphaltic concrete included in any mixture properties lot possessing an individual pt value lower than num for gradation asphalt cement content or effective voids will be rejected .
asphaltic concrete included in any compaction lot possessing a pt value lower than num will be rejected .
w ithin num days after receiving notice that a mixture properties lot or a compaction lot of asphaltic concrete has been rejected by the engineer the contractor may submit a written proposal to accept the material in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors .
maximum negative pay factors are defined as a minus num per ton each for mixture properties lots and compaction lots .
positive mixture properties lot pay factors become zero when the compaction lot is in reject and the material is allowed to be left in place .
positive compaction lot pay factors become zero when the mixture properties lot is in reject and the material is allowed to remain in place .
in addition for any mixture properties lot that is in reject due to asphalt cement content but allowed to remain in place payment shall not be made for asphalt cement quantities in excess of the upper limit ul .
the proposal shall contain an engineering analysis of the anticipated performance of the asphaltic concrete if left in place .
the engineering analysis shall also detail any proposed corrective action and the anticipated effect of such corrective action on the performance .
the engineering analysis shall be performed by a professional engineer experienced in asphaltic concrete testing and the development of asphaltic concrete mix designs .
if a rejected lot is submitted for referee testing by the contractor the num days allowed to prepare an engineering analysis will begin upon notification of referee test results .
w ithin three working days the engineer will determine whether or not to accept the contractors proposal .
if the proposal is not accepted the asphaltic concrete shall be removed at no additional cost to the department and replaced with asphaltic concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications .
if the proposal is accepted the asphaltic concrete shall remain in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors and any necessary corrective action shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
the department reserves the right to suspend the work should any of the following conditions occur section num num num the occurrence of two or more rejected lots within any ten consecutive production lots .
num the occurrence of three consecutive negative mixture properties lot pay factors or three consecutive negative compaction lot pay factors .
num the occurrence of five or more pay factors that are negative either for a mixture properties lot or for a compaction lot within any ten consecutive production lots .
if the department elects to suspend the work for any of these conditions the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design in accordance with subsection num or submit for the engineers approval a written engineering analysis .
the engineering analysis shall detail the course of action necessary to correct deficiencies in the contractors present production methods such that further production can be accomplished without excessive amounts of asphaltic concrete in penalty or rejection .
if approved by the engineer the revised mix design or the course of action proposed in the engineering analysis shall be implemented and the work may continue .
costs or delays due to the provisions of this subsection are not compensable .
f asphalt cement payment for asphalt cement will be made by the ton .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
g mineral admixture mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
h smoothness w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
i statistical acceptance the total percentage of lot w ithin ul and ll pt shall be determined in accordance with subsection num of the specifications .
pay factors pf shall be determined by entering table num with pt .
section num num table num mixture properties and compaction pay factors pay factors dollars per ton pt gradation and asphalt content effective voids compaction num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num reject see subsection nume section num asphaltic concrete friction course num description asphaltic concrete friction course hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of an aggregate material mineral admixture and a bituminous material to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications and as directed by the engineer .
num asphaltic concrete mix design mix designs will be developed on the basis of and tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the allowable range of percent absorbed asphalt shall be num when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
num materials num mineral aggregate there is no departmentfurnished source of mineral aggregate .
the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
w hen the contractor selects a source or sources it shall notify the engineer .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for assuring that the mineral aggregate meets all requirements and when processed is section num num fully capable of providing asphaltic concrete which meets all the requirements of these specifications .
mineral aggregate shall be separated into at least two stockpiles .
no individual stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
coarse mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate or blend material shall consist of natural sand sand prepared from rock or other approved inert materials or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
mineral aggregate furnished for mix designs shall be representative of the sources and sampled from the material stockpiles to be used in asphaltic concrete production .
mix designs shall conform to the grading limits in table num when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
table num mix design grading limits percent passing sieve size without admixture with admixture num inch num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num mineral aggregate shall conform to the requirements in table num when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
tests on aggregates outlined in table num other than abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed separately on samples from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
section num num table num mineral aggregate characteristics characteristic test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num sand equivalent arizona test method num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num at least two fractured faces and minimum num at least one fractured face flakiness index arizona test method num maximum num carbonates arizona test method num maximum num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max .
num num rev .
max .
num num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount used shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the requirements of table num .
table num mineral admixture material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material asphalt cement shall be an asphalt binder performance grade pg num conforming to the requirements of section num .
the percent of asphalt cement used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphalt cement mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
section num num the percent of asphalt cement to be used will be specified by the engineer .
num mix design approximately num pounds of produced mineral aggregate in proportion to the anticipated percent usage shall be obtained by the contractor and witnessed by the engineer so that both parties are satisfied that samples are representative of the mineral aggregate to be utilized in the asphaltic concrete production .
in addition to the mineral aggregate samples the contractor shall also furnish the engineer with representative samples of the following materials one gallon of asphalt cement from the intended supplier and a onegallon can of the proposed mineral admixture .
these materials must be representative of the material which will subsequently be used in the production of asphaltic concrete .
if the mineral aggregate does not meet the requirements of subsection num no mix design will be prepared .
the contractor shall take the necessary steps to provide material meeting the specified requirements .
along with the samples furnished for mix design testing the contractor shall submit a letter explaining in detail its methods of producing mineral aggregate including wasting washing blending proportioning etc .
and any special or limiting conditions it may propose .
the contractors letter shall also state the sources of mineral aggregate the source and type of asphalt cement and the source and type of mineral admixture .
w ithin num working days of receipt of all samples and the contractors letter in the central laboratory the department will provide the contractor with a mix design containing the type source and percentage of asphalt cement the type source and percentage of mineral admixture the sources of mineral aggregate and the percentage from each stockpile the composite mineral aggregate gradation the combined mineral aggregate and mineral admixture gradation and any special or limiting conditions .
the contract time established for the completion of the work includes num working days for the required testing and the developing of the approved mix design .
asphaltic concrete friction course production shall not begin until there is an approved mix design .
num mix design revisions section num num at any time after production of asphaltic concrete has been started using the approved mix design changes may be proposed by the contractor or directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall not change its methods of crushing screening washing or stockpiling from those used during production of material used for mix design purposes without approval of the engineer or without requesting a new mix design .
if changes are made in the source or type of bituminous material or the sources of mineral aggregate or changes are made in the proportions of mineral aggregate equal to or greater than five percentage points additional testing to the extent deemed necessary by the engineer will be performed in order that the engineer may be satisfied that the mix design criteria will be met .
during production of asphaltic concrete the contractor on the basis of field test results may request a change to the approved mix design .
the engineer will evaluate the proposed changes and notify the contractor of the engineers decision within two working days of the receipt of the request .
if at any time unapproved changes are made by the contractor in the source or type of bituminous material sources of mineral aggregate production methods or proportional changes in violation of approved mix design stipulations production shall cease until a new mix design is developed at no additional cost to the department or the contractor complies with the approved mix design .
at any time after the mix design has been approved the contractor may request a new mix design .
the costs associated with the testing of materials in the developing of mix designs requested by the contractor after a mix design acceptable to the department has been developed shall be borne by the contractor .
if the engineer determines that a new mix design is necessary due to changes in mineral aggregate characteristics or gradation costs associated with the development of the new mix design shall be borne by the contractor .
a new mix design can be developed by the engineer at any time the engineer deems necessary .
should such a new mix design require revisions to the contractors operations which result in additional cost to the contractor it will be reimbursed for these costs .
however the engineer reserves the right to modify the asphalt cement content without compensation being made to the contractor involving additional operation costs .
num acceptance of materials num general section num num the contractors attention is directed to the requirements of subsection num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized w ork .
if the production of asphaltic concrete is stopped either for failure to meet the requirements specified in subsection num or because changes are made in the mix design samples will be taken for calculating new consecutive averages either after production resumes or after the changes in the mix design have been made .
the acceptance of the mineral aggregate gradation and the bituminous material content will be determined on the basis of the tests as specified in subsection num .
the engineer reserves the right to increase the frequency of sampling and testing upon the resumption of asphaltic concrete production .
num mineral aggregate aggregate shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other material that prevent thorough coating of the aggregate with the bituminous material .
prior to and during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for determination of the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and flakiness index .
samples shall be obtained from the cold feed belt prior to the addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
should such testing indicate results not meeting the requirements of table num for sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and flakiness index operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the option of requesting a new mix design or correcting deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
num asphaltic concrete a mineral aggregate gradation prior to the initial startup of asphaltic concrete production and prior to startup after any subsequent mix design revisions affecting gradation a sample of the combined mineral aggregate shall be tested .
the mineral aggregate shall meet the gradation requirements for the numconsecutive test limits indicated below .
if the mineral aggregate does not meet these requirements production shall not begin until the mineral aggregate is in compliance with this requirement .
for each approximate num tons of asphaltic concrete produced at least one sample of mineral aggregate will be taken .
samples will be taken in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num on a random basis .
for batch plants the sample shall be taken from the hot bins .
for plants other than batch plants the sample shall be taken from the cold feed belt .
samples will be taken by means of a sampling device which is capable of obtaining representative samples .
the device which shall be approved by the engineer shall be furnished by section num num the contractor .
in any shift that the production of asphaltic concrete is less than num tons at least one sample will be taken .
samples will be tested for conformance to the mix design gradation with or without mineral admixture as appropriate in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the gradation will be considered to be acceptable unless the average of any three consecutive tests or the result of any single test varies from the mix design gradation percentages as follows number of tests passing sieve num consecutive one no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num one hundred percent of the material shall pass the numinch sieve .
at any time that test results indicate that the gradation does not fall within all of the limits indicated the production of asphaltic concrete shall cease immediately and shall not begin again until a calibration test indicates that the gradation is within the numconsecutive test limits indicated .
b bituminous material content during production of asphaltic concrete the contractor shall maintain at the plant site a nuclear asphalt content gauge calibrated and operated in accordance with arizona test method num .
at the discretion of the engineer the department may choose to prepare the calibration samples for use by the contractor .
under the observation of the engineer the contractor shall determine the asphalt content by means of the nuclear asphalt content gauge a minimum of four times per full shift .
the engineer shall determine the times that the samples are taken .
the contractors technicians performing the testing including the calibration of the nuclear gauge shall meet the technician requirements given in the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix az num .
production of asphaltic concrete shall cease immediately and the plant andor the nuclear asphalt content gauge recalibrated if any single test result varies by an amount greater than num or the average of three consecutive test results varies by an amount greater than num from the amount directed by the engineer .
material that has already been produced may be used on the project if the single test value representative of that material varies by an amount from num to num inclusive from the amount directed by the engineer .
material that has already been produced may not be used on the project if the section num num single test value representative of that material varies by an amount greater than num from the amount directed by the engineer unless by retesting the material is found to be acceptable .
num construction requirements num quality control quality control of mineral aggregate production and asphaltic concrete production shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall perform sufficient testing to assure that mineral aggregate and asphaltic concrete are produced which meet all specified requirements .
the engineer reserves the right to obtain samples of any portion of any material at any point of the operations for the engineers own use .
num stockpiling the contractor will not be allowed to feed the hot plant from stockpiles containing less than two full days of production unless only two days production remain to be done or special conditions exist where the engineer deems this requirement waived .
mineral aggregate shall be separated and stockpiled so that segregation is minimized .
an approved divider of sufficient size to prevent intermingling of stockpiles shall be provided .
num proportioning drying heating and mixing the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
unless approved by the engineer no individual mineral aggregate stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
changes in stockpile or hot bin use in excess of five percent from the approved mix design will not be permitted without the approval of the engineer .
no fine material which has been collected in the dust collection system shall be returned to the mixture unless the collected fines are accurately and uniformly metered into the mixture .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the dryer shall not exceed num degrees f. num placing and finishing section num num a general requirements the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
all wheels and tires of compactors and other equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of objectionable material and tacked with asphalt cement in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the cleaning of the surface the tacking of the surface and the amount and grade of asphalt cement used shall be as directed by and acceptable to the engineer .
unless otherwise specified on the project plans asphaltic concrete shall not be placed on the twofoot widened section where guardrail is to be installed .
num placement dates and weather requirements asphaltic concrete shall be placed only between the dates shown below for the average elevation of the project and only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of placement is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event that weather conditions either existing or expected are anticipated to have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
prior to opening to any traffic the engineer may require up to three applications of lime water a minimum of num pounds of lime per num gallons of water .
lime water shall be applied in a manner that uniformly covers the entire surface of the paving pass .
no separate payment will be made for lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
average elevation of project feet beginning and ending dates num num num num num num num and over march num may num september num october num april num october num june num september num section num num num delivery to screed unit asphaltic concrete delivered to the screed unit shall be a free flowing homogeneous mass in which there is no segregation crusts lumps or migration of the bituminous material .
should any one or more of such conditions be evident in the material delivered to the screed unit and which can not be eliminated by one or more of the following methods the engineer will order the work to be stopped until conditions are conducive to the delivery of the material in the condition as hereinbefore required a covering hauling units with tarpaulins .
b dumping material directly into the paver .
c moving the hot plant nearer to the point of delivery .
other measures proposed by the contractor which will deliver asphaltic concrete meeting the above requirements will be considered by the engineer .
b loading material into the paving machine if the asphaltic concrete is dumped directly into the paving machine from the hauling trucks care shall be taken to avoid jarring the machine or moving it out of alignment .
no vertical load shall be exerted on the paving machines by the trucks .
trucks while dumping shall be securely attached to the paving machine .
if the asphaltic concrete is dumped upon the surface being paved and subsequently loaded into the paving machine it shall not be dumped at a distance greater than num feet in front of the paving machine .
the loading equipment shall be selfsupporting and shall not exert any vertical load on the paving machine .
substantially all of the asphaltic concrete shall be picked up and loaded into the paving machine .
c placing and finishing asphaltic concrete by means of selfpropelled paving machines all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
in order to achieve as far as practical a continuous operation the speed of the paving machine shall be coordinated with the production of the plant .
section num num selfpropelled paving machines shall spread the mixture without segregation or tearing within the specified tolerances true to the line grade and crown indicated on the project plans .
pavers shall be equipped with hoppers and augers which will distribute the mixture uniformly in front of adjustable screeds .
screeds shall include any strikeoff device operated by tamping or vibrating action which is effective without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture and which produces a course with a uniform texture and density for the full width being paved .
screeds shall be adjustable as to height and crown and shall be equipped with a controlled heating device for use when required .
tapered sections not exceeding eight feet in width or widened sections not exceeding four feet in width may be placed and finished by other means approved by the engineer .
d automatically actuated control system except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of automatic controls impractical asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines equipped with an automatically actuated control system .
the control system shall control the elevation of the screed at each end by controlling the elevation of one end directly and the other end indirectly either through controlling the transverse slope or alternately when directed by controlling the elevation of each end independently .
the control system shall be capable of working with the following devices which shall be furnished with the machine skitype device at least num feet in length supported throughout its entire length .
short ski .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the asphaltic concrete operations .
num joints longitudinal joints shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of the immediate underlying course .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving section num num operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
num compaction a general requirements the temperature of the asphaltic concrete just prior to compaction shall be at least num degrees f. b equipment compacting and smoothing shall be accomplished by the use of static steel wheel compactors .
vibrator compactors may be used in the static mode only .
the compactors shall be selfpropelled and shall be operated with the drive wheel in the forward position .
a minimum of three compactors shall be provided however sufficient compactors shall be provided so that the drums of the compactors when staggered will cover the entire width of the paving machine during initial breakdown .
compactors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
compactors shall be designed and properly maintained so that they are capable of accomplishing the required compaction .
compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
c rolling procedure a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
compaction shall consist of the following rolling sequence rolling sequence number of coverages initial num finish num num a sufficient number of compactors shall be used for initial breakdown so that when the compactors are staggered the entire width of the mat being laid is compacted with one forward pass of the compactors .
the distance between the paving machine and the initial rolling shall not exceed num feet .
section num num a separate rollers shall be used for final compaction .
the rollers used for final compaction shall follow as closely behind the initial breakdown rollers as possible .
compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
num compacting miscellaneous items and surfaces asphaltic concrete used in the construction of miscellaneous items and surfaces shall be compacted using compactors hothand tampers smoothing irons mechanical vibrating hand tampers or with other devices to the extent considered necessary by the engineer .
num smoothness and surface tolerances asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met num the finished asphaltic concrete surface shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num acceptance asphaltic concrete will be accepted complete in place if in the judgment of the engineer the asphaltic concrete reasonably conforms to the requirements specified herein .
asphaltic concrete that is not acceptable and is rejected shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate bituminous material and mineral admixture .
measurement will include any weight section num num used in construction of intersections turnouts miscellaneous items or other surfaces .
asphalt cement will be measured by the ton .
mineral admixture will be measured by the ton .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified herein .
payment for asphalt cement will be made by the ton .
the results of a nuclear asphalt content gauge shall not be used to determine the weight of asphalt cement as the basis of payment .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w hen lime water is used no separate payment will be made for the lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
section num blank section num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num description asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing hauling and placing a mixture of aggregates mineral admixture and bituminous material to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as directed by the engineer .
the contractor may propose the use of a mix design that has been developed for a previous project .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the asphalt cement and mineral admixture type and source of supply and the source and methods of producing mineral aggregate have not changed since the formulation of the previous mix design .
the contractor shall also provide current test results for all specified section num num characteristics of the mineral aggregate proposed for use .
the engineer will determine if the previously used mix design is suitable for the intended use .
the engineer will either approve or disapprove the proposed mix design .
should the engineer disapprove the use of the previously used mix design the contractor shall prepare and submit a new mix design proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
a previously used mix design older than two years from the date it was formulated sealed signed and dated shall not be allowed for use .
any previously used mix design that is older than one year but less than two years shall not be allowed for use unless the contractor provides verification testing results .
such testing shall be a onepoint verification at the design asphalt content utilizing the proposed mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
once approved for use on a project a mix design may be used for the duration of the project .
num materials num mineral aggregate mineral aggregate shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
mineral aggregate characteristics test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
max num sand equivalent aashto t num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num plus no .
num material the gradation will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num and shall conform to the requirements given below .
section num num mix design grading limits percent passing lift thickness less than or equal to two inches lift thickness greater than two inches sieve size without admixture with admixture without admixture with admixture num inch num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num bituminous material asphalt cement shall be a performance grade pg asphalt binder conforming to the requirements of section num .
the type of asphalt binder shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the percent of asphalt cement used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphalt cement mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the contractor shall provide the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges to the mix design laboratory for each pg asphalt binder used for mix design purposes .
the laboratory mixing temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity of num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the laboratory compaction temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity of num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the testing required in aashto t num shall be performed at num of and num of and a viscositytemperature curve developed in accordance with astm d num .
the viscositytemperature curve shall be included in the mix design report .
for pg asphalt binders that have a maximum laboratory mixing temperature exceeding num of or a maximum laboratory compaction temperature exceeding num of the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges shall be specified in writing by the asphalt binder supplier .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures used shall be reported on the mix design .
the contractor shall ensure that the asphalt binder supplier information required in this paragraph is provided to all appropriate parties in a timely manner and that copies are included in the mix design report .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures are for mix design purposes only .
field mixing and compaction temperatures are specified in subsection num .
num mineral admixture section num num mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the following requirements material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num the mineral admixture content shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate .
however a minimum of num percent mineral admixture may be used if the contractor submits test information showing a lowered percentage of mineral admixture produces mix design results for index of retained strength of at least num percent and a minimum w et strength of num psi when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num of the standard specifications shall be submitted .
num mix design utilizing mineral aggregate which has been crushed processed separated and stockpiled a mix design shall be formulated and submitted by the contractor to the engineer .
the mineral aggregate samples used for mix design purposes shall be representative of aggregate materials to be used during production .
the mix design shall be based on the mix design criteria and other requirements specified herein utilizing asphalt cement and mineral admixture of the type and from the sources proposed for use in the production of asphaltic concrete .
the mix design shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a professional engineer experienced in the development of mix designs and mix design testing .
the mix design shall be provided in a format that clearly indicates all the mix design requirements and shall be sealed signed and dated by the mix design engineer .
the mix design shall be prepared by a mix design laboratory that has met the requirements of the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
test results used in the formulation of the mix design must be from testing performed no earlier than num days prior to the date the mix design is signed by the mix design engineer .
historical abrasion values may be supplied on sources provided the testing was conducted within the past two years .
the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer under a cover letter signed by an authorized representative of the contractor .
section num num the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer for review a minimum of five working days prior to the start of production .
the mix design shall meet the following criteria when tested in accordance with the requirements of the following test methods criteria requirement arizona test method num .
voids in mineral aggregate range num num num num .
effective voids range num num num num .
absorbed asphalt range num num the engineer reserves the right to adjust the asphalt content during production from the mix design value without additional compensation to the contractor in order to obtain desirable effective voids .
the engineer may waive the requirements for a mix design if the intended use of the material is temporary in nature .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing the materials or mixture for quality control purposes shall be the contractors responsibility .
the engineer reserves the right to sample and test the materials and mixture when necessary to determine that they reasonably conform to the requirements specified herein .
num construction requirements num general all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the following smoothness requirements shall be met num the surface of the final lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num the surface of any lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications other than the final lift shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
section num num num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
no fine material which has been collected in the dust collection system shall be returned to the mixture unless the collected fines are accurately and uniformly metered into the mixture .
the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the drier shall not exceed num degrees f unless a higher temperature is recommended in writing by the asphalt binder supplier and approved by the engineer .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete immediately behind the paver shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
asphaltic concrete shall be placed only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f. at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event that weather conditions either existing or expected are anticipated to have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
all wheels and tires of compactors and other equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
asphaltic concrete immediately behind the laydown machine shall be a minimum of num degrees f. just prior to being placed the asphaltic concrete shall be in a thoroughly mixed condition free of lumps and crusts and at such a temperature as to be in a free flowing workable condition .
all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
pavers shall be equipped with a screed for the full width being paved heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing all courses of asphaltic concrete .
section num num pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors for either or both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals which operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the placing of asphaltic concrete .
the base or subgrade upon which asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be prepared and maintained in a firm condition until asphaltic concrete is placed .
it shall not be frozen or excessively wet .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of objectionable material and tacked in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
longitudinal joints of each course shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of any immediate underlying course .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the center of a lane or within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
num compaction compaction shall consist of an established sequence of coverage using specified types of compactors .
a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
the rolling sequence the type of compactor to be used and the number of coverages required shall be as follows rolling type of compactor number of coverages sequence option no .
num option no .
num option no .
num option no .
num initial static steel vibrating steel num num intermediate pneumatic tired vibrating steel num num num num finish static steel static steel num num num num based on the roller pattern which exhibits the best performance .
section num num the engineer shall select the option for compaction and when pneumatictired compactors are used will designate the tire pressure .
steel wheel compactors shall not be used in the vibratory mode for courses of one inch or less in nominal thickness nor when the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num degrees f. steel wheel compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
initial and intermediate compaction shall be completed before the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num degrees f. all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated as specified and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
num acceptance asphaltic concrete will be accepted complete in place if in the judgment of the engineer the asphaltic concrete reasonably conforms to the requirements specified herein .
asphaltic concrete that is not acceptable and is rejected shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer and at no expense to the department .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate bituminous material and mineral admixture .
measurement will include any weight used in construction of intersections turnouts curbs spillways and spillway inlets ditches catch basin entrances median strips sidewalks or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
num basis of payment num general the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the bituminous mixture complete in place .
no direct payment will be made for the bituminous material and mineral admixture in the asphaltic concrete or the bituminous material for tack coat and application of tack coat the price being considered as included in the price paid for asphaltic concrete .
asphaltic concrete may be measured by volume upon the execution of a supplemental agreement which will specify the manner in which the volume is determined .
the volume will include the volume of mineral section num num aggregate bituminous material mineral admixture and any necessary blending material .
num reduction for noncompliance a reduction in payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete will be made for quantities of asphalt cement that do not meet the requirements of section num as determined by corresponding test results .
adjustments in payment will be made in accordance with the requirements of table num and the following formula r num p x num x t num w here r amount of reduction in payment dollars t quantity of asphalt cement in failure tons rounded to nearest tenth p percent of contract unit price allowed table num section num asphaltrubber stressabsorbing membrane num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials including asphaltrubber tack coat and cover material and applying the materials in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num tack coat the existing roadway surface upon which the asphalt rubber membrane is to be placed shall be first cleaned of potentially detrimental material and tacked with a light coat of bituminous material conforming to the requirements of subsection num of the specifications .
the cleaning of the surface the tacking of the surface and the type and amount of bituminous material used shall be as directed by the engineer .
num asphaltrubber asphaltrubber shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the type of asphaltrubber shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the crumb rubber gradation shall be type a conforming to the requirements of section num .
num cover material section num num cover material shall conform to the requirements of subsection numc .
num construction requirements num general all equipment used to mix and apply asphaltrubber material shall meet the requirements specified under subsection num a of the specifications .
the equipment shall also be capable of maintaining a uniform homogeneous mixture throughout the operation .
num application of the asphaltrubber stressabsorbing membrane asphaltrubber stressabsorbing membranes shall be placed between the dates below for the average elevation of the project .
average elevation of project feet beginning and ending dates num num num num num num num and over march num may num september num october num april num october num june num september num the existing pavement shall be cleaned in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
after cleaning and prior to the application of the membrane the existing pavement surface shall be treated with a tack coat as hereinbefore specified .
placement of the asphaltrubber membrane shall be made only when all of the following conditions are met num the pavement surface temperature is above num degrees f. num the pavement is dry .
num the wind conditions are such that a satisfactory membrane can be achieved .
num all construction equipment such as asphalt rubber distributor aggregate spreader haul trucks with cover material and rollers are in position and ready to commence placement operations .
the distributor shall be capable of spreading the asphaltrubber mixture in accordance with the tolerances specified in subsection numa section num num except that the maximum deviation from the specified rate shall not exceed num gallons per square yard .
the hot asphaltrubber mixture shall be applied at the rate of approximately num num gallons per square yard based on a unit weight of num pounds per gallon of hot asphaltrubber however the engineer will specify the exact rate based on existing surface conditions .
all transverse joints shall be made by placing building paper over the end of the previous application and the joining application shall start on the building paper .
once the application process has progressed beyond the paper the paper shall be disposed of as directed by the engineer .
all longitudinal joints shall be lapped approximately four inches .
traffic shall not be permitted on the asphaltrubber membrane prior to the application of cover material .
num application of cover material cover material shall be applied in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
cover material shall be immediately and uniformly spread over the freshly applied asphaltrubber at the rate of approximately num cubic yards per square yard however the actual rate of application will be determined by the engineer .
cover material shall be precoated with num to num percent asphalt cement by weight of the aggregate .
the cover material shall have a minimum temperature of num degrees f at the time of precoating with asphalt cement .
the asphalt cement shall meet the requirements of section num .
the end result shall be a dust free material .
num rolling at least three pneumatic rollers shall be provided to accomplish the required rolling .
the rollers shall conform to the requirements of subsection num a num except that the minimum air pressure in each tire shall be num pounds per square inch .
a sufficient number of rollers shall be furnished to cover the width of the spread on the first pass and complete the required number of passes within the time specified hereinafter .
the first pass shall be made immediately behind the spreader and if the spreading is stopped for any reason the spreader shall be moved ahead so that all cover material may be immediately rolled .
the rolling shall continue until a minimum of four complete coverages have been made .
final rolling shall be completed in accordance with the following section num num existing pavement temperature complete rolling within num of and above num minutes between num and num of num minutes num traffic traffic of all types shall be kept off the stressabsorbing membrane until it has had time to set properly .
the minimum traffic free period shall be three hours .
however when it is absolutely necessary that hauling equipment or piloted traffic travel on the newly applied membrane and the use is approved in advance by the engineer the speed shall not exceed num miles per hour .
stressabsorbing membrane operations shall be scheduled so that the normal flow of traffic will be resumed before sunset .
num removing loose cover material loose cover material shall be removed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
sweeping shall be completed and all excess cover material removed prior to the placement of any subsequent layers of asphaltic concrete .
num placement of asphaltic concrete if the asphaltrubber membrane has been subjected to traffic a tack coat as hereinbefore specified shall be applied at the rate of approximately num gallons per square yard prior to placement of the asphaltic concrete .
num method of measurement asphaltrubber material will be measured by the ton .
conversion from volume to weight will be calculated on the basis of num pounds per gallon of hot asphaltrubber material .
cover material will be measured by the cubic yard .
cover material will be weighed and the amount in tons of dry material will be converted to cubic yards .
the weight of all moisture contained in the cover material will be deducted prior to the conversion of the weight in tons to the volume in cubic yards .
the dry weight per cubic foot will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
the quantities of bituminous tack coat and time to apply tack coat will be measured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of asphaltrubber measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the asphaltrubber mixture complete in place including asphalt cement and crumb rubber .
section num num the accepted quantity of cover material measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including precoating material and rolling and removal of loose cover material .
the accepted quantities of bituminous tack coat and time to apply tack coat will be paid for in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the bidding schedule reflects a quantity of bituminous tack coat based on two applications of emulsified asphalt at the specified rate .
no adjustment in the contract unit prices will be made because of a variation in the quantities actually required to complete the work .
section num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num description asphaltic concrete friction course hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing hauling and placing a mixture of aggregates mineral admixture and bituminous material to form a pavement course in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as directed by the engineer .
num materials num mineral aggregate mineral aggregate shall be separated into at least two stockpiles .
no individual stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
coarse mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate or blend material shall consist of natural sand or of sand prepared from rock or other approved inert materials or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
mineral aggregate shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
section num num mineral aggregate characteristics test method requirement abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
max num sand equivalent arizona test method num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num at least two fractured faces and minimum num at least one fractured face flakiness index arizona test method num maximum num the gradation will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num and shall conform to the requirements given below .
percent passing sieve size without mineral admixture with mineral admixture num inch num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount used shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the following requirements mineral admixture material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material asphalt cement shall be an asphalt binder performance grade pg num conforming to the requirements of section num .
section num num approximately six percent will be required however the exact amount will be specified by the engineer .
the percent of asphalt cement used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphalt cement mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
num proportions the asphalt cement content will be specified by the engineer and will be appropriate with the characteristics of the mineral aggregate furnished from which the asphaltic concrete is to be produced .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing the materials or mixture for quality control purposes shall be the contractors responsibility .
the engineer reserves the right to sample and test the materials and mixture when necessary to determine that the materials and mixture reasonably conform to the requirements specified herein .
num construction requirements num general the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
just prior to being placed the asphaltic concrete shall be in a thoroughly mixed condition free of lumps and crusts and at such a temperature as to be in a free flowing workable condition .
the surface upon which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be cleaned of all objectionable material and tacked with a light coat of asphalt cement .
the cleaning of the surface the tacking of the surface and the grade and amount of asphalt cement used shall be as directed by and acceptable to the engineer .
asphaltic concrete shall be placed only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f. at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event that weather conditions either existing or expected are anticipated to have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
the asphaltic concrete shall be placed using approved equipment and methods to the lines and grades shown on the project plans and as directed by the engineer .
section num num the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
num compaction a general requirements the temperature of the asphaltic concrete just prior to compaction shall be at least num degrees f. b equipment compacting and smoothing shall be accomplished by the use of static steel wheel compactors .
vibrator compactors may be used in the static mode only .
the compactors shall be selfpropelled and shall be operated with the drive wheel in the forward position .
a minimum of three compactors shall be provided however sufficient compactors shall be provided so that the drums of the compactors when staggered will cover the entire width of the paving machine during initial breakdown .
compactors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
compactors shall be designed and properly maintained so that they are capable of accomplishing the required compaction .
compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
c rolling procedure a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
compaction shall consist of the following rolling sequence rolling sequence number of coverages initial num finish num num a sufficient number of compactors shall be used for initial breakdown so that when the compactors are staggered the entire width of the mat being laid is compacted with one forward pass of the compactors .
the distance between the paving machine and the initial rolling shall not exceed num feet .
section num num a separate rollers shall be used for final compaction .
the rollers used for final compaction shall follow as closely behind the initial breakdown rollers as possible .
compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
num acceptance asphaltic concrete will be accepted complete in place if in the judgment of the engineer the asphaltic concrete reasonably conforms to the requirements specified herein .
asphaltic concrete that is not acceptable and is rejected shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer and at no expense to the department .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate mineral admixture and bituminous material .
measurement will include any quantity used in construction of intersections turnouts curbs spillways and spillway inlets ditches catch basin entrances median strips sidewalks or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
num basis of payment num general the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the bituminous mixture complete in place .
no direct payment will be made for the bituminous material in the asphaltic concrete or the bituminous material for tack coat and application of tack coat the price being considered as included in the price paid for asphaltic concrete .
asphaltic concrete may be measured by volume upon the execution of a supplemental agreement which will specify the manner in which the volume is determined .
the volume will include the volume of mineral aggregate mineral admixture and bituminous material .
num reduction for noncompliance a reduction in payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete will be made for quantities of asphalt cement that do not meet the requirements of section num as determined by corresponding test section num num results .
adjustments in payment will be made in accordance with the requirements of table num and the following formula .
r num p x num x t num w here r amount of reduction in payment dollars t quantity of asphalt cement in failure tons rounded to nearest tenth p percent of contract unit price allowed table num section num pavement fabric interlayer num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and placing a pavement fabric and applying an asphalt binder coat between pavement layers or beneath a pavement overlay to provide a waterproofing and stress relieving membrane within the pavement structure in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num pavement fabric the pavement fabric shall be supplied in accordance with and conform to the material requirements of subsections num and num .
num asphalt binder coat the asphalt binder coat is used to bond or tack the fabric to the pavement and perform a sealant function providing a barrier to moisture infiltration .
the bituminous material for the binder coat shall be an asphalt cement conforming to the requirements of section num .
the grade to be used shall be pg num or pg num as directed by the engineer .
the use of cutback or emulsion asphalts will not be allowed .
num blotter material blotter material shall meet the requirements of subsection numb .
num fabric packaging handling and storing the identification packaging handling and storing of the geotextile fabric shall be in accordance with astm d num .
fabric rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping for protection against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient to section num num determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacture shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
rolls will be stored on the site or at another identified storage location in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof cover .
at no time shall the fabric be exposed to ultraviolet light for a period exceeding seven days .
num construction requirements num weather limitations neither the asphalt binder coat nor fabric shall be placed when weather conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable .
for placement of the asphalt binder coat the minimum air and pavement temperature shall be num degrees f and rising .
air and pavement temperature shall also be sufficient to allow the asphalt binder coat to hold the fabric in place .
num equipment a asphalt distributor truck the asphalt distributor truck shall meet the minimum requirements of subsection numa .
the asphalt distributor truck shall be capable of spraying the asphalt binder coat at the application rate as approved by the engineer .
no streaking skipping or dripping will be permitted .
the distributor truck shall also be equipped with a hand spray attachment having a single nozzle and positive shutoff valve .
b fabric handling equipment mechanical or manual laydown equipment shall be capable of laying the fabric smoothly .
c miscellaneous equipment stiff bristle brooms or squeegees to smooth the fabric scissors or blades to cut the fabric and brushes for applying asphalt at fabric overlaps shall be provided .
pneumatic rolling equipment to smooth the fabric into the asphalt binder sanding equipment to apply a blotter sand and brooming equipment may be required by the engineer to improve the installation procedure .
refer to subsections num b c and d for equipment requirements .
num surface preparation the pavement surface on which the fabric is to be placed shall be cleaned to remove all dirt water oil and any vegetation or debris .
num application of the asphalt binder coat section num num the asphalt binder coat shall be uniformly spray applied to the prepared dry pavement surface by means of the asphalt distributor truck at the rate of num gallons per square yard or as recommended by the fabric manufacturer and as approved by the engineer .
some underlying surfaces may require a higher or lower application rate .
a test strip may be necessary to determine the proper application rate .
application of the asphalt binder coat shall be primarily by the distributor truck spray bar with hand spraying kept to a minimum .
temperature of the asphalt binder coat shall be sufficiently high to permit a uniform spray pattern .
the minimum temperature of asphalt in the distributor tank shall be num degrees f. however to avoid damage to the fabric the asphalt temperature in the tank shall not exceed num degrees f. the target width of the asphalt binder application shall be the width of the pavement fabric plus six inches .
the asphalt binder shall be applied only as far in advance of the fabric installation as is appropriate to insure a tacky binder surface at the time of the fabric placement .
fabric shall be placed the same workshift as the asphalt binder coat is applied .
traffic shall not be allowed on the asphalt binder coat .
excess asphalt or spills shall be cleaned from the road surface to avoid flushing and fabric movement .
num fabric placement the fabric shall be placed with the heat bonded side up on the asphalt binder coat using mechanical or manual laydown equipment capable of providing a smooth installation of the fabric with a minimum amount of wrinkling or folding .
placement of the fabric will take place prior to the time when the asphalt binder coat has cooled enough to start losing its tackiness .
w rinkles or folds which remain in the fabric and are large enough to be folded over num inch or more shall be slit and laid flat into the binder coat .
slit folds or wrinkles shall be shinglelapped in the direction of the paving operation .
brooming andor pneumatic rolling will be required to maximize fabric contact with underlying pavement surface .
overlap of fabric joints shall be a minimum of three inches to insure full closure of the joint but shall not exceed six inches .
transverse joints shall be lapped in the direction of paving to prevent edge pickup by the paver .
longitudinal joints shall be located in the same manner as normal pavement joints according to subsection num .
a second application of handplaced asphalt binder may be required at laps and repairs as determined by the engineer to ensure proper binding of the narrow double fabric layer .
all areas with fabric placed shall be paved the same workshift .
no vehicles or equipment except necessary construction equipment as approved by the engineer and emergency vehicles will be allowed to drive on the fabric .
section num num removal and replacement of any fabric that is damaged will be the responsibility of the contractor .
num application of blotter materials blotter material may be spread over asphaltsaturated fabric if approved by the engineer to facilitate movement of equipment during construction or to prevent tearing or delamination of the fabric .
if blotter sand is applied excess quantities shall be removed from the fabric prior to placing the asphaltic concrete .
num placement of the asphalt concrete all areas where fabric has been placed shall be paved with asphaltic concrete during the same workshift .
placement of the asphaltic concrete shall closely follow fabric lay down .
the temperature of the asphaltic concrete when delivered shall not exceed num degrees f. in the event that asphalt binder coat bleeds through the fabric causing construction problems before the overlay is placed the affected areas shall be blotted by spreading blotter sand .
excess sand shall be removed before beginning the paving operation .
in the event of a rainfall on the fabric prior to the placement of the asphaltic concrete the fabric must be allowed to dry completely before the asphalt concrete is placed .
to avoid movement or damage to the fabric during the paving operation the turning of the paver and other vehicles shall be gradual and kept to a minimum .
num method of measurement the pavement fabric interlayer will be measured by the square yard inplace .
bituminous material that is required for the asphalt binder coat will be measured by the ton .
time to apply the asphalt binder coat is defined as the hours within a work shift that an approved distributor truck containing the specified bituminous material is required by the engineer to be at the work site .
the time which is required to apply the asphalt binder coat will be measured to the nearest hour for the actual number of hours required in any one work shift however when the time required is less than four hours in any work day the time will be measured as four hours .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of pavement fabric measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials and equipment and performing all operations in connection with placing the section num num pavement fabric interlayer as shown on the project plans and as specified and described herein .
the accepted quantities of bituminous material for the asphalt binder coat complete in place measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton except that adjustments in the contract unit price in accordance with the requirements of table num will be made for the quantities of material represented by the corresponding test results .
payment for all measures necessary to direct and escort traffic through the area where the pavement fabric is being placed will be made as specified under section num .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for pneumatic rolling or brooming which is required or at the direction of the engineer .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for furnishing applying and removing sand blotter material which may be required by the engineer .
the accepted quantity of time to apply the asphalt binder coat measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour which payment shall be full compensation for applying the asphalt binder coat .
section num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num description asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and bituminous material asphaltrubber to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications and as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for all adjustments to its equipment necessary to properly accommodate the use of asphaltrubber as a bituminous material .
num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria mix designs will be performed in accordance with arizona test method num modified as necessary for asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber .
mix designs shall meet the criteria in table num .
section num num table num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria criteria requirement num .
effective voids range num num num .
voids in mineral aggregate min .
num num .
absorbed asphaltrubber range num num num materials num mineral aggregate there is no departmentfurnished source of mineral aggregate .
the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
w hen the contractor selects a source or sources it shall notify the engineer .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for assuring that the mineral aggregate meets all requirements and when processed is fully capable of providing asphaltic concrete which meets all the requirements of these specifications .
coarse and intermediate mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate shall be obtained from crushed gravel or crushed rock .
all uncrushed material passing a no .
num sieve shall be removed prior to the crushing screening and washing operations necessary to produce the specified gradation .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of num hours in advance of crushing the material to be used as mineral aggregate so all crushing operations are inspected .
existing stockpile material which has not been inspected during crushing will not be permitted for use unless the contractor is able to document to the engineers satisfaction that the mineral aggregate has been crushed .
any material inspected by the department as crushed material shall be separated from the contractors other stockpiles and reserved for use by the department .
mineral aggregate shall be separated into stockpiles by the contractor .
no individual stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
no individual stockpile shall be permitted to contain more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
if necessary the contractor shall wash the mineral aggregate to meet this requirement .
mineral aggregate furnished for mix designs shall be representative of the sources and sampled from the material stockpiles to be utilized in asphaltic concrete production .
mix designs shall conform to the section num num grading limits in table num when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
table num mix design grading limits percent passing sieve size without admixture with admixture num inch num num num inch num num num num num inch num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num mineral aggregate shall conform to the requirements in table num when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
tests on aggregates outlined in table num other than abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed separately on samples from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
section num num table num mineral aggregate characteristics characteristics test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num sand equivalent aashto t num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num at least two fractured faces and minimum num at least one fractured face determined on plus no .
num material abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
maxnum carbonates only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
arizona test method num maximum num num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the requirements of table num .
table num mineral admixture material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
section num num num bituminous material bituminous material shall be asphaltrubber conforming to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the type of asphaltrubber shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the crumb rubber gradation shall be type b conforming to the requirements of section num .
the percent of asphaltrubber used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphaltrubber mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the percent of asphaltrubber to be used will be specified by the engineer .
in no case shall the asphaltrubber be diluted with extender oil kerosene or other solvents .
any asphaltrubber so contaminated will be rejected .
any kerosene or other solvents used in the cleaning of equipment shall be purged from the system prior to any subsequent use of that equipment .
num blotter material an application of blotter material may be required following the placement of the asphaltic concrete and prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
the blotter material shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the blotter material shall be applied in one or more applications for a total application of two pounds per square yard .
the engineer may reduce or eliminate blotter material if deemed to be unnecessary .
num mix design approximately num pounds of produced mineral aggregate in proportion to the anticipated percent usage shall be obtained by the contractor and witnessed by the engineer so that both parties are satisfied that samples are representative of the mineral aggregate to be utilized in the asphaltic concrete production .
in addition to the mineral aggregate samples the contractor shall also furnish the engineer with representative samples of the following materials a fivepound sample of the crumb rubber proposed for use one gallon of asphalt cement from the intended supplier three gallons of the proposed mixture of asphalt and rubber and a onegallon can of the proposed mineral admixture .
these materials must be representative of the material which will subsequently be used in the production of asphaltic concrete .
if the mineral aggregate does not meet the requirements of subsection num no mix design will be prepared .
the contractor section num num shall take the necessary steps to provide material meeting the specified requirements .
along with the samples furnished for mix design testing the contractor shall submit a letter explaining in detail its methods of producing mineral aggregate including wasting washing blending proportioning etc .
and any special or limiting conditions it may propose .
the contractors letter shall also state the sources of mineral aggregate the source and type of asphalt cement the source and type of crumb rubber and the source and type of mineral admixture .
w ithin num working days of receipt of all samples and the contractors letter in the central laboratory the department will provide the contractor with a mix design containing the type and percentage of asphaltrubber the type and source of asphalt cement the type and source of crumb rubber the type source and percentage of mineral admixture the sources of mineral aggregate and the percentage from each stockpile the composite mineral aggregate gradation the combined mineral aggregate and mineral admixture gradation and any special or limiting conditions .
the contract time established for the completion of the work includes num working days for the required testing and the developing of the approved mix design .
asphaltic concrete production shall not begin until there is an approved mix design .
num mix design revisions at any time after production of asphaltic concrete has been started using the approved mix design changes may be proposed by the contractor or directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall not change its methods of crushing screening washing or stockpiling from those used during production of material used for mix design purposes without approval of the engineer or without requesting a new mix design .
if changes are made in the source or type of bituminous material or the sources of mineral aggregate or changes are made in the proportions of mineral aggregate equal to or greater than five percentage points additional testing to the extent deemed necessary by the engineer will be performed in order that the engineer may be satisfied that the mix design criteria will be met .
during production of asphaltic concrete the contractor on the basis of field test results may request a change to the approved mix design .
the engineer will evaluate the proposed changes and notify the contractor of the engineers decision within two working days of the receipt of the request .
section num num if at any time unapproved changes are made by the contractor in the source or type of bituminous material sources of mineral aggregate production methods or proportional changes in violation of approved mix design stipulations production shall cease until a new mix design is developed at no additional cost to the department or the contractor complies with the approved mix design .
at any time after the mix design has been approved the contractor may request a new mix design .
the costs associated with the testing of materials in the developing of mix designs requested by the contractor after a mix design acceptable to the department has been developed shall be borne by the contractor .
if the engineer determines that a new mix design is necessary due to changes in mineral aggregate characteristics or gradation costs associated with the development of the new mix design shall be borne by the contractor .
a new mix design can be developed by the engineer at any time the engineer deems necessary .
should such a new mix design require revisions to the contractors operations which result in additional cost to the contractor it will be reimbursed for these costs .
however the engineer reserves the right to modify the asphaltrubber content without compensation being made to the contractor involving additional operation costs .
num acceptance of materials num general the contractors attention is directed to the requirements of subsection num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized w ork .
if the production of asphaltic concrete is stopped either for failure to meet the requirements specified in subsection num or because changes are made in the mix design samples will be taken for calculating new consecutive averages either after production resumes or after the changes in the mix design have been made .
the acceptance of the mineral aggregate gradation and the bituminous material content will be determined on the basis of the tests specified in subsection num .
the engineer reserves the right to increase the frequency of sampling and testing upon the resumption of asphaltic concrete production .
num mineral aggregate aggregate shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other materials that prevent thorough coating of the aggregate with the bituminous material .
prior to and during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for the determination of section num num the sand equivalent and fractured coarse aggregate particles .
samples shall be obtained from the cold feed belt prior to addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
should such testing indicate results not meeting the requirements outlined in table num for sand equivalent and fractured coarse aggregate particles operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the option of requesting a new mix design or correcting deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
num asphaltic concrete a mineral aggregate gradation prior to the initial startup of asphaltic concrete production and prior to startup after any subsequent mix design revisions affecting gradation a sample of the combined mineral aggregate shall be tested .
the mineral aggregate shall meet the gradation requirements for the numconsecutive test limits indicated below .
if the mineral aggregate does not meet these requirements production shall not begin until the mineral aggregate is in compliance with this requirement .
for each approximate num tons of asphaltic concrete produced at least one sample of mineral aggregate will be taken .
samples will be taken in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num on a random basis .
for batch plants the sample shall be taken from the hot bins .
for plants other than batch plants the sample shall be taken from the cold feed belt .
samples will be taken by means of a sampling device which is capable of obtaining representative samples .
the device which shall be approved by the engineer shall be furnished by the contractor .
in any shift that the production of asphaltic concrete is less than num tons at least one sample will be taken .
samples will be tested for conformance with the mix design gradation with or without mineral admixture as appropriate in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the gradation will be considered to be acceptable unless the average of any three consecutive tests or the result of any single test varies from the mix design gradation percentages as follows passing sieve number of tests num consecutive one num inch and larger num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num one hundred percent of the material shall pass the largest sieve size shown in table num .
section num num at any time that test results indicate that the gradation does not fall within all of the limits indicated the production of asphaltic concrete shall cease immediately and shall not begin again until a calibration test indicates that the gradation is within the numconsecutive test limits indicated .
b asphaltrubber content during production of asphaltic concrete the contractor shall maintain at the plant site a nuclear asphalt content gauge calibrated and operated in accordance with arizona test method num .
at the discretion of the engineer the department may choose to prepare the calibration samples for use by the contractor .
under the observation of the engineer the contractor shall determine the asphaltrubber content by means of the nuclear asphalt content gauge a minimum of four times per full shift .
the engineer shall determine the times that the samples are taken .
the contractors technicians performing the testing including the calibration of the nuclear gauge shall meet the technician requirements given in the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix az num .
production of asphaltic concrete shall cease immediately and the plant andor the nuclear asphalt content gauges recalibrated if any single test result varies by an amount greater than num or the average of three consecutive test results varies by an amount greater than num from the amount directed by the engineer .
material that has already been produced may be used on the project if the single test value representative of that material varies by an amount from num to num inclusive from the amount directed by the engineer .
material that has already been produced may not be used on the project if the single test value representative of that material varies by an amount greater than num from the amount directed by the engineer unless by retesting the material is found to be acceptable .
num construction requirements num quality control quality control of mineral aggregate production and asphaltic concrete production shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall perform sufficient testing to assure that mineral aggregate and asphaltic concrete are produced which meet all specified requirements .
the engineer reserves the right to obtain samples of any portion of any material at any point of the operations for the engineers own use .
num stockpiling the contractor will not be allowed to feed the hot plant from stockpiles containing less than two full days of production unless only two days production remain to be done or special conditions exist where the engineer deems this requirement waived .
section num num mineral aggregate shall be separated and stockpiled so that segregation is minimized .
an approved divider of sufficient size to prevent intermingling of stockpiles shall be provided .
num proportioning drying heating and mixing the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
unless approved by the engineer no individual mineral aggregate stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
changes in stockpile or hot bin use in excess of five percent from the approved mix design will not be permitted without the approval of the engineer .
no fine material which has been collected in the dust collection system shall be returned to the mixture unless collected fines are uniformly metered into the mixture .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the dryer shall not exceed num degrees f. num placing and finishing a general requirements the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
all equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of all objectionable material and tacked with asphalt cement in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the cleaning of the surface the tacking of the surface and the amount and grade of asphalt cement used shall be as directed by and acceptable to the engineer .
a light coat of asphalt cement shall be applied as directed to edges or vertical surfaces against which asphaltic concrete is to be placed .
section num num the base or subgrade upon which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirement for the material involved and maintained in a smooth and firm condition until placement .
asphaltic concrete shall not be placed on a frozen or excessively wet base or subgrade .
asphaltic concrete shall be placed only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of placement is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event that weather conditions either existing or expected are anticipated to have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
prior to opening to any traffic the engineer may require an application of lime water a minimum of num pounds of lime per num gallons of water .
lime water shall be applied in a manner that uniformly covers the entire surface of the paving pass .
no separate payment will be made for lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
all asphaltic concrete shall be placed either as a leveling course or as a surfacing course .
leveling courses are defined as courses placed for the primary purpose of raising an existing paved or unpaved surface to a smooth plane .
surfacing courses are defined as courses placed to serve either as the traffic surface or as a surface upon which a finishing course or seal coat is to be placed .
thickness of leveling and surfacing courses will be shown on the project plans .
no change in thickness will be allowed without the written approval of the engineer .
b loading asphaltic concrete into the paving machine if the asphaltic concrete is dumped directly into the paving machine from the hauling trucks care shall be taken to avoid jarring the machine or moving it out of alignment .
no vertical load shall be exerted on the paving machine by the trucks .
trucks while dumping shall be securely attached to the paving machine .
if the asphaltic concrete is dumped upon the surface being paved and subsequently loaded into the paving machine the loading equipment shall be selfsupporting and shall not exert any vertical load on the paving machine .
substantially all of the asphaltic concrete shall be picked up and loaded into the paving machine .
c placing and finishing asphaltic concrete by means of selfpropelled paving machines section num num all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
in order to achieve as far as practical a continuous operation the speed of the paving machine shall be coordinated with the production of the plant .
selfpropelled paving machines shall spread the mixture without segregation or tearing within the specified tolerances true to the line grade and crown indicated on the project plans .
pavers shall be equipped with hoppers and augers which will distribute the mixture uniformly in front of adjustable screeds .
screeds shall include any strikeoff device operated by tamping or vibrating action which is effective without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture and which produces a course with a uniform texture and density for the full width being paved .
screeds shall be adjustable as to height and crown and shall be equipped with a controlled heating device for use when required .
tapered sections not exceeding eight feet in width or widened sections not exceeding four feet in width may be placed and finished by other means approved by the engineer .
d automatically actuated control system except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of automatic controls impractical asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines equipped with an automatically actuated control system .
the control system shall control the elevation of the screed at each end by controlling the elevation of one end directly and the other end indirectly either through controlling the transverse slope or alternately when directed by controlling the elevation of each end independently .
the control system shall be capable of working with the following devices which shall be furnished with the machine skitype device at least num feet in length supported throughout its entire length .
short ski .
num feet of control line and stakes .
joint matcher shoe .
section num num the control line shall be set and maintained taut by the contractor to the grade and alignment established by the engineer .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the asphaltic concrete operations .
num joints longitudinal joints of each course shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of the immediate underlying course .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the center of a lane or within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
joints shall be formed by a slope shoe or hot lapped and shall be compacted while the mixture is still hot .
before a surface course is placed in contact with a cold transverse construction joint the cold existing asphaltic concrete shall be trimmed to a vertical face by cutting the existing asphaltic concrete back for its full depth and exposing a fresh face .
after placement and finishing of the new asphaltic concrete both sides of the joint shall be dense and the joint shall be well sealed .
the surface in the area of the joint shall conform to the requirements hereinafter specified for surface tolerances when tested with the straightedge placed across the joint .
w hen surfacing courses are placed on tenfoot or wider shoulders that are to receive a rumble strip any longitudinal joint between the shoulder and the travel lane shall be located at the travel lane edge of the rumble strip .
num compaction a general requirements the temperature of asphaltic concrete just prior to compaction shall be at least num of .
the wheels of compactors shall be wetted with water or if necessary soapy water or a product approved by the engineer to prevent the asphaltic concrete from sticking to the steel wheels during rolling .
the engineer may change the rolling procedure if in the engineers section num num judgment the change is necessary to prevent picking up of the asphaltic concrete .
b equipment for courses greater than one inch in nominal thickness a minimum of one static steelwheel compactor and two vibratory steelwheel compactors shall be provided however sufficient vibratory steelwheel compactors shall be provided so that the drums of the compactors when staggered will cover the entire width of the paving machine .
for courses of one inch or less in nominal thickness a minimum of three static steelwheel compactors shall be provided however sufficient compactors must be provided so that the drums of the compactors when staggered will cover the entire width of the paving machine on the initial forward pass while a static compactor remains to complete final rolling .
if the asphaltic concrete production rate exceeds num tons per hour an additional static steelwheel compactor shall be provided .
the compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
the compactors shall be selfpropelled and shall be operated with the drive wheel in the forward position .
vibratory rollers shall be used in the mode required by the engineer .
vibratory compactors shall not be used in the vibratory mode for courses of one inch or less in nominal thickness .
c rolling procedure vibratory compactors shall be used for initial breakdown on courses greater than one inch in nominal thickness .
static steel wheel compactors or vibratory compactors in the static mode shall be used for initial breakdown on courses one inch or less in nominal thickness .
initial breakdown rollers shall be maintained no more than num feet behind the paving machine .
the rollers for final compaction shall follow as closely behind the initial breakdown as practical such that a uniformly smooth surface is achieved .
as many passes as are possible shall be made with the compactors before the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num of .
all edges shall be compacted by methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
num compacting miscellaneous items and surfaces asphaltic concrete used in the construction of miscellaneous items and surfaces shall be compacted using compactors hothand tampers smoothing irons mechanical vibrating hand tampers or with other devices to the extent considered necessary by the engineer .
num smoothness and surface tolerances section num num all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met num the surface of the final lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num the surface of any lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications other than the final lift shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num acceptance asphaltic concrete will be accepted complete in place if in the judgment of the engineer the asphaltic concrete reasonably conforms to the requirements specified herein .
asphaltic concrete that is not acceptable and is rejected shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate mineral admixture and asphaltrubber .
measurement will include any weight used in construction of intersections turnouts or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
asphaltrubber material will be measured by the ton .
the weight of the asphaltrubber material shall either be determined by weighing directly enroute from the reaction vessel to the point of delivery or be determined from the weight of the asphalt cement and the weight of the rubber minus wastage .
section num num mineral admixture will be measured by the ton .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified herein .
payment for the asphaltrubber will be made by the ton including asphalt cement and crumb rubber .
the results of a nuclear asphalt content gauge shall not be used to determine the weight of asphalt rubber material as the basis of payment .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w hen lime water is used no separate payment will be made for the lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
section num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num description asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber hereinafter asphaltic concrete shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and bituminous material asphaltrubber to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications and as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for all adjustments to its equipment necessary to properly accommodate the use of asphaltrubber as a bituminous material .
num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria mix designs will be performed in accordance with arizona test method num modified as necessary for asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber .
the allowable range of percent absorbed asphaltrubber shall be num when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
section num num num materials num mineral aggregate there is no departmentfurnished source of mineral aggregate .
the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
w hen the contractor selects a source or sources it shall notify the engineer .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for assuring that the mineral aggregate meets all requirements and when processed is fully capable of providing asphaltic concrete which meets all the requirements of these specifications .
mineral aggregate shall be separated into at least two stockpiles .
no individual stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
coarse mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate or blend material shall consist of natural sand sand prepared from rock or other approved inert materials or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
mineral aggregate furnished for mix designs shall be representative of the sources and sampled from the material stockpiles to be utilized in asphaltic concrete production .
mix designs shall conform to the grading limits in table num when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
table num mix design grading limits percent passing sieve size without admixture with admixture num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num mineral aggregate shall conform to the requirements in table num when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
tests on aggregates outlined in table num other than abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed section num num separately on samples from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
table num mineral aggregate characteristics characteristic test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num sand equivalent arizona test method num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num at least two fractured faces and minimum num at lest one fractured face flakiness index arizona test method num maximum num carbonates arizona test method num maximum num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max .
num num rev .
max .
num num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the requirements of table num .
table num mineral admixture material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material bituminous material shall be asphaltrubber conforming to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the type of asphaltrubber shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the crumb section num num rubber gradation shall be type b conforming to the requirements of section num .
the percent of asphaltrubber used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphaltrubber mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the percent of asphaltrubber to be used will be specified by the engineer .
in no case shall the asphaltrubber be diluted with extender oil kerosene or other solvents .
any asphaltrubber so contaminated will be rejected .
any kerosene or other solvents used in the cleaning of equipment shall be purged from the system prior to any subsequent use of that equipment .
num mix design approximately num pounds of produced mineral aggregate in proportion to the anticipated percent usage shall be obtained by the contractor and witnessed by the engineer so that both parties are satisfied that samples are representative of the mineral aggregate to be utilized in the asphaltic concrete production .
in addition to the mineral aggregate samples the contractor shall also furnish the engineer with representative samples of the following materials a fivepound sample of the crumb rubber proposed for use one gallon of asphalt cement from the intended supplier three gallons of the proposed mixture of asphalt and rubber and a onegallon can of the proposed mineral admixture .
these materials must be representative of the material which will subsequently be used in the production of asphaltic concrete .
if the mineral aggregate does not meet the requirements of subsection num no mix design will be prepared .
the contractor shall take the necessary steps to provide material meeting the specified requirements .
along with the samples furnished for mix design testing the contractor shall submit a letter explaining in detail its methods of producing mineral aggregate including wasting washing blending proportioning etc .
and any special or limiting conditions it may propose .
the contractors letter shall also state the sources of mineral aggregate the source and type of asphalt cement the source and type of crumb rubber and the source and type of mineral admixture .
w ithin num working days of receipt of all samples and the contractors letter in the central laboratory the department will provide the contractor with a mix design containing the type and percentage of asphaltrubber the type and source of asphalt cement the type and source of crumb rubber the type source and percentage of mineral section num num admixture the sources of mineral aggregate and the percentage from each of the stockpile the composite mineral aggregate gradation the combined mineral aggregate and mineral admixture gradation and any special or limiting conditions .
the contract time established for the completion of the work includes num working days for the required testing and the developing of the approved mix design .
asphaltic concrete friction course production shall not begin until there is an approved mix design .
num mix design revisions at any time after production of asphaltic concrete has been started using the approved mix design changes may be proposed by the contractor or directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall not change its methods of crushing screening washing or stockpiling from those used during production of material used for mix design purposes without approval of the engineer or without requesting a new mix design .
if changes are made in the source or type of bituminous material or the sources of mineral aggregate or changes are made in the proportions of mineral aggregate equal to or greater than five percentage points additional testing to the extent deemed necessary by the engineer will be performed in order that the engineer may be satisfied that the mix design criteria will be met .
during production of asphaltic concrete the contractor on the basis of field test results may request a change to the approved mix design .
the engineer will evaluate the proposed changes and notify the contractor of the engineers decision within two working days of the receipt of the request .
if at any time unapproved changes are made by the contractor in the source of bituminous material sources of mineral aggregate production methods or proportional changes in violation of approved mix design stipulations production shall cease until a new mix design is developed at no additional cost to the department or the contractor complies with the approved mix design .
at any time after the mix design has been approved the contractor may request a new mix design .
the costs associated with the testing of materials in the developing of mix designs requested by the contractor after a mix design acceptable to the department has been developed shall be borne by the contractor .
if the engineer determines that a new mix design is necessary due to changes in mineral aggregate characteristics or gradation costs section num num associated with the development of the new mix design shall be borne by the contractor .
a new mix design can be developed by the engineer at any time the engineer deems necessary .
should such a new mix design require revisions to the contractors operations which result in additional cost to the contractor it will be reimbursed for these costs .
however the engineer reserves the right to modify the asphaltrubber content without compensation being made to the contractor involving additional operation costs .
num acceptance of materials num general the contractors attention is directed to the requirements of subsection num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized w ork .
if the production of asphaltic concrete is stopped either for failure to meet the requirements specified in subsection num or because changes are made in the mix design samples will be taken for calculating new consecutive averages either after production resumes or after the changes in the mix design have been made .
the acceptance of the mineral aggregate gradation and the bituminous material content will be determined on the basis of the tests specified in subsection num .
the engineer reserves the right to increase the frequency of sampling and testing upon the resumption of asphaltic concrete production .
num mineral aggregate aggregate shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other material that prevent thorough coating of the aggregate with the bituminous material .
prior to and during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for the determination of the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and flakiness index .
samples shall be obtained either from the cold feed belt prior to the addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
should such testing indicate results not meeting the requirements of table num for sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and flakiness index operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the option of requesting a new mix design or correcting deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
num asphaltic concrete a mineral aggregate gradation section num num prior to the initial startup of asphaltic concrete production and prior to startup after any subsequent mix design revisions affecting gradation a sample of the combined mineral aggregate shall be tested .
the mineral aggregate shall meet the gradation requirements for the numconsecutive test limits indicated below .
if the mineral aggregate does not meet these requirements production shall not begin until the mineral aggregate is in compliance with this requirement .
for each approximate num tons of asphaltic concrete produced at least one sample of mineral aggregate will be taken .
samples will be taken in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num on a random basis .
for batch plants the sample shall be taken from the hot bins .
for other than batch plants the sample shall be taken from the cold feed belt .
samples will be taken by means of a sampling device which is capable of obtaining representative samples .
the device which shall be approved by the engineer shall be furnished by the contractor .
in any shift that the production of asphaltic concrete is less than num tons at least one sample will be taken .
samples will be tested for conformance to the mix design gradation with or without mineral admixture as appropriate in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the gradation will be considered to be acceptable unless the average of any three consecutive tests or the result of any single test varies from the mix design gradation percentages as follows number of tests passing sieve num consecutive one no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num one hundred percent of the material shall pass the numinch sieve .
at any time that test results indicate that the gradation does not fall within all of the limits indicated the production of asphaltic concrete shall cease immediately and shall not begin again until a calibration test indicates that the gradation is within the numconsecutive test limits indicated .
b asphaltrubber content during production of asphaltic concrete the contractor shall maintain at the plant site a nuclear asphalt content gauge calibrated and operated in accordance with arizona test method num .
at the discretion of the engineer the department may choose to prepare the calibration samples for use by the contractor .
under the observation of the engineer the contractor shall determine the asphaltrubber content by means of the nuclear asphalt content gauge a minimum of four times per full shift .
the engineer shall determine the times that the samples section num num are taken .
the contractors technicians performing the testing including the calibration of the nuclear gauge shall meet the technician requirements given in the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix az num .
production of asphaltic concrete shall cease immediately and the plant andor the nuclear asphalt content gauges recalibrated if any single test result varies by an amount greater than num or the average of three consecutive test results varies by an amount greater than num from the amount directed by the engineer .
material that has already been produced may be used on the project if the single test value representative of that material varies by an amount from num to num inclusive from the amount directed by the engineer .
material that has already been produced may not be used on the project if the single test value representative of that material varies by an amount greater than num from the amount directed by the engineer unless by retesting the material is found to be acceptable .
num construction requirements num quality control quality control of mineral aggregate production and asphaltic concrete production shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall perform sufficient testing to assure that mineral aggregate and asphaltic concrete are produced which meet all specified requirements .
the engineer reserves the right to obtain samples of any portion of any material at any point of the operations for the engineers own use .
num stockpiling the contractor will not be allowed to feed the hot plant from stockpiles containing less than two full days of production unless only two days production remain to be done or special conditions exist where the engineer deems this requirement waived .
mineral aggregate shall be separated and stockpiled so that segregation is minimized .
an approved divider of sufficient size to prevent intermingling of stockpiles shall be provided .
num proportioning drying heating and mixing the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
unless approved by the engineer no individual mineral aggregate stockpile or hot bin usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate .
section num num changes in stockpile or hot bin use in excess of five percent from the approved mix design will not be permitted without the approval of the engineer .
no fine material which has been collected in the dust collection system shall be returned to the mixture unless the collected fines are uniformly metered into the mixture .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the dryer shall not exceed num degrees f. num placing and finishing a general requirements the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
all equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of all objectionable material and tacked with asphalt cement in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the cleaning of the surface the tacking of the surface and the amount and grade of asphalt cement used shall be as directed by and acceptable to the engineer .
unless otherwise specified on the project plans asphaltic concrete shall not be placed on the twofoot widened section where guardrail is to be installed .
num placement dates and weather requirements asphaltic concrete shall be placed between the dates shown below for the average elevation of the project and only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of placement is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
section num num average elevation of project feet beginning and ending dates num num num num num num num and over march num may num september num october num april num october num june num september num at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event of weather conditions either existing or expected which would have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
prior to opening to any traffic the engineer may require up to three applications of lime water a minimum of num pounds of lime per num gallons of water .
lime water shall be applied in a manner that uniformly covers the entire surface of the paving pass .
no separate payment will be made for lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
num delivery to screed unit asphaltic concrete delivered to the screed unit shall be a free flowing homogeneous mass in which there is no segregation crusts lumps or migration of the asphaltrubber .
should any one or more of such conditions be evident in the material delivered to the screed unit and which can not be eliminated by one or more of the following methods the engineer will order the work to be stopped until conditions are conducive to the delivery of the material in the condition as hereinbefore required a covering hailing units with tarpaulins .
b dumping material directly into the paver .
c moving the hot plant nearer to the point of delivery .
other measures proposed by the contractor which will deliver asphaltic concrete meeting the above requirements will be considered by the engineer .
b loading asphaltic concrete into the paving machine if the asphaltic concrete is dumped directly into the paving machine from the hauling trucks care shall be taken to avoid jarring the machine or moving it out of alignment .
no vertical load shall be exerted on the paving machine by the trucks .
trucks while dumping shall be securely attached to the paving machine .
section num num if the asphaltic concrete is dumped upon the surface being paved and subsequently loaded into the paving machine it shall not be dumped at a distance greater than num feet in front of the paving machine .
the loading equipment shall be selfsupporting and shall not exert any vertical load on the paving machine .
substantially all of the asphaltic concrete shall be picked up and loaded into the paving machine .
c placing and finishing asphaltic concrete by means of selfpropelled paving machines all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
in order to achieve as far as practical a continuous operation the speed of the paving machine shall be coordinated with the production of the plant .
selfpropelled paving machines shall spread the mixture without segregation or tearing within the specified tolerances true to the line grade and crown indicated on the project plans .
pavers shall be equipped with hoppers and augers which will distribute the mixture uniformly in front of adjustable screeds .
screeds shall include any strikeoff device operated by tamping or vibrating action which is effective without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture and which produces a course with a uniform texture and density for the full width being paved .
screeds shall be adjustable as to height and crown and shall be equipped with a controlled heating device for use when required .
tapered sections not exceeding eight feet in width or widened sections not exceeding four feet in width may be placed and finished by other means approved by the engineer .
d automatically actuated control system except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of automatic controls impractical asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines equipped with an automatically actuated control system .
the control system shall control the elevation of the screed at each end by controlling the elevation of one end directly and the other end indirectly either through controlling the transverse slope or alternately when directed by controlling the elevation of each end independently .
the control system shall be capable of working with the following devices which shall be furnished with the machine section num num skitype device at least num feet in length supported throughout its entire length .
short ski .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the asphaltic concrete operations .
num joints longitudinal joints shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of the immediate underlying course .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
num compaction a general requirements the temperature of asphaltic concrete just prior to compaction shall be at least num degrees f. the wheels of compactors shall be wetted with water or if necessary soapy water or a product approved by the engineer to prevent the asphaltic concrete from sticking to the steel wheels during rolling .
the engineer may change the rolling procedure if in the engineers judgment the change is necessary to prevent picking up of the asphaltic concrete .
b equipment compacting and smoothing shall be accomplished by the use of static steel wheel compactors .
vibrator compactors may be used in the static mode only .
the compactors shall be selfpropelled and shall be operated with the drive wheel in the forward position .
a minimum of three compactors shall be provided however sufficient compactors shall be provided so that the drums of the compactors when staggered will cover the entire width of the paving machine during initial breakdown .
compactors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
compactors shall be designed and properly section num num maintained so that they are capable of accomplishing the required compaction .
the compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
c rolling procedure a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
compaction shall consist of the following rolling sequence rolling sequence number of coverages initial num finish num num a sufficient number of compactors shall be used for initial breakdown so that when the compactors are staggered the entire width of the mat being laid is compacted with one forward pass of the compactors .
the distance between the paving machine and the initial rolling shall not exceed num feet .
a separate rollers shall be used for final compaction .
the rollers used for final compaction shall follow as closely behind the initial breakdown rollers as possible .
compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
num compacting miscellaneous items and surfaces asphaltic concrete used in the construction of miscellaneous items and surfaces shall be compacted using compactors hothand tampers smoothing irons mechanical vibrating hand tampers or with other devices to the extent considered necessary by the engineer .
num smoothness and surface tolerances asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance of subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met section num num num the finished asphaltic concrete surface shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num acceptance asphaltic concrete will be accepted complete in place if in the judgment of the engineer the asphaltic concrete reasonably conforms to the requirements specified herein .
asphaltic concrete that is not acceptable and is rejected shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the mixture actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate mineral admixture and asphaltrubber .
measurement will include any weight used in construction of intersections turnouts or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
asphaltrubber will be measured by the ton .
the weight of the asphaltrubber material shall either be determined by weighing directly enroute from the reaction vessel to the point of delivery or be determined from the weight of the asphalt cement and the weight of the rubber minus wastage .
mineral admixture will be measured by the ton .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified herein .
payment for the asphaltrubber will be made by the ton including asphalt cement and crumb rubber .
the results of a nuclear asphalt content gauge shall not be used to determine the weight of asphalt rubber material as the basis of payment .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
section num num w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w hen lime water is used no separate payment will be made for the lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
section num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber end product num description the work under this section shall consist of constructing asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber hereinafter asphaltic concrete by providing a mix design meeting the design criteria specified herein furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and bituminous material asphaltrubber to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall be responsible for all adjustments to its equipment necessary to properly accommodate the use of asphaltrubber as a bituminous material .
num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria mix designs shall be developed by the contractor .
each mix design shall meet the criteria in table num .
section num num table num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria criteria requirements arizona test method num .
voids in mineral aggregate minimum num see note num .
effective voids range num num see note num .
absorbed asphalt rubber range num num see note num .
mix design grading limits num percent passing sieve size w ithout admixture w ith admixture num inch num num num inch num num num num num inch num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num note draft method for the design of arac mixtures available from the adot materials group num n. numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
num materials num mineral aggregate source the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num except that subparagraph num under subsection numb shall not apply .
w hen the contractor selects a source or sources it shall notify the engineer .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for assuring that the mineral aggregate meets all requirements and when processed is fully capable of providing asphaltic concrete which meets all the requirements of these specifications .
num mineral aggregate coarse and intermediate mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert materials with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate shall be obtained from crushed gravel or crushed rock .
all uncrushed material passing the no .
num sieve shall be removed prior to the crushing screening and washing operations necessary to produce the specified gradation .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of num hours in advance of crushing the section num num material to be used as mineral aggregate so all crushing operations are inspected .
existing stockpile material which has not been inspected during crushing will not be permitted for use unless the contractor is able to document to the engineers satisfaction that the mineral aggregate has been crushed .
any material inspected by the department as crushed material shall be separated from the contractors other stockpiles and reserved for use throughout the project duration .
mineral aggregate shall be separated into stockpiles by the contractor .
no individual stockpile usage shall be less than three percent of the total mineral aggregate at any time during mix design or production .
no individual stockpile shall contain more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
if necessary the contractor shall wash the mineral aggregate to meet this requirement .
aggregates shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other material that prevent the thorough coating with the asphaltrubber .
mineral aggregate shall conform to the requirements in table num when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
section num num table num mineral aggregate characteristics characteristics test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num sand equivalent aashto t num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num uncompacted void content arizona test method num minimum num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num at least two fractured faces and minimum num at least one fractured face determined on plus no .
num material abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
max num carbonates only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
arizona test method num maximum num tests on aggregates outlined in table num other than abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed separately on samples from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
mineral aggregate from a source or combination of sources which does not meet the requirements given in table num for combined bulk oven dry specific gravity andor combined water absorption up to a maximum of num but meets the other specified requirements will be considered for acceptance by the engineer if a the total estimated cost of all asphaltic concrete components using the mix design unit weight asphaltrubber content and mineral admixture percentage does not exceed the total amount bid for these items by more than num percent or b a supplemental agreement is executed adjusting the unit section num num prices of asphaltic concrete components such that the total estimated cost does not exceed the total amount bid by more than num percent .
num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate .
mineral admixture shall be portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the requirements of table num .
table num mineral admixture material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydrated cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material bituminous material shall be asphaltrubber conforming to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the type of asphaltrubber shall be as specified in the special provisions .
the crumb rubber gradation shall be type b conforming to the requirements of section num .
the percent of asphaltrubber used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphaltrubber mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
in no case shall the asphaltrubber be diluted with extender oil kerosene or other solvents .
any asphaltrubber so contaminated will be rejected .
any kerosene or other solvents used in the cleaning of equipment shall be purged from the system prior to any subsequent use of that equipment .
num blotter material an application of blotter material may be required following the placement of the asphaltic concrete and prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
the blotter material shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the blotter material shall be applied in one or more applications for a total application of two pounds per square yard .
the engineer may reduce or eliminate blotter material if deemed to be unnecessary .
num mix design section num num utilizing mineral aggregate which has been crushed processed separated and stockpiled a mix design shall be formulated and submitted by the contractor to the engineer .
the mineral aggregate samples used for mix design purposes shall be representative of aggregate materials to be used during production .
the mix design shall be based on the mix design criteria and other requirements hereinbefore specified utilizing asphalt cement crumb rubber and mineral admixture of the type and from the sources proposed for use in the production of asphaltic concrete .
the mix design shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a professional engineer experienced in the development of mix designs and mix design testing .
the mix design shall be provided in a format that clearly indicates all the mix design requirements and shall be sealed signed and dated by the mix design engineer .
the mix design shall be prepared by a mix design laboratory that has met the requirements of the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
the contractor may propose the use of a mix design that has been developed for a previous project .
the proposed mix design shall meet the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the asphaltrubber and mineral admixture type and source of supply and the source and methods of producing mineral aggregate have not changed since the formulation of the previous mix design .
the contractor shall also provide current test results for all specified characteristics of the mineral aggregate proposed for use .
the engineer will either approve or disapprove the proposed mix design .
should the engineer disapprove the use of the previously used mix design the contractor shall prepare and submit a new mix design proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
a previously used mix design older than two years from the date it was formulated sealed signed and dated shall not be allowed for use .
any previously used mix design that is older than one year but less than two years shall not be allowed for use unless the contractor provides verification testing results .
such testing shall be a onepoint verification at the design asphaltrubber content using the proposed mineral aggregate asphaltrubber and mineral admixture .
once approved for use on a project a mix design may be used for the duration of the project .
the mix design shall contain as a minimum num the name and address of the testing organization and the person responsible for the mix design testing .
num the specific locations of the sources of mineral aggregate .
section num num num asphaltrubber design including asphalt cement type and source crumb rubber type gradation and source percent crumb rubber by weight of asphalt cement asphalt cement binder properties asphaltrubber binder properties blending procedures and reaction time .
num the anticipated mineral aggregate gradation in each stockpile .
num mix design gradation .
the mix design shall contain the mineral aggregate gradation and also the gradation with mineral admixture .
num the results of all testing determinations etc .
such as specific gravity of each component water absorption sand equivalent loss on abrasion fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content percent carbonates if required asphaltrubber absorption percent air voids voids in mineral aggregate and bulk density .
test results used in the formulation of the mix design shall be from testing performed no earlier than num days prior to the date the mix design is signed by the mix design engineer .
historical abrasion values may be supplied on sources provided the testing was conducted within the past two years .
the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer under a cover letter signed by an authorized representative of the contractor .
at least five working days prior to the start of asphaltic concrete production the contractor shall provide the engineer with samples of the asphalt cement crumb rubber and asphaltrubber that are representative of the materials to be used during production .
asphaltic concrete production shall not begin until the engineer determines the acceptability of the proposed asphalt cement crumb rubber and asphaltrubber .
a copy of the mix design and representative samples of the mineral aggregate mineral admixture and asphaltrubber used in the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer for calibration of the ignition furnace and for the determination of sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content .
the engineer shall witness the sampling of the mineral aggregate .
the mix design and samples shall be submitted to the engineer at least five working days prior to the start of asphaltic concrete production .
the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content shall meet the requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing fine aggregate is modified .
section num num if the mineral aggregate fails to meet the requirements specified herein asphaltic concrete production shall not commence and the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design which is representative of the materials produced or correct the deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
the engineer will review the mix design to assure that it contains all required information .
if it does not it will be returned within two working days of receipt of all samples and mix design information for further action and resubmission by the contractor .
if the contractor elects to change its source of material the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a new mix design which meets the requirements specified hereinbefore .
the contractor may make selfdirected target changes to the approved mix design within the limits shown below .
requests for selfdirected target changes shall be made in writing and acknowledged by the engineer prior to start of production for a lot .
the selfdirected target change shall meet contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
measured characteristics allowable selfdirected target changes gradation numinch sieve num from mix design target value no .
num sieve num from mix design target value no .
num sieve num from mix design target value no .
num sieve none asphaltrubber content num from mix design target value effective voids none the contractor may propose target changes to the approved mix design for the engineers approval .
the engineer will determine if the proposed target change will result in mix production that meets the contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
for acceptance purposes target changes will not be retroactive .
should a mix design prove unsatisfactory to the contractor during production the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a revised mix design .
for acceptance purposes the revised mix design will not be retroactive .
the contractor shall not change its methods of crushing screening washing or stockpiling from those used during production of material used for mix design purposes without approval of the engineer or without preparing a new mix design .
if at any time unapproved changes are made in the source of bituminous material sources of mineral aggregate production section num num procedures or proportional changes in violation of approved mix design stipulations production shall cease until a new mix design is developed or the contractor complies with the approved mix design .
num contractor quality control the contractor shall perform the quality control measures described in subsection numc .
at the weekly meeting the contractor shall be prepared to explain and discuss how the following processes will be employed .
a aggregate production including crusher methods pit extraction and washing .
b stockpile management including stacking methods separation technique plant feed technique stockpile pad thickness and segregation prevention .
c proportioning and plant control including plant scale calibration mix temperature control storing method and addition of admixture .
d transporting and placing including hauling distance and temperature control segregation and nonuniform placement control and joint placement and technique .
e compaction including types and weight of rollers establishing and monitoring of roller patterns and temperature controls .
the contractor shall obtain samples and perform the tests specified in the following table section num num contractor quality control testing requirements type of test test method sampling point minimum testing frequency mineral aggregate for asphalt concrete gradation ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per stockpile per day sand equivalent aashto t num fractured coarse aggregate particles ariz num uncompacted void content ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per num tons of total aggregate num asphaltic concrete endproduct gradation ariz num or num cold feed hot bins roadway or plant num per num tons asphaltrubber content ariz num num or other approved methods roadway or plant num per num tons voids ariz num num num roadway or plant num per num tons each day .
maximum of num per day .
compaction ariz num roadway num per num tons note num prior to the completion of the mix design quality control tests on mineral aggregate shall be performed based on the anticipated percent use of each stockpile .
samples taken from individual stockpiles may be composited prior to performing the required tests or testing may be performed on material from each stockpile and the composite test result for each required test determined mathematically .
num construction requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the proportioning of all materials for the hauling placing loading spreading and finishing of asphaltic concrete and for the applying of bituminous material such as tack coats prime coats and provisional seals all in accordance with the appropriate portions of the specifications .
the contractor shall be responsible for the material spread rate and thickness control .
the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
section num num the temperature of asphaltic concrete upon discharge from the mixer shall not exceed num degrees f. all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
pavers shall be equipped with a screed for the full width being paved heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing all courses of asphaltic concrete .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors for either or both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals which operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the placing of asphaltic concrete .
the base or subgrade upon which asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be prepared and maintained in a firm condition until asphaltic concrete is placed .
it shall not be frozen or excessively wet .
at any time the engineer may require that the work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event that weather conditions either existing or expected are anticipated to have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
prior to opening to any traffic the engineer may require an application of lime water a minimum of num pounds of lime per num gallons of water .
lime water shall be applied in a manner that uniformly covers the entire surface of the paving pass .
no separate payment will be made for lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
all wheels and tires of compactors and other equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
longitudinal joints of each course shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of any immediate underlying course .
w hen surfacing courses are placed on num foot or wider shoulders which are to receive rumble strips the contractor shall place any longitudinal joints approximately one foot away from the travel lane side of the rumble strip .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the center of a lane or within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
section num num joints shall be formed by a slope shoe or hotlapped and shall result in an even uniform surface .
before a surface course is placed in contact with a cold transverse construction joint the cold existing asphaltic concrete shall be trimmed to a vertical face by cutting the existing asphaltic concrete back for its full depth of the lift and exposing a fresh face .
after placement and finishing of the new asphaltic concrete both sides of the joint shall be dense and the joint shall be well sealed .
the surface in the area of the joint shall conform to the requirements hereinafter specified for surface tolerances when tested with the straightedge placed across the joint .
all locations where plate samples are taken from the roadway shall be immediately repaired by the contractor utilizing hot asphaltic concrete .
all holes where cores are taken shall be repaired within num hours after coring using material approved by the engineer .
all holes shall be in a dry condition prior to repair .
the patching material shall be thoroughly compacted in the holes by the contractor .
the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of all objectionable material and tacked with asphalt cement in accordance with the requirements of section num of the specifications .
the cleaning of the surface the tacking of the surface and the amount and grade of asphalt cement used shall be as directed by and acceptable to the engineer .
a light coat of asphalt cement shall be applied as directed to edges or vertical surfaces against which asphaltic concrete is to be placed .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete immediately behind the paver shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
num acceptance of materials num general in addition to the random acceptance samples taken from each lot the engineer may sample and reject material which appears to be defective .
such rejected material shall not be used in the work .
the section num num results of tests performed on rejected material will not be included with the lot acceptance tests .
acceptance will be on the basis of the following sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content gradation asphaltrubber content effective voids material spread compaction smoothness num sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content of mineral aggregate during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for the determination of the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content .
samples shall be obtained from the cold feed belt prior to the addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
mineral aggregate will be acceptable for sand equivalent if it meets the minimum requirements specified in subsection num and the running average of three sand equivalent tests is at least num percent and no single test is less than num percent of the sand equivalent result contained in the contractors mix design .
the fractured coarse aggregate particles shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
the uncompacted void content shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet the requirements specified herein operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the option of submitting a revised mix design conforming to the requirements of subsection num or correcting deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
num material spread a spread lot shall be considered to be onehalf shift of production .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection numd .
section num num the contractor shall record information pertaining to each spread lot on forms provided by the engineer .
information shall include the project number date and period of time that each spread lot was placed the spread lot number beginning and ending station the plans thickness and tons placed in each lot .
completed spread lot forms shall be signed by the contractor and given to the engineer at the end of each shift .
the engineer will calculate the quantity required in each spread lot using the mix design bulk density .
the calculated quantity required in each spread lot will be compared to the actual quantity placed .
a lot will be considered to be acceptable with a zero pay factor if the actual quantity placed varies by no more than num to num percent from the required quantity .
if the quantity in a lot is found to vary between num and num percent pay factors will be determined in accordance with table num .
these pay factors will be utilized in the pay adjustment as outlined in subsection num .
num gradation asphaltrubber content and effective voids a lot shall be considered to be one shifts production however production consisting of less than one shift such as at the beginning or at the completion of production will also be considered to be a lot .
if changes are made in the mix design or target values new lots will be established .
four samples of the asphaltic concrete shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer at random locations designated by the engineer .
samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of section num paragraphs d through f or section num of arizona test method num .
the samples shall be delivered to the engineer immediately after being taken .
the minimum weight of the sample shall be num pounds .
the engineer will split the sample and save onehalf for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
the material will be tested by the engineer for asphaltrubber content gradation marshall density and maximum theoretical density .
asphaltrubber content and gradation shall be tested in accordance with arizona test method num using an ignition furnace except the sample size specified in section numc of arizona test method num shall be a minimum of num grams .
a new calibration of the ignition furnace shall be performed for each mix design and at any other time the engineer directs .
marshall density and maximum theoretical density shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test methods num and num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
section num num for plants providing asphaltic concrete exclusively for this project the difference between the asphaltrubber content as measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphaltrubber content shall be determined for the first five lots of asphaltic concrete produced for each mix design .
if approved by the engineer a plant may be considered exclusive to the project if an asphaltrubber tank is dedicated for the shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the determination of the actual asphaltrubber content may include invoice quantities volumetric tank measurements using a calibrated rod tank stickings corrected for temperature computerized massflow meter and accounting for wasted materials .
if a computerized massflow meter is used documentation of its calibration shall be submitted to the engineer prior to asphaltic concrete production .
at any time during asphaltic concrete production the engineer may require that a new calibration of the massflow meter be performed .
if there is a difference of greater than num percent asphaltrubber content between the asphaltrubber content measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphaltrubber content the contractor may request that a correction to the asphaltrubber content by ignition furnace testing be made .
the contractor must make such a request in writing within two working days after receiving the test results for the fifth lot of asphaltic concrete production .
if referee testing is performed on a lot of asphaltic concrete for which a correction based on the actual asphaltrubber content was made to the asphaltrubber content by ignition furnace testing referee testing shall not apply to the determination of asphaltrubber content .
the correction once documented and approved by the engineer shall be applied to test results from the beginning of asphaltic concrete production through the remainder of asphaltic concrete production using that mix design .
if the contractor submits a new mix design a new correction must be established and applied as specified above .
for other plants no correction will be made to asphaltrubber content values measured by ignition furnace testing .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of samples by the engineer .
in the event the contractor elects to question the test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the referee testing shall be performed in an independent approved laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the samples will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the tests results by the department or the mix design targets for gradation and effective voids .
the asphaltic concrete samples previously saved will be tested for marshall density and maximum theoretical density in accordance with the requirements of arizona test methods num and num respectively except when testing for marshall density the specimens shall not be extruded from the molds until the day after they are compacted .
effective voids will be section num num determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the samples shall also be tested in accordance with arizona test method num for asphaltrubber content by ignition furnace and gradation of the mineral aggregate except the sample size specified in section numc of arizona test method num shall be a minimum of num grams .
new pts will be determined for all characteristics with the exception of asphaltrubber content if a correction to the ignition furnace test value was made as specified above .
w hen referee testing is performed on a mixtureproperties lot the referee test result for the average maximum theoretical density will be used to determine a new pt for compaction .
the results of these determinations will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the total pay factor of the lot does not improve or is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
the target values for gradation asphaltrubber content and effective voids are given in the contractors mix design .
the upper limits ul and lower limits ll of acceptable production of each of the measured characteristics are as follows measured characteristics ll ul gradation sieve size numinch tv num tv num no .
num tv num tv num no .
num tv num tv num no .
num tv num tv num asphaltrubber content tv num tv num effective voids tv num tv num note the limits are used in the statistical calculations for quality index .
acceptance is controlled by the variability of the produced material and every effort should be made to strive for the applicable target value tv .
the engineer will determine the pt of each measured characteristic in accordance with subsection numi and utilizing table num the engineer will determine pay factors for each measured characteristic .
num compaction asphaltic concrete shall only be placed when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is at or below num degrees f and falling .
compaction control shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the number and types of rollers shall be the contractors responsibility and shall be sufficient to meet these requirements .
section num num all edges shall be rolled while the mixture is still hot .
a lot for compaction purposes shall be identical to the lot described in subsection num .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection num d. each lot shall be tested for acceptance .
twenty cores shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer .
cores shall be taken using wet coring with soapy water to aid in the release of the core from the coring equipment .
the engineer will designate ten random locations within the lot and the contractor shall take two cores at each location .
the engineer will save one core from each location for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest one foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
w hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
cores shall be taken utilizing mechanical coring equipment in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num section num .
cores shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and shall be taken not later than two working days after the lot placement .
the cores shall be delivered to the engineer immediately upon being taken .
the cores will be tested for acceptance by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of samples by the engineer .
the target value for compaction shall be num percent inplace air voids .
inplace air voids shall be determined using arizona test method num .
the maximum theoretical density used in determination of air voids will be the average of the four maximum theoretical densities determined in subsection num .
the upper limit ul is num percent inplace air voids and the lower limit ll is num percent inplace air voids .
the engineer will determine the pt for compaction in accordance with subsection num numi and utilizing table num will determine the compaction pay factor .
in the event the contractor elects to question the core test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the cores previously saved will be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num in an independent testing laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the cores will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the test results by the department or the density target .
using the referee test results the engineer will determine a new pt for section num num compaction .
the result of this determination will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the compaction pay factor of the lot does not improve is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
num smoothness and surface tolerances all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met num the surface of the final lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num the surface of any lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications other than the final lift shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the asphaltic concrete actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate asphaltrubber and mineral admixture .
measurement will include any quantity used in construction of intersections turnouts or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
asphaltrubber will be measured by the ton on the basis of the asphaltrubber content determined in accordance with subsection num num for each lot of asphaltic concrete accepted .
the average asphaltrubber content will be multiplied by the number of tons of asphaltic concrete in that lot to determine the amount of asphaltrubber .
if the contractor has requested referee testing the average asphaltrubber content will come from the independent testing laboratory results unless a correction based on the actual section num num asphaltrubber content was made to the ignition furnace test value as allowed in subsection num .
if a correction based on the actual asphaltrubber content was made to the ignition furnace test value the average asphaltrubber content determined from the departments acceptance testing will be used .
at the discretion of the engineer asphaltrubber may be measured by invoice quantities adjusted as necessary for waste .
in no case shall the measured amount of asphaltrubber for payment be greater than the total of the invoice quantities adjusted for waste .
mineral admixture will be measured by the ton for the mineral admixture actually used in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted by the appropriate total pay factor as hereinafter provided .
for the purpose of determining acceptability and appropriate total pay factors each unit of asphaltic concrete will be included in three separate lots a spread lot a mixture properties lot and a compaction lot .
the total unit price for any unit of accepted asphaltic concrete will be the contract unit price adjusted by the applicable spread lot pay factor mixture properties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor .
the engineer may exclude asphaltic concrete from the spread lot quantity and from the spread lot pay factor calculations if the engineer determines that the proposed use of the material or the existing surface conditions are not conducive to the use of spread lots .
the engineer may exclude certain locations from the mixture properties lot quantity andor the compaction lot quantity and from the random sampling used in determining the mixture properties lot pay factor andor the compaction lot pay factor should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
w hen lime water is used no separate payment will be made for the lime water or its application the cost being considered as included in this contract item .
a spread lot pay factor the spread lot pay factor will be determined in accordance with subsection num .
if the quantity in a spread lot is found to vary by more than num percent no payment will be made for the material which exceeds the num percent including asphaltrubber and mineral admixture .
if the quantity is found to vary by more than num percent the spread lot will be rejected .
b mixture properties lot pay factor section num num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined in accordance with the following procedure num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphaltrubber content and effective voids shall be determined as set forth in subsection num .
num a single pay factor shall be determined for gradation and asphaltrubber content .
that pay factor shall be the lowest pay factor for the individual measured characteristics for gradation and asphaltrubber content .
num if no individual pt value in num above is less than num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be the sum of the pay factor determined in num above and the effective voids pay factor .
the negative pay factor for mixture properties shall not exceed num per ton .
if any individual pt value is less than num the lot is in reject and the provisions in subsection nume shall apply .
c compaction lot pay factor the compaction lot pay factor shall be the compaction pay factor determined as set forth in subsection num .
d determination of lot pay factors on contracts involving multiple projects w hen more than one project is included in a single contract placement during a shift or half shift of production may encompass more than one project .
in such case the applicable spread lot pay factor mixture properties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor for each project shall be determined as follows num spread lot pay factors will be determined separately for each project utilizing the procedure set forth in subsection num num .
num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphaltrubber content and effective voids will be determined from the results of the random samples taken and tested in accordance with subsection num regardless of which projects the samples fall within .
num pt values and pay factors for compaction shall be determined from separate sets of core samples for each project .
num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numb utilizing the individual pay factors determined in num above .
section num num num the compaction lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numc utilizing the pay factor determined in num above .
e acceptability asphaltic concrete included in any mixture properties lot possessing an individual pt value lower than num for gradation asphaltrubber content or effective voids will be rejected .
asphaltic concrete included in any compaction lot possessing a pt value lower than num will be rejected .
w ithin num days after receiving notice that a spread lot mixture properties lot or compaction lot of asphaltic concrete has been rejected by the engineer the contractor may submit a written proposal to accept the material in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors .
maximum negative pay factors are defined as a minus num per ton for spread lots and a minus num per ton each for mixture properties lots and compaction lots .
positive mixture properties lot pay factors become zero when the compaction lot is in reject and the material is allowed to be left in place .
positive compaction lot pay factors become zero when the mixture properties lot is in reject and is allowed to remain in place .
in addition for any mixture properties lot that is in reject due to asphaltrubber content but allowed to remain in place payment shall not be made for asphaltrubber quantities in excess of the upper limit ul .
the proposal shall contain an engineering analysis of the anticipated performance of the asphaltic concrete if left in place .
the engineering analysis shall also detail any proposed corrective action and the anticipated effect of such corrective action on the performance .
the engineering analysis shall be performed by a professional engineer experienced in asphaltic concrete testing and the development of asphaltic concrete mix designs .
if a rejected lot is submitted for referee testing by the contractor the num days allowed to prepare an engineering analysis will begin upon notification of referee test results .
w ithin three working days the engineer will determine whether or not to accept the contractors proposal .
if the proposal is not accepted the asphaltic concrete shall be removed at no additional cost to the department and replaced with asphaltic concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications .
if the proposal is accepted the asphaltic concrete shall remain in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors and any necessary corrective action shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
the department reserves the right to suspend the work should any of the following conditions occur num the occurrence of two or more rejected lots within any ten consecutive production lots .
section num num num the occurrence of three consecutive negative mixture properties lot pay factors or three consecutive negative compaction lot pay factors .
num the occurrence of five or more pay factors that are negative either for a mixture properties lot or for a compaction lot within any ten consecutive production lots .
if the department elects to suspend the work for any of these conditions the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design in accordance with subsection num or submit for the engineers approval a written engineering analysis .
the engineering analysis shall detail the course of action necessary to correct deficiencies in the contractors present production methods such that further production can be accomplished without excessive amounts of asphaltic concrete in penalty or rejection .
if approved by the engineer the revised mix design or the course of action proposed in the engineering analysis shall be implemented and the work may continue .
costs or delays due to the provisions of this subsection are not compensable .
f asphaltrubber payment for asphaltrubber will be made by the ton .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section num .
g mineral admixture mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
h smoothness w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
i statistical acceptance the total percentage of lot w ithin ul and ll pt shall be determined in accordance with subsection num of the specifications .
pay factors pf shall be determined by entering table num with pt .
section num num table num pay factors material spread mixture properties and compaction pay factors dollar per ton negative variance pay factor dollars per ton pt gradation and asphaltrubber content effective voids compaction num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num more than num reject see subsections num a and e less than num reject see subsection num e section num asphaltic concrete end product num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing at a plant hauling and placing a mixture of aggregate materials mineral admixture and an asphalt cement to form a pavement course or to be used for other specified purposes in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
it is the intent of this specification that the contractor acquire and make all arrangements for a source or sources of material that it furnish certificates of compliance as hereinafter specified that it furnish a mix design which will meet the design criteria specified hereinafter and that it provide all the equipment materials and labor necessary to furnish and place the asphaltic concrete in accordance with the requirements specified herein .
num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria mix designs shall be developed by the contractor on the basis of the following criteria and tested in accordance with the requirements of the following test methods section num num criteria requirements arizona test num mix num mix base mix method num .
voids in mineral aggregate range num num num num num num num num .
effective voids range note num note num note num num num .
absorbed asphalt range num num num num num num num num .
index of retained strength minimum note num num num num num num .
w et strength psi minimum num num num num num .
stability pounds minimum num num num num num .
flow numinch range num num num num num num num num .
mix design grading limits num percent passing sieve num inch mix num inch mix base mix size without admix .
with admix .
without admix .
with admix .
without admix .
with admix .
num in .
num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num num num inch num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num as specified in the special provisions num for interstate roadways if the average elevation of the project is above num feet the index of retained strength shall be a minimum of num percent .
the ratio of the mix design composite gradation target for the no .
num sieve including mineral admixture to the effective asphalt content shall be within the range specified in the special provisions .
num materials num mineral aggregate the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num except that subparagraph num under subsection num b shall not apply .
section num num coarse mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert material with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
for areas or applications where special mix is not called for on the plans fine mineral aggregate shall consist of natural sand or of sand prepared from rock or other approved inert materials or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
for areas or applications where special mix is called for on the project plans the following shall apply fine mineral aggregate shall be obtained from crushed gravel or crushed rock .
all uncrushed material passing the no .
num sieve shall be removed prior to the crushing screening and washing operations necessary to produce the specified gradation .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of num hours in advance of crushing the material to be used as mineral aggregate so all crushing operations can be inspected .
existing stockpile material which has not been inspected during crushing will not be permitted for use unless the contractor is able to document to the engineers satisfaction that the mineral aggregate has been crushed .
any material inspected by the department as crushed material for the project shall be separated from the contractors other stockpiles and reserved for use throughout the project duration .
the contractor may blend uncrushed fine aggregate up to a maximum of num percent of the total aggregate provided that the composite of uncrushed fine aggregate and crushed fine aggregate meets the requirement for uncompacted void content .
the uncrushed fine aggregate shall be num percent passing the num inch sieve and contain not more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
should the contractor modify the method of producing either the uncrushed or crushed fine aggregate the engineer shall be immediately notified and the materials sampled and tested for determination of uncompacted void content .
aggregates shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other material that prevent the thorough coating with the asphalt cement .
mineral aggregate shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods .
section num num mineral aggregate characteristics test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test methods num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test methods num num num sand equivalent aashto t num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max .
num num rev .
max .
num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num numat least one fractured face determined on plus no .
num material uncompacted void content special mix only arizona test method num minimum num carbonates only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
arizona test method num maximum num num w hen special mix is called for on the project plans this value shall be minimum num with at least two fractured faces and minimum num with at least one fractured face determined on plus no .
num material .
tests on aggregates outlined above except for abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed separately on materials from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
mineral aggregate from a source or combination of sources which does not meet the requirements according to the contractors mix design proposal for combined bulk specific gravity andor combined water absorption up to a maximum of num percent but meets other specified requirements will be further considered for acceptance by the engineer if a the total estimated cost of all asphaltic concrete components using the mix design unit weight asphalt cement content and mineral admixture percentage does not exceed the total amount bid for these items by more than num percent or b a supplemental agreement is executed adjusting the unit prices of asphaltic concrete components section num num such that the total estimated cost does not exceed the total amount bid by more than num percent .
num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount used shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate unless testing demonstrates that additional admixture is required in order to meet the mix design criteria for w et strength and index of retained strength .
a maximum of num percent admixture will be permitted .
the exact amount of admixture required shall be specified in the mix design .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the following requirements .
material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material asphalt cement shall be a performance grade pg asphalt binder conforming to the requirements of section num .
the type of asphalt binder shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the percent of asphalt cement used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphalt cement mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the contractor shall provide the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges to the mix design laboratory for each pg asphalt binder used for mix design purposes .
the laboratory mixing temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity of num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the laboratory compaction temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity of num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the testing required in aashto t num shall be performed at num of and num of and a viscositytemperature curve developed in accordance with astm d num .
the viscositytemperature curve shall be included in the mix design report .
for pg asphalt binders that have a maximum laboratory mixing temperature exceeding num of or a maximum laboratory compaction temperature exceeding num of the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges shall be specified in writing by the asphalt binder supplier .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures used shall be reported on the mix design .
the contractor shall ensure that the asphalt binder section num num supplier information required in this paragraph is provided to all appropriate parties in a timely manner and that copies are included in the mix design report .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures are for mix design purposes only .
field mixing and compaction temperatures are specified in subsection num and num .
num mix design utilizing mineral aggregate which has been crushed processed separated and stockpiled a mix design shall be formulated and submitted by the contractor to the engineer .
the mineral aggregate samples used for mix design purposes shall be representative of aggregate materials to be used during production .
the mix design shall be based on the mix design criteria and other requirements hereinbefore specified utilizing asphalt cement and mineral admixture of the type and from the sources proposed for use in the production of asphaltic concrete .
the mix design shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a professional engineer experienced in the development of mix designs and mix design testing .
the mix design shall be provided in a format that clearly indicates all the mix design requirements and shall be sealed signed and dated by the mix design engineer .
the mix design shall be prepared by a mix design laboratory that has met the requirements of the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
the contractor may propose the use of a mix design that has been developed for a previous project .
the proposed mix design shall meet the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the asphalt cement and mineral admixture type and source of supply and the source and methods of producing mineral aggregate have not changed since the formulation of the previous mix design .
the contractor shall also provide current test results for all specified characteristics of the mineral aggregate proposed for use .
the engineer will either approve or disapprove the proposed mix design .
should the engineer disapprove the use of the previously used mix design the contractor shall prepare and submit a new mix design proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
a previously used mix design older than two years from the date it was formulated sealed signed and dated shall not be allowed for use .
any previously used mix design that is older than one year but less than two years shall not be allowed for use unless the contractor provides verification testing results .
such testing shall be a onepoint verification at the design asphalt content utilizing the proposed mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
once approved for use on a project a mix design may be used for the duration of the project .
section num num the mix design shall contain as a minimum num the name and address of the testing organization and the person responsible for the mix design testing .
num the specific locations of the sources of mineral aggregate .
num the supplier refinery type of asphalt cement and any modifiers including polymers .
the source and type of mineral admixture .
the percentage of asphalt cement and mineral admixture to be used .
num the anticipated mineral aggregate gradation in each stockpile .
num mix design gradation .
the mix design shall contain the mineral aggregate gradation and also the gradation with mineral admixture .
num the results of all testing determinations etc .
such as specific gravity of each component water absorption sand equivalent loss on abrasion fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content for special mix percent carbonates if required immersion compression results index of retained strength wet and dry strengths marshall stability and flow asphalt absorption percent air voids voids in mineral aggregate and bulk density .
num viscositytemperature curve along with the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures used .
test results used in the formulation of the mix design shall be from testing performed no earlier than num days prior to the date the mix design is signed by the mix design engineer .
historical abrasion values may be supplied on sources provided the testing was conducted within the past two years .
the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer under a cover letter signed by an authorized representative of the contractor .
a copy of the mix design and representative samples of the mineral aggregate mineral admixture and asphalt cement used in the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer for calibration of the ignition furnace and for the determination of sand equivalent and fractured coarse aggregate particles .
w hen special mix is used the uncompacted void content shall also be determined .
the engineer shall witness the sampling of the mineral aggregate .
the mix design and samples shall be submitted to the engineer at least five working days prior to the start of asphaltic concrete production .
section num num the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and for special mix uncompacted void content shall meet the requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the uncrushed and crushed fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing either fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet the requirements specified herein asphaltic concrete production shall not commence and the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design which is representative of the materials produced or correct the deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
the engineer will review the mix design to assure that it contains all required information .
if it does not it will be returned within two working days of receipt of all samples and mix design information for further action and resubmission by the contractor .
if the contractor elects to change its source of material the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a new mix design which meets the requirements specified hereinbefore .
the contractor may make selfdirected target changes to the approved mix design within the limits shown below .
requests for selfdirected target changes shall be made in writing and acknowledged by the engineer prior to start of production for a lot .
the selfdirected target changes shall meet contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
measured characteristics allowable selfdirected target changes gradation sieve size num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num from mix design target value num from mix design target value num from mix design target value none asphalt cement content num from mix design target value effective voids none the contractor may propose target changes to the approved mix design for the engineers approval .
the engineer will determine if the proposed target change will result in mix production that meets the contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
for acceptance purposes target changes will not be retroactive .
should a mix design prove unsatisfactory to the contractor during production the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a revised mix design .
for acceptance purposes the revised mix design will not be retroactive .
num contractor quality control section num num the contractor shall perform the quality control measures described in subsection numc .
at the weekly meeting the contractor shall be prepared to explain and discuss how the following processes will be employed .
a aggregate production including crusher methods pit extraction and washing .
b stockpile management including stacking methods separation technique plant feed technique stockpile pad thickness and segregation prevention .
c proportioning and plant control including plant scale calibration mix temperature control storing method and addition of admixture .
d transporting and placing including hauling distance and temperature control segregation and nonuniform placement control and joint placement and technique .
e compaction including types and weight of rollers establishing and monitoring of roller patterns and temperature controls .
the contractor shall obtain samples and perform the tests specified in the following table section num num contractor quality control testing requirements type of test test method sampling point minimum testing frequency mineral aggregate for asphaltic concrete gradation ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per stockpile per day sand equivalent aashto t num fractured coarse aggregate particles ariz num uncompacted void content num ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per num tons of total aggregate num asphaltic concrete endproduct gradation ariz num or num cold feed hot bins roadway or plant num per num tons asphalt content ariz num num or other approved methods roadway or plant num per num tons voids ariz num num num roadway or plant num per num tons each day .
maximum of num per day .
compaction ariz num roadway num per num tons notes num prior to the completion of the mix design quality control tests on mineral aggregate shall be performed based on the anticipated percent use of each stockpile .
samples taken from individual stockpiles may be composited prior to performing the required tests or testing may be performed on material from each stockpile and the composite test result for each required test determined mathematically .
num for special mix .
num construction requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the proportioning of all materials for the hauling placing loading spreading and finishing of asphaltic concrete and for the applying of bituminous material such as tack coats prime coats and provisional seals all in accordance with the appropriate portions of the specifications .
the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
section num num the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the drier shall not exceed num f unless a higher temperature is recommended in writing by the asphalt binder supplier and approved by the engineer .
all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
pavers shall be equipped with a screed for the full width being paved heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing all courses of asphaltic concrete .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors for either or both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals which operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the placing of asphaltic concrete .
the base or subgrade upon which asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be prepared and maintained in a firm condition until asphaltic concrete is placed .
it shall not be frozen or excessively wet .
at any time the engineer may require the work to cease or that the work day be reduced in the event of weather conditions either existing or expected which would have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
all wheels and tires of compactors and other equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of objectionable material .
longitudinal joints of each course shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of any immediate underlying course .
w hen surfacing courses are placed on num foot or wider shoulders which are to receive rumble strips the contractor shall place any longitudinal joints approximately one foot away from the travel lane side of the rumble strip .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the center of a lane or within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
section num num joints shall be formed by a slope shoe or hotlapped and shall result in an even uniform surface .
before a surface course is placed in contact with a cold transverse construction joint the cold existing asphaltic concrete shall be trimmed to a vertical face by cutting the existing asphaltic concrete back for its full depth of the lift and exposing a fresh face .
after placement and finishing of the new asphaltic concrete both sides of the joint shall be dense and the joint shall be well sealed .
the surface in the area of the joint shall conform to the requirements hereinafter specified for surface tolerances when tested with the straightedge placed across the joint .
all locations where plate samples are taken from the roadway shall be immediately repaired by the contractor utilizing hot asphaltic concrete .
all holes where cores are taken shall be repaired within num hours after coring using a material approved by the engineer .
all holes shall be in a dry condition prior to repair .
the patching material shall be thoroughly compacted in the holes by the contractor .
the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
a light coat of bituminous material shall be applied as directed to edges or vertical surfaces against which asphaltic concrete is to be placed .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete immediately behind the paver shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
num acceptance num general in addition to the random acceptance samples taken from each lot the engineer may sample and reject material which appears to be defective .
such rejected material shall not be used in the work .
the results of tests run on rejected material will not be included with the lot acceptance tests .
acceptance will be on the basis of the following sand equivalent section num num fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content for special mix material spread gradation asphalt cement content effective voids stability compaction smoothness num sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content of mineral aggregate during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for the determination of the sand equivalent and fractured coarse aggregate particles .
w hen special mix is used the uncompacted void content shall also be determined .
samples shall be obtained from the cold feed belt prior to the addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
mineral aggregate will be acceptable for sand equivalent if it meets the minimum requirements specified in subsection num and the running average of three sand equivalent tests is at least num percent and no single test is less than num percent of the sand equivalent result contained in the contractors mix design .
the fractured coarse aggregate particles shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
for special mix the compacted void content shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the uncrushed and crushed fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing either fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet the requirements specified herein operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the option of submitting a revised mix design conforming to the requirements of subsection num or correcting deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
num material spread a spread lot shall be considered to be onehalf shift of production .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection numd .
the contractor shall record information pertaining to each spread lot on forms provided by the engineer .
information shall include the project number date and period of time that each spread lot was placed the section num num spread lot number beginning and ending station the plans thickness and tons placed in each lot .
completed spread lot forms shall be signed by the contractor and given to the engineer at the end of each shift .
the engineer will calculate the quantity required in each spread lot using the mix design bulk density .
the calculated quantity required in each spread lot will be compared to the actual quantity placed .
a lot will be considered to be acceptable with a zero pay factor if the actual quantity placed varies by no more than num to num percent from the required quantity .
if the quantity in a lot is found to vary between num and num percent pay factors will be determined in accordance with table num .
these pay factors will be utilized in the pay adjustment as outlined in subsection num .
num gradation asphalt cement content effective voids and stability a lot shall be considered to be one shifts production however production consisting of less than one shift such as at the beginning or at the completion of production will also be considered to be a lot .
if changes are made in the mix design new lots will be established .
four samples of the asphaltic concrete shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer at random locations designated by the engineer .
samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of section num or num of arizona test method num and delivered to the engineer immediately after being taken .
the minimum weight of the sample shall be num pounds .
the engineer will split the sample and save onehalf for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
the material will be tested by the engineer for asphalt cement content gradation marshall density and stability and maximum theoretical density .
asphalt cement content and gradation shall be tested in accordance with arizona test method num using an ignition furnace .
a new calibration of the ignition furnace shall be performed for each mix design and at any other time the engineer directs .
marshall density and stability and maximum theoretical density shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test methods num and num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
for plants providing asphaltic concrete exclusively for this project the difference between the asphalt cement content as measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphalt cement content shall be determined for the first five lots of asphaltic concrete produced for each mix design .
if approved by the engineer a plant may be considered exclusive to the project if an asphalt cement tank is dedicated for the shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the section num num determination of the actual asphalt cement content may include weighing of asphalt cement deliveries invoice quantities volumetric tank measurements using a calibrated rod tank stickings corrected for temperature computerized massflow meter and accounting for wasted materials .
if a computerized massflow meter is used documentation of its calibration shall be submitted to the engineer prior to asphaltic concrete production .
at any time during asphaltic concrete production the engineer may require that a new calibration of the massflow meter be performed .
if there is a difference of greater than num percent asphalt cement content between the asphalt cement content measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphalt cement content the contractor may request that a correction to the asphalt cement content by ignition furnace testing be made .
the contractor must make such a request in writing within two working days after receiving the test results for the fifth lot of asphaltic concrete production .
if referee testing is performed on a lot of asphaltic concrete for which a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the asphalt cement content by ignition furnace testing referee testing shall not apply to the determination of asphalt cement content .
the correction once documented and approved by the engineer shall be applied to test results from the beginning of asphaltic concrete production through the remainder of asphaltic concrete production using that mix design .
if the contractor submits a new mix design a new correction must be established and applied as specified above .
for other plants no correction will be made to asphalt cement content values measured by ignition furnace testing .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of samples by the engineer .
in the event the contractor elects to question the test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the referee testing shall be performed in an independent approved laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the samples will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the tests results by the department or the mix design targets for gradation and effective voids .
the asphaltic concrete samples previously saved will be tested for marshall density and stability and maximum theoretical density in accordance with the requirements of arizona test methods num and num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the samples shall also be tested in accordance with arizona test method num for asphalt cement content by ignition furnace and gradation of the mineral aggregate .
new pts will be determined for all characteristics with the exception of asphalt cement content if a correction to the ignition furnace value was made as specified above .
w hen referee testing is performed on a mixture properties lot the referee test result for the average maximum theoretical density will be used to determine a new pt for compaction .
section num num the results of these determinations will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the total pay factor of the lot does not improve or is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
a mixtureproperties lot placed with an average stability below num pounds for base mixes or num pounds for num or num inch mixes shall be rejected and shall be subject to an engineering analysis of anticipated performance in accordance with subsection nume .
production shall cease until the contractor proposes a corrective action the engineer finds acceptable .
if the engineer rejects the proposed corrective action the contractor shall submit a revised mix design .
the target values for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids are given in the contractors mix design .
the upper limits ul and lower limits ll of acceptable production of each of the measured characteristics are as follows measured characteristics ll ul gradation sieve size num inch note num tv num tv num no .
num no .
num no .
num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num asphalt cement content tv num tv num effective voids tv num tv num notes num the limits are used in the statistical calculations for quality index .
acceptance is controlled by the variability of the produced material and every effort should be made to strive for the applicable target value tv .
num in the case of the num inch sieve requirement for the base mix only the lower limit shall be the target value minus num and the upper limit shall be the target value plus num .
the engineer will determine the pt of each measured characteristic in accordance with subsection numi and utilizing table num will determine pay factors for each measured characteristic .
num compaction a courses num inches or less in nominal thickness num general requirements asphaltic concrete shall be placed only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of section num num placement is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
asphaltic concrete immediately behind the laydown machine shall be a minimum of num degrees f. all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
num equipment compacting and smoothing shall be accomplished by the use of selfpropelled equipment .
compactors shall be pneumatictired andor steel wheel .
compactors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
compactors shall be designed and properly maintained so that they are capable of accomplishing the required compaction .
steel wheel compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
pneumatictired compactors shall be the oscillating type with at least seven pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter .
w obblewheel compactors will not be permitted .
the tires shall be spaced so that the gaps between adjacent tires will be covered by the following tires .
the tires shall be capable of being inflated to num pounds per square inch and maintained so that the air pressure will not vary more than five pounds per square inch from the designated pressure .
pneumatictired compactors shall be constructed so that the total weight of the compactor will be varied to produce an operating weight per tire of not less than num pounds .
pneumatictired compactors shall be equipped with skirttype devices mounted around the tires so that the temperature of the tires will be maintained during the compaction process .
num rolling method procedure compaction shall consist of an established sequence of coverage using specified types of compactors .
a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
the rolling sequence the type of compactor to be used and the number of coverages required shall be as follows section num num rolling type of compactor no .
of coverages sequence option no .
num option no .
num option no.num option no .
num initial static steel vibrating steel num num intermediate pneumatic tired vibrating steel num num num finish static steel static steel num num based on the roller pattern which exhibits the best performance .
the engineer shall select the option for compaction and when pneumatictired compactors are used will designate the tire pressure .
one pneumatictired roller shall be furnished for each num tons of asphaltic concrete per hour .
steel wheel compactors shall not be used in the vibratory mode for courses of one inch or less in thickness nor when the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num degrees f. initial and intermediate compaction shall be accomplished before the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num degrees f. compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated as specified and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
b courses greater than num inches in nominal thickness compaction control shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the number and types of rollers shall be the contractors responsibility and shall be sufficient to meet these requirements .
all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
a lot for compaction purposes shall be identical to the lot described in subsection num .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection numd .
each lot shall be tested for acceptance .
twenty cores shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer .
the engineer will designate ten random locations within the lot and the contractor shall take two cores at each location .
the engineer will save one core from each location for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest one foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however section num num the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
w hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
areas excluded from testing will be compacted in accordance with subsection numa .
cores shall be taken utilizing mechanical coring equipment in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num section num .
cores shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and shall be taken not later than two working days after the lot placement .
the cores shall be delivered to the engineer immediately upon being taken .
the cores will be tested for acceptance by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of cores by the engineer .
in areas where more than one lift is placed in the same lot coring shall be accomplished through the full depth of the lifts after the final lift is placed and the compaction density shall be based on the full depth of the lift .
the target value for compaction shall be num percent inplace air voids .
inplace air voids shall be determined using arizona test method num .
the maximum theoretical density used in determination of air voids will be the average of the four maximum theoretical densities determined in subsection num .
the upper limit ul is num percent inplace air voids and the lower limit ll is num percent inplace air voids .
the engineer will determine the pt for compaction in accordance with subsection num numi and utilizing table num will determine the compaction pay factor .
in the event the contractor elects to question the core test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for the lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the cores previously saved will be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num in an independent testing laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the cores will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the test results by the department or the density target .
using the referee test results the engineer will determine a new pt for compaction .
the result of this determination will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the compaction pay factor of the lot does not improve is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
num smoothness and surface tolerances asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
section num num the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met num the surface of the final lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num the surface of any lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications other than the final lift shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the asphaltic concrete actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
measurement will include any quantity used in construction of intersections turnouts or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
asphalt cement will be measured by the ton on the basis of the asphalt cement content determined in accordance with subsection num for each lot of asphaltic concrete accepted .
the average asphalt cement content will be multiplied by the number of tons of asphaltic concrete in that lot to determine the amount of asphalt cement .
if the contractor has requested referee testing the average asphalt cement content will come from the independent testing laboratory results unless a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the ignition furnace test value as allowed in subsection num .
if a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the ignition furnace test value the average asphalt cement content determined from the departments acceptance testing will be used .
at the discretion of the engineer asphalt cement may be measured by invoice quantities adjusted as necessary for waste .
in no case shall the measured amount of asphalt cement for payment be greater than the total of the invoice quantities adjusted for waste .
mineral admixture will be measured by the ton for the mineral admixture actually used in accordance with subsection num .
section num num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted by the appropriate total pay factor as hereinafter provided .
for the purpose of determining acceptability and appropriate total pay factors each unit of asphaltic concrete will be included in three separate lots a spread lot a mixtureproperties lot and a compaction lot .
the total unit price for any unit of accepted asphaltic concrete will be the contract unit price adjusted by the applicable spread lot pay factor mixtureproperties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor .
the engineer may exclude asphaltic concrete from the spread lot quantity and from the spread lot pay factor calculations if the engineer determines that the proposed use of the material or the existing surface conditions are not conducive to the use of spread lots .
the engineer may exclude certain locations from the mixture properties lot quantity andor the compaction lot quantity and from the random sampling used in determining the mixture properties lot pay factor andor the compaction lot pay factor should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
a spread lot pay factor the spread lot pay factor will be determined in accordance with subsection num .
if the quantity in a spread lot is found to vary by more than num percent no payment will be made for the material which exceeds the num percent including asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
if the quantity is found to vary by more than num percent the spread lot will be rejected .
b mixtureproperties lot pay factor the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined in accordance with the following procedure num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids shall be determined as set forth in subsection num .
num a single pay factor shall be determined for gradation and asphalt cement content .
that pay factor shall be the lowest pay factor for the individual measured characteristics for gradation and asphalt cement content .
num if no individual pt value in num above is less than num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be the sum of the pay factor determined in num above and the effective voids pay factor .
the negative pay factor for mixture properties shall not exceed num per ton .
if any individual pt value is less section num num than num the lot is in reject and the provisions in subsection nume shall apply .
c compaction lot pay factor the compaction lot pay factor shall be the compaction pay factor determined as set forth in subsection numb .
d determination of lot pay factors on contracts involving multiple projects w hen more than one project is included in a single contract placement during a shift or half shift of production may encompass more than one project .
in such case the applicable spread lot pay factor mixtureproperties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor for each project shall be determined as follows num spread lot pay factors will be determined separately for each project utilizing the procedure set forth in subsection num .
num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids will be determined from the results of the random samples taken and tested in accordance with subsection num regardless of which projects the samples fall within .
num pt values and pay factors for compaction for those areas subject to subsection numb shall be determined from separate sets of core samples for each project utilizing the procedure set forth in that subsection .
num the mixtureproperties lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numb utilizing the individual pay factors determined in num above .
num the compaction lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numc utilizing the pay factor determined in num above .
e acceptability asphaltic concrete included in any mixture properties lot possessing an individual pt value lower than num for gradation asphalt cement content or effective voids will be rejected .
asphaltic concrete included in any compaction lot possessing a pt value lower than num will be rejected .
section num num w ithin num days after receiving notice that a spread lot mixture properties lot or compaction lot of asphaltic concrete has been rejected by the engineer the contractor may submit a written proposal to accept the material in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors .
maximum negative pay factors are defined as a minus num per ton for spread lots and a minus num per ton each for mixture properties lots and compaction lots .
positive mixture properties lot pay factors become zero when the compaction lot is in reject and the material is allowed to be left in place .
positive compaction lot pay factors become zero when the mixture properties lot is in reject and the material is allowed to remain in place .
in addition for any mixture properties lot that is in reject due to asphalt cement content but allowed to remain in place payment shall not be made for asphalt cement quantities in excess of the upper limit ul .
the proposal shall contain an engineering analysis of the anticipated performance of the asphaltic concrete if left in place .
the engineering analysis shall also detail any proposed corrective action and the anticipated effect of such corrective action on the performance .
the engineering analysis shall be performed by a professional engineer experienced in asphaltic concrete testing and the development of asphaltic concrete mix designs .
if a rejected lot is submitted for referee testing by the contractor the num days allowed to prepare an engineering analysis will begin upon notification of referee test results .
w ithin three working days the engineer will determine whether or not to accept the contractors proposal .
if the proposal is not accepted the asphaltic concrete shall be removed at no additional cost to the department and replaced with asphaltic concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications .
if the proposal is accepted the asphaltic concrete shall remain in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors and any necessary corrective action shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
the department reserves the right to suspend the work should any of the following conditions occur num the occurrence of two or more rejected lots within any ten consecutive production lots .
num the occurrence of three consecutive negative mixture properties lot pay factors or three consecutive negative compaction lot pay factors .
num the occurrence of five or more pay factors that are negative either for a mixture properties lot or for a compaction lot within any ten consecutive production lots .
if the department elects to suspend the work for any of these conditions the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design in accordance with subsection num or submit for the engineers approval a written engineering analysis .
the engineering analysis shall section num num detail the course of action necessary to correct deficiencies in the contractors present production methods such that further production can be accomplished without excessive amounts of asphaltic concrete in penalty or rejection .
if approved by the engineer the revised mix design or the course of action proposed in the engineering analysis shall be implemented and the work may continue .
costs or delays due to the provisions of this subsection are not compensable .
f asphalt cement payment for asphalt cement will be made by the ton .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
g mineral admixture mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
h smoothness w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
i statistical acceptance the total percentage of lot w ithin ul and ll pt shall be determined in accordance with subsection num of the specifications .
pay factors pf shall be determined by entering table num with pt .
section num num mix designs shall be developed by the contractor .
each mix design shall meet the criteria in table num and the grading requirements in table num when tested in accordance with arizona test method num with the noted exceptions .
table num asphaltic concrete mix design criteria requirements criteria num mix num mix voids in mineral aggregate range num num effective voids range as specified in the special provisions absorbed asphalt range num num index of retained strength arizona test method num num minimum see note num below w et strength psi arizona test method num num minimum notes num mix design laboratory compacted test specimens except for arizona test method num shall be prepared using a gyratory compactor in accordance with aashto t num .
num the mix design shall be formulated in a manner described for level num mix designs in the superpave mix design manual for new construction and overlays shrpanum except that volumetrics will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num and number of trial blend gradations necessary will be determined by the mix design laboratory .
duplicate gyratory samples shall be prepared at a minimum of num binder contents to select the recommended binder content .
the completed mix design shall meet all the mineral aggregate and mix design criteria specified herein .
num the ratio of the mix design composite gradation target for the no .
num sieve including mineral admixture to the effective asphalt content shall be as specified in the special provisions .
num in preparation of test specimens for arizona test method num mineral aggregate samples shall be weighed up by replacing the plus num inch material of the composite with material which passes the num inch sieve and is retained on the num inch sieve .
arizona test method num shall be modified to require that the average bulk density for the specimens be num to num of the maximum theoretical density at the design asphalt content .
section num num table num continued mix design grading limits for num inch mix coarse band fine band sieve size percent passing without admixture with admixture without admixture with admixture num inch num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num table num continued mix design grading limits notes num the contractor may provide a mix meeting the fine band or coarse band mix design grading limits unless otherwise specified .
num in addition to the mineral aggregate grading requirements the contractors mix design shall provide a minimum of num percent intermediate size mineral aggregate for the num mix and num percent for the num mix .
intermediate size mineral aggregate is defined as the percentage of mineral aggregate passing the num sieve and retained on the no .
num sieve in the combined mineral aggregate exclusive of mineral admixture .
num materials num mineral aggregate the contractor shall provide a source in accordance with the requirements of section num except that subparagraph num under subsection num numb shall not apply .
coarse mineral aggregate shall consist of crushed gravel crushed rock or other approved inert material with similar characteristics or a combination thereof conforming to the requirements of these specifications .
fine mineral aggregate shall be obtained from crushed gravel or crushed rock .
all uncrushed material passing the no .
num sieve shall be removed prior to the crushing screening and washing operations necessary to produce the specified gradation .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of num hours in advance of crushing the section num num material to be used as mineral aggregate so all crushing operations can be inspected .
existing stockpile material which has not been inspected during crushing will not be permitted for use unless the contractor is able to document to the engineers satisfaction that the mineral aggregate has been crushed .
any material inspected by the department as crushed material shall be separated from the contractors other stockpiles and reserved for use throughout the project duration .
the contractor may blend uncrushed fine aggregate up to a maximum of num percent of the total aggregate for mixes meeting the fine band grading requirements or up to a maximum of num percent of the total aggregate for mixes meeting the coarse band grading requirements provided that the composite of uncrushed fine aggregate and crushed fine aggregate meets the requirement for uncompacted void content .
the uncrushed fine aggregate shall be num percent passing the num inch sieve and contain not more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
should the contractor modify the method of producing either the uncrushed or crushed fine aggregate the engineer shall be immediately notified and the materials sampled and tested for determination of uncompacted void content .
aggregates shall be free of deleterious materials clay balls and adhering films or other material that prevent the thorough coating with the asphalt cement .
mineral aggregate shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with the applicable test methods section num num mineral aggregate characteristics test method requirement combined bulk oven dry specific gravity arizona test method num num num combined w ater absorption arizona test method num num num sand equivalent aashto t num after thoroughly sieving the sample no additional cleaning of the fines from the plus no .
num material is required .
minimum num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max num num rev .
max num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num minimum num with at least two fractured faces and minimum num with at least one fractured face plus no .
num material flat and elongated particles astm d num except test shall be performed on plus no .
num material maximum num of the plus no .
num material num uncompacted void content arizona test method num minimum num carbonates only if the asphaltic concrete is the designed final pavement surface normally used by traffic detours and temporary paving are excluded .
arizona test method num maximum num tests on aggregates outlined above except for abrasion shall be performed on materials furnished for mix design purposes and composited to the mix design gradation .
abrasion shall be performed separately on materials from each source of mineral aggregate .
all sources shall meet the requirements for abrasion .
mineral aggregate from a source or combination of sources which does not meet the requirements according to the contractors mix design proposal for combined bulk specific gravity andor combined water absorption up to a maximum of num percent but which meets other specified requirements will be further considered for acceptance by the section num num engineer if a the total estimated cost of all asphaltic concrete components using the mix design unit weight asphalt cement content and mineral admixture percentage does not exceed the total amount bid for these items by more than num percent or b a supplemental agreement is executed adjusting the unit prices of asphaltic concrete components such that the total estimated cost does not exceed the total amount bid by more than num percent .
num mineral admixture mineral admixture will be required .
the amount used shall be num percent by weight of the mineral aggregate unless testing demonstrates that additional admixture is required in order to meet the mix design criteria for w et strength and index of retained strength .
a maximum of num percent admixture will be permitted .
the exact amount of admixture required shall be specified in the mix design .
mineral admixture shall be either portland cement blended hydraulic cement or hydrated lime conforming to the following requirements material requirement portland cement type i or ii astm c num blended hydraulic cement type ip astm c num hydrated lime astm c num a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num of the standard specification shall be submitted to the engineer .
num bituminous material asphalt cement shall be a performance grade pg asphalt binder conforming to the requirements of section num .
the type of asphalt binder shall be as shown in the special provisions .
the percent of asphalt cement used shall be based on the weight of total mix asphalt cement mineral aggregate and mineral admixture .
the contractor shall provide the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges to the mix design laboratory for each pg asphalt binder used for mix design purposes .
the laboratory mixing temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the laboratory compaction temperature range is defined as the range of temperatures where the unaged asphalt binder has a rotational viscosity num num pascalseconds measured in accordance with aashto t num .
the testing required in aashto t num shall be performed at num of and num of and a viscositytemperature curve developed in accordance with astm d num .
the viscositytemperature curve shall be included in the mix design report .
for pg asphalt binders that have a maximum laboratory mixing temperature exceeding section num num num of or a maximum laboratory compaction temperature exceeding num of the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges shall be specified in writing by the asphalt binder supplier .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures used shall be reported on the mix design .
the contractor shall ensure that the asphalt binder supplier information required in this paragraph is provided to all appropriate parties in a timely manner and that copies are included in the mix design report .
the laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures are for mix design purposes only .
field mixing and compaction temperatures are specified in subsection num and num .
num mix design utilizing mineral aggregate which has been crushed processed separated and stockpiled a mix design shall be formulated and submitted by the contractor to the engineer .
the mineral aggregate samples used for mix design purposes shall be representative of aggregate materials to be used during production .
the mix design shall be based on the mix design criteria and other requirements hereinbefore specified utilizing asphalt cement and mineral admixture of the type and from the sources proposed for use in the production of asphaltic concrete .
the mix design shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a professional engineer experienced in the development of mix designs and mix design testing .
the mix design shall be provided in a format that clearly indicates all the mix design requirements and shall be sealed signed and dated by the mix design engineer .
the mix design shall be prepared by a mix design laboratory that has met the requirements of the departments system for the evaluation of testing laboratories .
the requirements may be obtained from adot materials group num north num s t avenue phoenix arizona num num .
the contactor may propose the use of a mix design that has been developed for a previous project .
the proposed mix design shall meet the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall provide evidence that the asphalt cement and mineral admixture type and source of supply and the source and methods of producing mineral aggregate have not changed since the formulation of the previous mix design .
the contractor shall also provide current test results for all specified characteristics of the mineral aggregate proposed for use .
the engineer will either approve or disapprove the proposed mix design .
should the engineer disapprove the use of the previously used mix design the contractor shall prepare and submit a new mix design proposal in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
a previously used mix design older than two years from the date it was formulated sealed signed and dated shall not be allowed for use .
any section num num previously used mix design that is older than one year but less than two years shall not be allowed for use unless the contractor provides verification testing results .
such testing shall be a onepoint verification at the design asphalt content utilizing the proposed mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
once approved for use on a project a mix design may be used for the duration of the project .
the mix design shall contain as a minimum num the name and address of the testing organization and the person responsible for the mix design testing .
num the specific locations of the sources of mineral aggregate .
num the supplier refinery type of asphalt cement and any modifiers including polymers .
the source and type of mineral admixture .
the percentage of asphalt cement and mineral admixture to be used .
num the anticipated mineral aggregate gradation in each stockpile .
num mix design gradation and mix test results from all trial gradations .
the mix design shall contain the mineral aggregate gradation and also the gradation with mineral admixture .
num the results of all testing determinations etc .
such as specific gravity of each component water absorption sand equivalent loss on abrasion fractured coarse aggregate particles flat and elongated particles uncompacted void content percent carbonates if required immersion compression results index of retained strength wet and dry strengths asphalt absorption percent air voids voids in mineral aggregate and bulk density .
num viscositytemperature curve along with the laboratory mixing and compaction temperature ranges as well as the actual laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures used .
test results used in the formulation of the mix design shall be from testing performed no earlier than num days prior to the date the mix design is signed by the mix design engineer .
historical abrasion values may be supplied on sources provided the testing was conducted within the past two years .
the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer under a cover letter signed by an authorized representative of the contractor .
section num num a copy of the mix design and representative samples of the mineral aggregate mineral admixture and asphalt cement used in the mix design shall be submitted to the engineer for calibration of the ignition furnace and for the determination of the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content .
the engineer shall witness the sampling of the mineral aggregate .
the mix design and samples shall be submitted to the engineer at least five working days prior to the start of asphaltic concrete production .
the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content shall meet the requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the uncrushed and crushed fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing either fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet the requirements specified herein asphaltic concrete production shall not commence and the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design which is representative of the materials produced or correct the deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
the engineer will review the mix design to assure that it contains all required information .
if it does not it will be returned within two working days of receipt of all samples and mix design information for further action and resubmission by the contractor .
if the contractor elects to change its source of material the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a new mix design which meets the requirements specified hereinbefore .
the contractor may make selfdirected target changes to the approved mix design within the limits shown below .
requests for selfdirected target changes shall be made in writing and acknowledged by the engineer prior to start of production for a lot .
the selfdirected target changes shall meet contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
measured characteristics allowable selfdirected target changes gradation sieve size num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num from the mix design target value num from the mix design target value num from the mix design target value none asphalt cement content num from the mix design target value effective voids none the contractor may propose target changes to the approved mix design for the engineers approval .
the engineer will determine if the proposed target change will result in mix production that meets the section num num contract requirements for mix design criteria and grading limits .
for acceptance purposes target changes will not be retroactive .
should a mix design prove unsatisfactory to the contractor during production the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a revised mix design .
for acceptance purposes the revised mix design will not be retroactive .
num contractor quality control the contractor shall perform the quality control measures described in subsection numc .
at the weekly meeting the contractor shall be prepared to explain and discuss how the following processes will be employed .
a aggregate production including crusher methods pit extraction and washing .
b stockpile management including stacking methods separation technique plant feed technique stockpile pad thickness and segregation prevention .
c proportioning and plant control including plant scale calibration mix temperature control storing method and addition of admixture .
d transporting and placing including hauling distance and temperature control segregation and nonuniform placement control and joint placement and technique .
e compaction including types and weight of rollers establishing and monitoring of roller patterns and temperature controls .
the contractor shall obtain samples and perform the tests specified in the following table section num num contractor quality control testing requirements type of test sampling minimum test method point testing frequency mineral aggregate for asphaltic concrete gradation ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per stockpile per day sand equivalent aashto t num fractured coarse aggregate particles ariz num crusher belt or stockpile num per num tons of total aggregate num uncompacted void content ariz num asphaltic concrete endproduct gradation ariz num or num cold feed hot bins roadway or plant num per num tons asphalt content ariz num num or other roadway or plant num per num tons approved methods voids ariz num num num roadway or plant num per num tons each day .
maximum of num per day .
compaction ariz num roadway num per num tons notes num prior to the completion of the mix design quality control tests on mineral aggregate shall be performed based on the anticipated percent use of each stockpile .
samples taken from individual stockpiles may be composited prior to performing the required tests or testing may be performed on material from each stockpile and the composite test result for each required test determined mathematically .
num construction requirements the contractor shall be responsible for the proportioning of all materials for the hauling placing loading spreading and finishing of asphaltic concrete and for the applying of bituminous material such as tack coats prime coats and provisional seals all in accordance with the appropriate portions of the specifications .
the asphaltic concrete hot plant shall conform to the requirements of section num of the specifications .
section num num the temperature of asphaltic concrete or mineral aggregate upon discharge from the drier shall not exceed num f unless a higher temperature is recommended in writing by the asphalt binder supplier and approved by the engineer .
all courses of asphaltic concrete shall be placed and finished by means of selfpropelled paving machines except under certain conditions or at certain locations where the engineer deems the use of selfpropelled paving machines impractical .
pavers shall be equipped with a screed for the full width being paved heated if necessary and capable of spreading and finishing all courses of asphaltic concrete .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors for either or both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals which operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope .
failure of the control system to function properly shall be cause for the suspension of the placing of asphaltic concrete .
the base or subgrade upon which asphaltic concrete is to be placed shall be prepared and maintained in a firm condition until asphaltic concrete is placed .
it shall not be frozen or excessively wet .
at any time the engineer may require the work to cease or that the work day be reduced in the event of weather conditions either existing or expected which would have an adverse effect upon the asphaltic concrete .
all wheels and tires of compactors and other equipment surfaces shall be treated when necessary with a product approved by the engineer in order to prevent the sticking of asphaltic concrete .
before asphaltic concrete is placed the surface to be paved shall be cleaned of objectionable material .
longitudinal joints of each course shall be staggered a minimum of one foot with relation to the longitudinal joint of any immediate underlying course .
w hen surfacing courses are placed on ten foot or wider shoulders which are to receive rumble strips the contractor shall place any longitudinal joints approximately one foot away from the travel lane side of the rumble strip .
longitudinal joints shall be located within one foot of the center of a lane or within one foot of the centerline between two adjacent lanes .
joints shall be formed by a slope shoe or hotlapped and shall result in an even uniform surface .
section num num before a surface course is placed in contact with a cold transverse construction joint the cold existing asphaltic concrete shall be trimmed to a vertical face by cutting the existing asphaltic concrete back for its full depth of the lift and exposing a fresh face .
after placement and finishing of the new asphaltic concrete both sides of the joint shall be dense and the joint shall be well sealed .
the surface in the area of the joint shall conform to the requirements hereinafter specified for surface tolerances when tested with the straightedge placed across the joint .
all locations where plate samples are taken from the roadway shall be immediately repaired by the contractor utilizing hot asphaltic concrete .
all holes where cores are taken shall be repaired within num hours after coring using a material approved by the engineer .
all holes shall be in a dry condition prior to repair .
the patching material shall be thoroughly compacted in the holes by the contractor .
the handling of asphaltic concrete shall at all times be such as to minimize segregation .
any asphaltic concrete which displays segregation shall be removed and replaced .
a light coat of bituminous material shall be applied as directed to edges or vertical surfaces against which asphaltic concrete is to be placed .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations to minimize exposed longitudinal edges .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall limit the placement of asphaltic concrete courses in advance of adjacent courses to one shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the contractor shall schedule its paving operations in such a manner to eliminate exposed longitudinal edges over weekends or holidays .
the moisture content of the asphaltic concrete immediately behind the paver shall not exceed num percent .
the moisture content will be determined in accordance with arizona test method num .
num acceptance num general in addition to the random acceptance samples taken from each lot the engineer may sample and reject material which appears to be defective .
such rejected material shall not be used in the work .
the results of tests run on rejected material will not be included with the lot acceptance tests .
acceptance will be on the basis of the following sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles uncompacted void content section num num material spread gradation asphalt cement content effective voids compaction smoothness num sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content of mineral aggregate during asphaltic concrete production the engineer shall obtain and test samples of mineral aggregate for the determination of the sand equivalent fractured coarse aggregate particles and uncompacted void content .
samples shall be obtained from the cold feed belt prior to the addition of mineral admixture or from the stockpiles when sampling from the cold feed belt is not possible .
mineral aggregate will be acceptable for sand equivalent if it meets the minimum requirements specified in subsection num and the running average of three sand equivalent tests is at least num percent and no single test is less than num percent of the sand equivalent result contained in the contractors mix design .
the fractured coarse aggregate particles shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
the uncompacted void content shall meet the minimum requirements specified in subsection num .
additional testing of the uncrushed and crushed fine aggregate for uncompacted void content will be required if the method of producing either fine aggregate is modified .
if the mineral aggregate fails to meet these requirements operations shall cease and the contractor shall have the option of submitting a revised mix design conforming to the requirements of subsection num or correcting deficiencies in the aggregate stockpiles .
num material spread a spread lot shall be considered to be onehalf shift of production .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection numd .
the contractor shall record information pertaining to each spread lot on forms provided by the engineer .
information shall include the project number date and period of time that each spread lot was placed the spread lot number beginning and ending station the plans thickness and tons placed in each lot .
completed spread lot forms shall be signed by the contractor and given to the engineer at the end of each shift .
section num num the engineer will calculate the quantity required in each spread lot using the mix design bulk density .
the calculated quantity required in each spread lot will be compared to the actual quantity placed .
a lot will be considered to be acceptable with a zero pay factor if the actual quantity placed varies by no more than num to num percent from the required quantity .
if the quantity in a lot is found to vary between num and num percent pay factors will be determined in accordance with table num .
these pay factors will be utilized in the pay adjustment as outlined in subsection num .
num gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids a lot shall be considered to be one shifts production however production consisting of less than one shift such as at the beginning or at the completion of production will also be considered to be a lot .
if changes are made in the mix design new lots will be established .
four samples of the asphaltic concrete shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer at random locations designated by the engineer .
samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of section num or num of arizona test method num and delivered to the engineer immediately after being taken .
the minimum weight of the sample shall be num pounds .
the engineer will split the sample and save onehalf for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made .
the material will be tested by the engineer for asphalt cement content gradation gyratory density and maximum theoretical density .
asphalt cement content and gradation shall be tested in accordance with arizona test method num using an ignition furnace .
a new calibration of the ignition furnace shall be performed for each mix design and at any other time the engineer directs .
gyratory density and maximum theoretical density shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num and arizona test method num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
for plants providing asphaltic concrete exclusively for this project the difference between the asphalt cement content as measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphalt cement content shall be determined for the first five lots of asphaltic concrete produced for each mix design .
if approved by the engineer a plant may be considered exclusive to the project if an asphalt cement tank is dedicated for the shift of asphaltic concrete production .
the determination of the actual asphalt cement content may include weighing of asphalt cement deliveries invoice quantities volumetric tank measurements using a calibrated rod tank stickings corrected for temperature computerized massflow meter and accounting for wasted materials .
if a computerized massflow meter is used documentation section num num of its calibration shall be submitted to the engineer prior to asphaltic concrete production .
at any time during asphaltic concrete production the engineer may require that a new calibration of the massflow meter be performed .
if there is a difference of greater than num percent asphalt cement content between the asphalt cement content measured by ignition furnace testing and the actual asphalt cement content the contractor may request that a correction to the asphalt cement content by ignition furnace testing be made .
the contractor must make such a request in writing within two working days after receiving the test results for the fifth lot of asphaltic concrete production .
if referee testing is performed on a lot of asphaltic concrete for which a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the asphalt cement content by ignition furnace testing referee testing shall not apply to the determination of asphalt cement content .
the correction once documented and approved by the engineer shall be applied to test results from the beginning of asphaltic concrete production through the remainder of asphaltic concrete production using that mix design .
if the contractor submits a new mix design a new correction must be established and applied as specified above .
for other plants no correction will be made to asphalt cement content values measured by ignition furnace testing .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of samples by the engineer .
in the event the contractor elects to question the test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the referee testing shall be performed in an independent approved laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the samples will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the tests results by the department or the mix design targets for gradation and effective voids .
the asphaltic concrete samples previously saved will be tested for gyratory density and maximum theoretical density in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num and arizona test method num respectively .
effective voids will be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the samples shall also be tested in accordance with arizona test method num for asphalt cement content by ignition furnace and gradation of the mineral aggregate .
new pts will be determined for all characteristics with the exception of asphalt cement content if a correction to the ignition furnace value was made as specified above .
w hen referee testing is performed on a mixtureproperties lot the referee test result for the average maximum theoretical density will be used to determine a new pt for compaction .
the results of these determinations will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the total pay factor of the lot does not improve or is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
section num num the target values for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids are given in the contractors mix design .
the upper limits ul and lower limits ll of acceptable production of each of the measured characteristics are as follows coarse band num and num mixes measured characteristics ll ul gradation num sieve no .
num sieve no .
num sieve no .
num sieve asphalt cement content effective voids tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num fine band num and num mixes measured characteristics ll ul gradation num sieve no .
num sieve no .
num sieve no .
num sieve asphalt cement content effective voids tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num tv num note the limits are used in the statistical calculations for quality index .
acceptance is controlled by the variability of the produced material and every effort should be made to strive for the center of the applicable target valve tv .
the engineer will determine the pt of each measured characteristic in accordance with subsection numi and utilizing table num will determine pay factors for each measured characteristic .
num compaction a courses num inches or less in nominal thickness num general requirements asphaltic concrete shall be placed only when the temperature of the surface on which the asphaltic concrete is to be placed is at least num degrees f and the ambient temperature at the beginning of placement is at least num degrees f and rising .
the placement shall be stopped when the ambient temperature is num degrees f or less and falling .
asphaltic concrete immediately behind the laydown machine shall be a minimum of num degrees f. section num num all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
num equipment compacting and smoothing shall be accomplished by the use of selfpropelled equipment .
compactors shall be pneumatic tired andor steel wheel .
compactors shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
compactors shall be designed and properly maintained so that they are capable of accomplishing the required compaction .
steel wheel compactors shall weigh not less than eight tons .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be the oscillating type with at least seven pneumatic tires of equal size and diameter .
w obblewheel compactors will not be permitted .
the tires shall be spaced so that the gaps between adjacent tires will be covered by the following tires .
the tires shall be capable of being inflated to num pounds per square inch and maintained so that the air pressure will not vary more than num pounds per square inch from the designated pressure .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be constructed so that the total weight of the compactor will be varied to produce an operating weight per tire of not less than num pounds .
pneumatic tired compactors shall be equipped with skirttype devices mounted around the tires so that the temperature of the tires will be maintained during the compaction process .
num rolling method procedure compaction shall consist of an established sequence of coverage using specified types of compactors .
a pass shall be defined as one movement of a compactor in either direction .
coverage shall be the number of passes as are necessary to cover the entire width being paved .
the rolling sequence the type of compactor to be used and the number of coverages required shall be as follows type of compactor no .
of coverages rolling sequence option no .
num option no .
num option no .
num option no .
num initial static steel vibrating steel num num intermediate pneumatic tired vibrating steel num num num finish static steel static steel num num num num based on the roller pattern which exhibits the best performance .
section num num the engineer shall select the option for compaction and when pneumatic tired compactors are used will designate the tire pressure .
one pneumatic tired roller shall be furnished for each num tons of asphaltic concrete per hour .
steel wheel compactors shall not be used in the vibratory mode for courses of one inch or less in thickness nor when the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num of .
initial and intermediate compaction shall be accomplished before the temperature of the asphaltic concrete falls below num of .
compaction will be deemed to be acceptable on the condition that the asphaltic concrete is compacted using the type of compactors specified ballasted and operated as specified and with the number of coverages of the compactors as specified .
b courses greater than num inches in nominal thickness compaction control shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the number and types of rollers shall be the contractors responsibility and shall be sufficient to meet these requirements .
all edges shall be rolled with a pneumatic tired compactor or other methods approved by the engineer while the mixture is still hot .
a lot for compaction purposes shall be identical to the lot described in subsection num .
lots encompassing more than one project shall be separated in accordance with subsection num d. each lot shall be tested for acceptance .
twenty cores shall be taken for each lot by the contractor under the observation of the engineer .
the engineer will designate ten random locations within the lot and the contractor shall take two cores at each location .
the engineer will save one core from each location for num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for the lot has been made .
randomly selected locations will be determined to the nearest onehalf foot in the transverse direction and to the nearest foot in the longitudinal direction of the pavement course however the outside one foot of the unconfined pavement course will be excluded from testing .
w hen a previously unconfined pavement course is confined by a subsequent pavement course the compacted joint will not be excluded from the testing .
areas excluded from testing will be compacted in accordance with subsection num a. cores shall be taken utilizing mechanical coring equipment in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num section num .
cores shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and shall be taken not later than two working days after the lot placement .
the cores shall be delivered to the engineer immediately upon being taken .
the cores will be tested for acceptance by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of section num num arizona test method num .
acceptance testing results will be furnished to the contractor within four working days of receipt of cores by the engineer .
in areas where more than one lift is placed in the same lot coring shall be accomplished through the full depth of the lifts after the final lift is placed and the compaction density shall be based on the full depth of the lifts .
the target value for compaction shall be num percent inplace air voids .
inplace air voids shall be determined using arizona test method num .
the maximum theoretical density used in determination of air voids will be the average of the four maximum theoretical densities determined in subsection num .
the upper limit ul is num percent inplace air voids and the lower limit ll is num percent inplace air voids .
the engineer will determine the pt for compaction in accordance with subsection num numi and utilizing table num will determine the compaction pay factor .
in the event the contractor elects to question the core test results obtained for a particular lot within num days after written notification to the contractor of test results for that lot has been made the contractor may make a written request for referee testing of that lot .
the cores previously saved will be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num in an independent testing laboratory designated by the engineer .
the testing of the cores will be performed by the independent testing laboratory without knowledge of the specific project conditions such as the identity of the contractor or mix design laboratory the test results by the department or the density target .
using the referee test results the engineer will determine a new pt for compaction .
the result of this determination will be binding on both the contractor and the department .
the department will pay for this testing however if the compaction pay factor of the lot does not improve is reduced or the lot remains in reject payment to the contractor for asphaltic concrete shall be reduced by the amount of the cost of this testing .
num smoothness and surface tolerances asphaltic concrete shall be compacted as required smooth and true to the required lines grades and dimensions .
the special provisions may require the smoothness of the final pavement surface to be tested in accordance with subsection num .
regardless of whether testing in accordance with subsection num is specified or not the following requirements shall be met num the surface of the final lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction section num num including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num the surface of any lift of asphaltic concrete placed under this section of the specifications other than the final lift shall be tested and shall not vary by more than num inch from the lower edge of a tenfoot straightedge when it is placed in the longitudinal direction including across transverse joints and when it is placed in the transverse direction across longitudinal joints .
num all deviations exceeding the specified tolerances above shall be corrected by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num method of measurement asphaltic concrete will be measured by the ton for the asphaltic concrete actually used which will include the weight of mineral aggregate asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
measurement will include any quantity used in construction of intersections turnouts or other miscellaneous items or surfaces .
asphalt cement will be measured by the ton on the basis of the asphalt cement content determined in accordance with subsection num for each lot of asphaltic concrete accepted .
the average asphalt cement content will be multiplied by the number of tons of asphaltic concrete in that lot to determine the amount of asphalt cement .
if the contractor has requested referee testing the average asphalt cement content will come from the independent testing laboratory results unless a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the ignition furnace test value as allowed in subsection num .
if a correction based on the actual asphalt cement content was made to the ignition furnace test value the average asphalt cement content determined from the departments acceptance testing will be used .
at the discretion of the engineer asphalt cement may be measured by invoice quantities adjusted as necessary for waste .
in no case shall the measured amount of asphalt cement for payment be greater than the total of the invoice quantities adjusted for waste .
mineral admixture will be measured by the ton for the mineral admixture actually used in accordance with subsection num .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of asphaltic concrete measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price adjusted by the appropriate total pay factor as hereinafter provided .
for the purpose of determining acceptability and appropriate total pay factors each unit of asphaltic concrete will be included in three separate lots a spread lot a mixture properties lot and a compaction lot .
the total unit price for any unit of accepted asphaltic section num num concrete will be the contract unit price adjusted by the applicable spread lot pay factor mixture properties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor .
the engineer may exclude asphaltic concrete from the spread lot quantity and from the spread lot pay factor calculations if the engineer determines that the proposed use of the material or the existing surface conditions are not conducive to the use of spread lots .
the engineer may exclude certain locations from the mixture properties lot quantity andor the compaction lot quantity and from the random sampling used in determining the mixture properties lot pay factor andor the compaction lot pay factor should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
a spread lot pay factor the spread lot pay factor will be determined in accordance with subsection num .
if the quantity in a spread lot is found to vary by more than num percent no payment will be made for the material which exceeds the num percent including asphalt cement and mineral admixture .
if the quantity is found to vary by more than num percent the spread lot will be rejected .
b mixture properties lot pay factor the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined in accordance with the following procedure num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids shall be determined as set forth in subsection num .
num a single pay factor shall be determined for gradation and asphalt cement content .
that pay factor shall be the lowest pay factor for the individual measured characteristics for gradation and asphalt cement content .
num if no individual pt value in num above is less than num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be the sum of the pay factor determined in num above and the effective voids pay factor .
the negative pay factor for mixture properties shall not exceed num per ton .
if any individual pt value is less than num the lot is in reject and the provisions in subsection nume shall apply .
c compaction lot pay factor the compaction lot pay factor shall be the compaction pay factor determined as set forth in subsection num b .
d determination of lot pay factors on contracts involving multiple projects section num num w hen more than one project is included in a single contract placement during a shift or half shift of production may encompass more than one project .
in such case the applicable spread lot pay factor mixture properties lot pay factor and compaction lot pay factor for each project shall be determined as follows num spread lot pay factors will be determined separately for each project utilizing the procedure set forth in subsection num .
num the individual pt values and pay factors for gradation asphalt cement content and effective voids will be determined from the results of the random samples taken and tested in accordance with subsection num regardless of which projects the samples fall within .
num pt values and pay factors for compaction for those areas subject to subsection numb shall be determined from separate sets of core samples for each project utilizing the procedure set forth in that subsection .
num the mixture properties lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numb utilizing the individual pay factors determined in num above .
num the compaction lot pay factor shall be determined separately for each project in accordance with subsection numc utilizing the pay factor determined in num above .
e acceptability asphaltic concrete included in any mixture properties lot possessing an individual pt value lower than num for gradation asphalt cement content or effective voids will be rejected .
asphaltic concrete included in any compaction lot possessing a pt value lower than num will be rejected .
w ithin num days after receiving notice that a spread lot mixture properties lot or compaction lot of asphaltic concrete has been rejected by the engineer the contractor may submit a written proposal to accept the material in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors .
maximum negative pay factors are defined as a minus num per ton for spread lots and a minus num per ton each for mixture properties lots and compaction lots .
positive mixture properties lot pay factors become zero when the compaction lot is in reject and the material is allowed to be left in place .
positive compaction lot pay factors become zero when the mixture properties lot is in reject and the material is allowed to remain in place .
in addition for any mixture properties lot that is in reject due to asphalt cement content but section num num allowed to remain in place payment shall not be made for asphalt cement quantities in excess of the upper limit ul .
the proposal shall contain an engineering analysis of the anticipated performance of the asphaltic concrete if left in place .
the engineering analysis shall also detail any proposed corrective action and the anticipated effect of such corrective action on the performance .
the engineering analysis shall be performed by a professional engineer experienced in asphaltic concrete testing and the development of asphaltic concrete mix designs .
if a rejected lot is submitted for referee testing by the contractor the num days allowed to prepare an engineering analysis will begin upon notification of referee test results .
w ithin three working days the engineer will determine whether or not to accept the contractors proposal .
if the proposal is not accepted the asphaltic concrete shall be removed at no additional cost to the department and replaced with asphaltic concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications .
if the proposal is accepted the asphaltic concrete shall remain in place at the applicable maximum negative pay factors and any necessary corrective action shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
the department reserves the right to suspend the work should any of the following conditions occur num the occurrence of two or more rejected lots within any ten consecutive production lots .
num the occurrence of three consecutive negative mixture properties lot pay factors or three consecutive negative compaction lot pay factors .
num the occurrence of five or more pay factors that are negative either for a mixture properties lot or for a compaction lot within any ten consecutive production lots .
if the department elects to suspend the work for any of these conditions the contractor shall either submit a revised mix design in accordance with subsection num or submit for the engineers approval a written engineering analysis .
the engineering analysis shall detail the course of action necessary to correct deficiencies in the contractors present production methods such that further production can be accomplished without excessive amounts of asphaltic concrete in penalty or rejection .
if approved by the engineer the revised mix design or the course of action proposed in the engineering analysis shall be implemented and the work may continue .
costs or delays due to the provisions of this subsection are not compensable .
f asphalt cement section num num payment for asphalt cement will be made by the ton .
adjustments in payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
g mineral admixture mineral admixture will be paid for at the predetermined price established in the bidding schedule .
h smoothness w hen required in the special provisions payment for smoothness shall be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
i statistical acceptance the total percentage of lot w ithin ul and ll pt shall be determined in accordance with subsection num of the specifications .
pay factors pf shall be determined by entering table num with pt .
table num pay factors material spread mixture properties and compaction pay factors dollars per ton negative variance pay factor dollars per ton pt gradation and asphalt content effective voids compaction num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num more than reject num num num num num num see subsections numa and e less than num reject see subsection nume section num num section num pipe culvert and storm drains num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing pipe and all other materials required and the installing of pipe including excavating and furnishing placing and compacting backfill material all in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
at each location where a pipe is to be installed the project plans will specify the size and approximate length along with the requirements for each approved option at that location such as the wall thickness corrugation configuration coatings linings class and strength .
at each such specified location pipe of one kind and material shall be selected by the contractor from the options shown .
all contiguous pipe and all metal pipe in close proximity shall be of the same kind and material .
special sections fittings elbows branch connections tapered inlets end sections connectors coupling and other such items shall be of the same material and coating as the pipe to which they are attached unless otherwise stated in these specifications .
w hen trenching to depths in excess of five feet is required prior to construction the contractor shall submit in writing to the engineer a detailed description of its proposed trenching operations including shoring methods .
num materials num all pipe except nonreinforced castinplace except for nonreinforced castinplace concrete pipe materials shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num nonreinforced castinplace concrete for constructing the castinplace concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of section num for class s concrete except as specified herein .
class s concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at num days .
the proposed slump in the mix design furnished by the contractor shall be the minimum required to permit proper placement of the concrete without harmful segregation bleeding or incomplete consolidation .
the maximum size of the coarse aggregate for pipes num inches or less in diameter shall be one inch and for pipes larger than num inches in diameter shall be num inches .
section num num num construction requirements num preparation of foundations trenches and embankments a trench condition is defined as a trench which has vertical slopes to a point at least one foot above the top of the pipe and its maximum width is as detailed on the plans .
unless specified otherwise the contractor may install pipe in either a nontrench condition or a trench condition in natural ground or in embankment .
w here rock hardpan or other unyielding material is encountered such material shall be removed below the vertical limits as shown on the plans .
the depth to be removed shall be at least num inches or as designated by the engineer .
the width to be removed shall depend on whether a trench or nontrench condition exists .
if a trench condition exists the width of the trench as shown on the plans shall be maintained throughout the additional depth .
if a nontrench condition exists the width of the removal shall be a minimum of the outside diameter of the pipe plus two feet for pipe under four feet in diameter or a minimum of the outside diameter of the pipe plus three feet for pipe of four or more feet in diameter .
the overexcavated area shall be backfilled with structure backfill material as designated in subsection numbnum and compacted in layers not exceeding six inches in depth .
w hen a firm foundation is not encountered at the bottom of the vertical limits as shown on the plans due to soft spongy or other unstable soil such unstable soil shall be removed for a width of at least the horizontal outside dimension of the pipe on each side of the pipe and to the depth specified by the engineer .
the unstable soil removed shall be replaced with structure backfill material as designated in subsection numbnum and compacted in sixinch lifts .
the completed foundation shall be firm for its full length and width .
w hen specified on the project plans the foundation shall have a longitudinal camber of the magnitude specified .
num bedding a bedding material num general bedding material for all pipe shall conform to the following aggregate gradation section num num sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num the plasticity index of the bedding material for all pipe shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
bedding material for all pipe shall have a value of resistivity not less than num ohmcentimeters unless otherwise specified or approved by the engineer .
bedding material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive for all metal pipe installations except aluminum .
bedding material for aluminum pipe installations shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive .
bedding material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive for all concrete or plastic pipe installations .
tests for ph and resistivity shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
num standard aggregate bedding material standard aggregate bedding material shall conform to the requirements specified in subsection numanum and may be compacted jetted or placed as an aggregate slurry as herein specified .
the maximum water content in an aggregate slurry mixture shall be num gallons of water per ton of bedding material .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the slurry shall be compacted with internal vibrators in accordance with the requirements of subsection numd .
aggregate slurry shall be thoroughly mixed in a mixer approved by the engineer .
num cementtreated slurry bedding material aggregate for cementtreated slurry bedding material prior to the addition of cement and water shall conform to the requirements specified in subsection numanum .
one sack of cement shall be added to each cubic yard of aggregate .
cementtreated slurry shall be thoroughly mixed in a mixer or at a central batch plant as approved by the engineer and shall have a slump of eight to num inches .
b placement of bedding material num general all trash forms sheeting bracing and loose rock or loose earth shall be removed from the area into which bedding material is to be placed .
bedding material shall be placed under and around the pipe from the bottom of the trench or bedding limits to the elevation at the point of maximum width of the pipe springline as shown on the plans .
at the section num num contractors option bedding material may be placed above the springline of the pipe at no additional cost to the department .
for pipes placed in a nontrench condition as shown on the plans standard aggregate bedding material shall be used from six inches below the pipe to the springline .
for pipes placed in trench condition a sixinch layer of standard aggregate bedding material shall be placed in accordance with the plans between the bottom of the trench and the bottom of the pipe .
the remainder of the bedding from the bottom of the pipe to the springline shall be either standard aggregate bedding material or cementtreated slurry as tabulated below for pipe culverts or storm drains num inches or larger cement treated slurry shall be used as bedding material from the bottom of the pipe to springline .
for pipe culverts or storm drains less than num inches in diameter cementtreated slurry may be substituted for standard aggregate bedding material from the bottom of the pipe to springline .
bedding material shall be placed in a manner which will prevent distortion damage to or displacement of the pipe from its intended location .
bedding material shall also be placed so that adequate support will be provided in the haunch support areas for the pipe .
voids or loose soils which are found to occur due to improper placement or compaction of bedding materials will result in rejection of that portion of the pipe installation .
replacement of the pipe will be at no additional cost to the department .
num standard aggregate bedding material standard aggregate bedding material shall be placed either in uniform horizontal layers not exceeding eight inches in depth before compaction or in uniform horizontal layers not exceeding four feet in depth when placed as a slurry .
bedding material may also be placed in uniform horizontal layers not exceeding four feet in depth when compaction is done by jetting .
num cementtreated slurry bedding material cementtreated slurry bedding material shall be placed in a uniform manner that will prevent voids in or segregation of the bedding material and will not float or shift the culvert or pipe .
cementtreated slurry bedding material shall be placed from bottom of pipe to pipe springline .
no backfilling above the cementtreated slurry shall be commenced until num hours after the cementtreated slurry has been placed .
c compaction of bedding material section num num num general compaction of bedding material shall be performed without damage to the pipe and surrounding inplace material .
special care shall be taken in placing shaping and compacting all bedding material under haunches of pipe to prevent moving the pipe or raising it from its bedding .
num standard aggregate bedding materials standard aggregate bedding material shall be compacted to at least num percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
w hen standard aggregate bedding material is placed as an aggregate slurry or compacted by jetting the material placed below the springline of the pipe shall be compacted prior to placement of material above the springline of the pipe .
jetting shall not be used for any material placed more than one foot above the top of the pipe .
ponding will not be permitted in any case .
jetting shall be done in such a manner that water will not be impounded .
jetting methods shall be supplemented by the use of vibratory or other compaction equipment when necessary to obtain the required compaction .
bedding material compacted by jetting shall use the least amount of water that will properly consolidate the material and move the material under the pipe to eliminate voids .
a jetting probe shall be inserted into the material .
it shall be of such length as to reach the material under the pipe .
w ater shall be provided to the jetting probe at a minimum pressure of num pounds per square inch .
the jetting probe shall be inserted at uniformly spaced intervals on both sides of the pipe a maximum spacing of three feet .
the contractor shall excavate holes in the compacted aggregate slurry or jetted bedding material to the depths and at the locations designated by the engineer .
these holes shall be of such size as to allow the required density testing to be performed in a safe manner .
upon completion of the tests the contractor shall refill the excavated areas and compact the material to the required density in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num cementtreated slurry bedding material cementtreated slurry bedding material shall not require additional compaction after placement up to pipe springline if it meets the material requirements of subsection numa and is placed as outlined in subsection numb .
the engineer may require the use of vibrators with cementtreated slurry bedding if the fluidity of the section num num mixture is not sufficient to fill all voids .
no density tests will be required in the cementtreated slurry bedding material as placed up to pipe springline .
num installation a general pipe shall be handled carefully .
proper facilities shall be provided for handling and lowering the sections of pipe .
all pipes which show defects due to negligence or rough handling shall be removed and replaced if so ordered by the engineer .
if damaged galvanized steel pipe is not replaced it shall be repaired in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
damage to the coating of bituminous coated pipe shall be repaired using material conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
pipe shall be installed in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and dimensions shown on the project plans or specified by the engineer .
prior to the staking of pipe culverts a study of the normal flow of the drainage shall be made .
as a result of the study a change in length or location of pipe may be required as approved by the engineer to attain proper placement of the pipe .
pipe profiles shall be approved by the engineer prior to constructing or installing each structure .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer the installing of the pipe shall begin at the downstream end .
bell or groove ends of rigid conduits and outside circumferential laps of flexible conduits shall be placed facing upstream .
helical corrugated pipe shall be installed with the separate sections firmly joined together with the corrugations in alignment .
w here there is restricted cover the bolts of the bands connecting flexible pipe shall be advanced so that the tops of the bolts will be in line with or below the top of the pipe .
w hen aluminum alloys come in contact with concrete the contacting surfaces shall be coated either with asphalt mastic conforming to the requirements of aashto m num or with aluminumimpregnated caulking compound .
w hen specified on the project plans the vertical diameter of round flexible conduit shall be increased five percent by shop elongation .
any pipe which is not in true alignment or which shows undue settlement after laying or is damaged shall be removed .
the trench shall be prepared as hereinbefore specified and the pipe shall be section num num installed again .
any pipe which in the opinion of the engineer is damaged so that it can not be used shall be replaced .
paved or partially lined flexible pipe shall be installed so that the longitudinal center line of the paved segment coincides with the flow line .
elliptical and elliptically reinforced rigid pipe shall be installed with the major axis within five degrees of a vertical plane through the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
the interior of all pipes shall be free of dirt and foreign material as the work progresses and all pipes shall be left clean at the time of final acceptance .
connections to new or existing pipes or structures shall be made in accordance with the details shown on the project plans or as may be ordered by the engineer in order to complete the work specified .
w hen using metal safety end sections the embankment slope shall be warped to match the end section .
for a skewed pipe installation the toe of the embankment slope shall be warped to match the toe of the skewed metal safety end section in order to provide effective drainage .
w hen metal safety end sections are used the bolts in the safety bars shall be torqued at num footpounds .
b full circle corrugated metal pipe num general field joints for each type of corrugated metal pipe shall provide circumferential and longitudinal strength to maintain the pipe alignment prevent separation of the pipe prevent infiltration of side fill material and prevent leakage of water into the surrounding soil .
coupling bands and gaskets shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
corrugations in the coupling bands shall have the same dimensions as the corrugations in the pipes being connected .
pipe fabricated with helical corrugations shall have the ends rerolled to circumferential corrugations to facilitate coupling .
the rerolled end shall extend a minimum of two corrugations from the end of the pipe .
w hen a new pipe is to be connected to the end of an existing inplace helical pipe a coupling band with projections dimples may be used to make the connection .
bands for pipe diameters to num inches inclusive and corrugation sizes of num by num or three by one inches shall be at least num inches wide .
bands for pipes num to num inches in diameter inclusive with corrugations five by one inches shall be at least num inches wide .
bands section num num shall have two circumferential rows of projections .
the rows of projections shall be spaced to provide equal contact on each side of the pipes being joined .
w hen bands with projections dimples are used to join new pipe to existing pipe the joints shall be sealed with a continuous sponge rubber strip .
the strip shall conform to the minimum requirements of astm d num grade numanum and shall be at least num inches wide and num inch thick .
w here existing pipes are to be extended the ends of the existing pipe shall be in such condition that the new pipe can be firmly joined to form an acceptable joint .
all existing pipe ends that are damaged or are out of shape such that they can not be joined in an acceptable manner shall be repaired .
damaged galvanized coating shall be cleaned with a wire brush and the damaged area painted with at least one full coat of zinc paint as specified in subsection num .
if the engineer determines that the end of an existing pipe is damaged to the extent that it can not be repaired sufficiently to be joined properly to the new pipe the damaged portion shall be removed .
w here prefabricated pipe fittings are to be installed in existing pipes a portion of the existing pipe shall be removed in order to accommodate the fitting .
num watertight and water resistant joints w atertight joints shall be provided for siphon and irrigation pipe installation and when specified in the special provisions standard drawings or shown on the project plans .
w atertight joints unless otherwise specified will not be required for storm drains culverts or other drainage pipe however joints for these pipes shall be water resistant .
w atertight and water resistant joints shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of the specifications .
w hen watertight joints are shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions the assembled joint shall pass a performance test as specified herein or as approved by the engineer without significant leakage at the joint a a hydrostatic pressure test on a joint shall be made on an assembly of two sections of pipe properly connected in accordance with the joint design .
at the option of the contractor suitable bulkheads shall be provided within the pipe adjacent to and on either side of the joint or the outer ends of the two joined pipe sections shall be bulkheaded .
no mortar or concrete coatings fillings or packings in addition to that normally required for the joint shall be placed prior to watertightness tests .
after the pipe sections are fitted together with the gasket or gaskets in place the section num num assembly shall be subjected to a pressure resulting from a head of num feet of water above the crown of the pipe for num minutes .
moisture of beads of water appearing on the surface of the joint will not be considered as leakage .
the tests on individual joints may be performed at the fabricators facility or at the job site .
the joint watertightness test shall be performed on pipe sections in straight alignment and on pipe sections deflected from straight alignment .
w hen testing pipe sections not on straight alignment the pipe sections shall be positioned to create a gap on one side of the outside perimeter of the pipe that is num inch wider than the gap for pipe sections in straight alignment .
w hen coupling bands are used to test pipe sections not on straight alignment and the maximum gap on one side of the outside perimeter of the pipe is less than num inch wider than that for pipe sections in straight alignment said coupling band pipe sections shall be positioned to provide maximum gap .
b joints other than watertight joints which employ rubber gaskets whether flat or o rings will be considered water resistant .
no testing will be required to establish that condition .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a certificate of compliance in accordance with the provisions in subsection num of the specifications that the material being furnished conforms to the joint property requirements as described herein .
field tests may be required by the engineer whenever there is a question regarding compliance with these requirements .
c slotted pipe slotted pipe shall be joined with coupling bands as shown on the project plans and the joint shall be made water resistant .
prior to attaching the coupling band sealant material shall be placed between the coupling band and the periphery of the pipe section ends .
prior to backfilling and paving operations the slot shall be covered to prevent infiltration of material into the pipe .
heavy tape roofing paper timber or other material may be used .
coverings shall be removed when the paving operations have been completed .
slotted pipe shall be backfilled with grout in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
the grout shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
grout shall not be placed when a descending air temperature falls below num degrees f or until an ascending air temperature exceeds num degrees f. temperatures shall be taken in the shade and away from artificial heat .
the grout shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
section num num d precast concrete pipe pipe sections shall be jointed such that the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even and the ends are centered as required .
unless a particular type of joint is specified on the project plans joints shall be made with portland cement mortar portland cement grout rubber gaskets plastic sealing compound or any other type approved by the engineer .
selfcentering tongue and groove mortar joints shall be finished smooth on the inside .
for diapered joints diapers shall be used to retain the poured grout .
joints shall be thoroughly wetted before mortar or grout is applied .
w hen portland cement mixtures are used the completed joints shall be protected against rapid drying by means of an approved curing method .
no joint shall be grouted until the following two sections of pipe are laid .
w hen required flexible watertight gasketed joints shall be installed on the pipe in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num paragraph num .
e spiral rib corrugated metal pipe spiral rib corrugated metal pipe shall be installed in accordance with the requirements specified in subsection numb for full circle corrugated metal pipe except as otherwise specified herein .
special care shall be taken during placement of the pipe and backfilling to avoid damage to the pipe .
lateral field connections between metal pipes shall be welded and any galvanizing damaged by welding shall be repaired in accordance with the requirements of subsection numa .
coupling bands shall be supplied in accordance with subsection numc .
the coupling bands used to connect spiral rib pipe sections shall be huggertype bands made from the same material as the pipe or other approved design and shall be fitted with gaskets or o rings fabricated from neoprene or butyl rubber or other durable resilient material approved by the engineer and assembled in such a manner as to form a sealed joint .
o ring gaskets required for watertight joints shall be composed of rubber as specified in astm c num section num and shall be placed in the first corrugation of each pipe end and shall be compressed by tightening the coupling band in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
f concretelined corrugated metal pipe section num num concretelined corrugated metal pipe shall be installed in accordance with the requirements specified in subsection numb for full circle corrugated metal pipe except as otherwise specified herein .
pipe shall be joined with huggertype bands which are num inches in thickness of the same material as the pipe and shall be twopiece for pipe greater than num inches in diameter .
coupling bands in addition to the requirements specified in subsection numa shall be a minimum of num inches wide formed with two corrugations that are spaced to provide nesting in the second corrugation of each pipe end and shall be drawn together by a minimum of two galvanized bolts num inch in diameter inserted in a bar held in place by a strap welded to the pipe .
bands drawn together by other connection arrangements such as angles shall not be allowed .
o ring gaskets required for watertight joints shall be composed of rubber as specified in astm c num section num and shall be placed in the first corrugation of each pipe end and shall be compressed by tightening the coupling bands in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
g corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe shall be assembled and installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
w atertight joints unless otherwise specified will not be required for storm drains culverts or other drainage pipes .
however joints for these pipes shall be water resistant .
w atertight joints shall be provided for siphon and irrigation pipe installations .
w atertight and water resistant joints shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
a six by eighteeninch strip of magnetic tape shall be placed in the trench at the crown of each length of installed pipe .
special care shall be taken in the handling and installation of corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe and fittings to prevent damage and to assure that proper line and pipe grade are maintained throughout the backfilling operation .
w hen end sections for corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe are called for on the plans the contractor shall use metal safety end sections unless otherwise specified .
num backfilling and compacting a backfill material num pipe backfill section num num pipe backfill material shall be selected from excavation or from a source selected by the contractor .
it shall not contain frozen lumps stones larger than three inches in diameter chunks of clay or other objectionable material .
backfill material to be used for pipes pipearches or arches made of metal shall have a value of resistivity not less than num ohmcentimeters or the value shown on the project plans .
w hen resistivity is not shown on the plans the backfill material shall have a value of resistivity not less than that of the existing inplace material or num ohmcentimeters whichever is less .
backfill material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive for all metal pipe installations except aluminum .
backfill material for aluminum pipe installations shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive .
backfill material shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive for all concrete or plastic pipe installations .
tests for ph and resistivity shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
pipe backfill material shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num the plasticity index shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
as an alternate pipe backfill may conform to the material requirements listed for bedding material as specified in subsection numa for standard aggregate bedding material or cementtreated slurry bedding material .
num trench backfill trench backfill material shall not contain organic material rubbish debris and other deleterious material and shall not contain solid material which exceeds eight inches in greatest dimension and shall be soil selected from excavation or from a source selected by the contractor .
as an alternate trench backfill may conform to the material requirements listed for bedding material as specified in subsection numa for standard aggregate bedding material or cementtreated slurry bedding material .
num slope plating the roadway slope at the inlet ends of pipe culverts shall be plated with an impervious material .
the plating material shall be a finegrained cohesive material with at least num percent of it passing the no .
num sieve section num num and with a plasticity index of at least num and shall be placed as shown on the plans .
the plasticity index will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
b placement of backfill material num general all trash forms sheeting bracing and loose rock or loose earth shall be removed from the areas to be backfilled before backfill material is placed .
backfill compacted by pneumatic or mechanical tamping devices shall be placed in layers not more than eight inches in depth before compaction .
pipe backfill shall be brought up evenly on both sides of the pipe for the full length to an elevation one foot above the top of the pipe .
trench backfill shall be placed from one foot above the top of the pipe to the elevation at which base or surfacing materials are to be placed or to the top of the trench .
backfill material shall be placed around and over arches in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num standard aggregate slurry pipe backfill or trench backfill mixed as a standard aggregate slurry shall be placed in uniform horizontal layers not exceeding four feet in depth .
the slurry shall be compacted with internal vibrators in accordance with the requirements of subsection numd .
num cementtreated slurry cementtreated slurry pipe backfill placement above springline shall not commence within num hours of the placement of the underlying cementtreated bedding material below springline .
cementtreated pipe backfill shall be placed in a uniform manner that will prevent voids in or segregation of the backfill to an elevation one foot above the top of the pipe .
no backfilling above the cementtreated slurry pipe backfill shall be commenced until num hours after the cementtreated slurry has been placed .
if cementtreated slurry bedding material is used for trench backfill it shall not be disturbed or loaded in any manner within num hours of placement as above .
c compaction of backfill material section num num backfill material shall be compacted to at least num percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
jetting shall not be used to compact pipe backfill trench backfill or any material placed more than one foot above the top of the pipe .
ponding will not be allowed in any case .
if trench backfill or pipe backfill is placed as an aggregate slurry the contractor shall excavate holes in the compacted slurry to the depths and at the locations designated by the engineer .
these holes shall be of such size as to allow the required density tests to be performed in a safe manner .
upon completion of the tests the contractor shall refill the excavated areas and compact the material to the required density in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
cementtreated slurry bedding material for pipe backfill shall not require additional compaction after placement up to an elevation one foot above the top of pipe if it meets the material requirements of subsection numa and is placed and compacted as outlined in subsection numb and c. no density tests will be required in the cementtreated slurry bedding material when it is utilized for pipe backfill to an elevation one foot above the top of pipe .
cementtreated slurry bedding material used for trench backfill shall meet the requirements listed above for pipe backfill up to the elevation which it is placed .
num filter material w hen shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions filter material shall be carefully placed around perforated pipe .
filter material shall conform to the grading requirements for fine aggregate in section num and shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
num encasement of pipe w hen shown on the project plans pipe shall be encased in class b concrete .
portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num nonreinforced castinplace concrete pipe a general requirements the contractor shall have previously installed castinplace pipe similar to the pipe specified in this contract .
the engineer may require the section num num contractor to submit a list of names of the contractors key personnel with their castinplace pipe experience .
w hen required the list shall include the foreman and equipment operators .
w hen the project plans include castinplace concrete pipe as an alternate the contractor shall review the geotechnical investigation report .
the report will be available at contracts and specifications section num w . jackson phoenix arizona num phone num num num .
the contractor shall be responsible to determine if the inplace soil conditions will allow the specified trench to be constructed .
the contractor shall provide a quality control administrator who shall be responsible for castinplace pipe quality .
the administrator shall be a full time employee of the contractor or a consultant engaged by the contractor .
the contractor shall provide documentation to the engineer which demonstrates the quality control administrators experience in the manufacture and placement of castinplace pipe .
the administrator shall have the authority to control all activities necessary to ensure a product of acceptable quality including strength alignment thickness and grade .
the contractors quality control administrator shall inspect the pipe construction and complete a daily observation form supplied by the engineer .
the form shall be completed and submitted to the engineer no later than num a.m. on the first working day following each day work is being performed on the pipe installation .
nonreinforced castinplace concrete pipe shall be cast monolithically in a prepared trench at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the pipe shall be constructed with equipment specifically designed for constructing castinplace monolithic concrete pipe .
the equipment shall be approved by the engineer prior to use and the contractor may be required to furnish evidence of successful operation of the equipment on similar work .
if in the opinion of the engineer the equipment furnished is not suitable to produce the quality of work specified its use will not be permitted for the work .
pipe shall be constructed in trenches which have been excavated in either native soil or compacted fill .
the trench walls shall be stable so that the planned shape of the trench is maintained .
the minimum inside diameter of the pipe measured in any direction shall be at least num percent of the nominal pipe size .
the minimum wall thickness will be as specified on the project plans for each pipe size .
b excavation the trench shall be excavated to the lines and grades shown on the project plans .
laser guided alignment instruments shall be used to section num num control the grade and alignment of the trench .
departure from and return to the established grade for the finished trench shall not exceed one inch per ten linear feet with a total departure not to exceed num inches .
departure from and return to specified alignment for the trench shall not exceed two inches per ten linear feet with a total departure not to exceed four inches .
the bottom of the trench shall be shaped in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and prepared to provide full firm and uniform support over the bottom num degrees of the pipe to be constructed .
the length of trench permitted to remain open at any one time shall not exceed num linear feet unless otherwise specified in the special provisions or as may be permitted by the engineer .
the bottom of the trench must consist of either undisturbed native soil or compacted backfill .
w hen in the opinion of the engineer soft spongy or other unsuitable material is encountered in the bottom of the trench such unsuitable material shall be removed to the depth and width directed by the engineer .
the resulting area shall be backfilled with material conforming to the requirements of subsection numanum .
the backfill shall be compacted in accordance with the requirements of subsection numc .
the trench shall then be excavated as specified above .
w hen boulders bedrock or rock ledges are encountered in the bottom or side walls of the trench such material shall be removed to a distance of at least six inches from the nearest surface of the pipe and the space then backfilled compacted and reshaped as required above for unsuitable material .
the trench walls from a point one foot above the top of the pipe to the top of the trench may be sloped as required by soil conditions to provide more stability in the trench and safer working conditions in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
the steepness of the side slopes shall be limited to the degree of stability considered necessary for safety unless an approved shoring system is used .
side slopes shall conform to current osha regulations and be approved by the engineer .
c concrete placement at the time of concrete placement all surfaces in the trench which will be in contact with the pipe shall be thoroughly moistened so that moisture will not be drawn from the freshly placed concrete however the trench shall be free of standing water mud and debris .
the concrete shall be placed around the full circumference of the pipe in one operation .
w hen metal forms are used they shall be of sufficient strength to withstand vibrating and tamping of the concrete .
section num num the concrete shall be vibrated rammed tamped or worked with suitable devices until the concrete has been thoroughly consolidated and completely fills the formed space .
laser guided alignment instruments shall be used to control the grade and alignment of the pipe .
departure from and return to the established grade for the invert of the installed pipe shall not exceed one inch per ten linear feet with a total departure not to exceed num inches .
the surface of the invert shall not vary by more than num feet when tested with a ten foot straight edge .
departures from and return to specified alignment for the pipe shall not exceed two inches per ten linear feet with a total departure not to exceed four inches .
w hen placing operations stop for such a time that initial set of the concrete is likely to occur before placement resumes a construction joint shall be made by leaving the end of the pipe rough with a slope of approximately num degrees and inserting numinch no .
num dowels one foot into the center of the pipe wall at approximately numinch intervals .
collars may be used in lieu of doweled joints .
an excavation shall be made along the sides and bottom of the construction joint to permit casting of a concrete collar around the outside of the joint .
the collar shall have a minimum thickness num times the pipe wall thickness and shall lap the entire joint by at least two times the wall thickness .
immediately before resuming concrete placement the joint shall be cleaned of all laitance loose or defective concrete coatings and other deleterious materials and thoroughly wetted .
construction joints used for connections to another pipe or at junction structures shall be made by squaring off the end of the pipe .
an excavation along the sides and bottom of the pipe to permit casting of the concrete collar shall be made as previously specified .
after the removal of forms the inside of the pipe will be inspected for rock pockets voids form indentation and excessive form lap .
any necessary repairs shall be made within num hours and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
cracks shall be repaired in accordance with subsection numg .
d finishing the interior surface and exterior top surface of the pipe shall be as smooth as a woodfloat finish and shall be essentially free of fractures cracks and roughness .
e curing w ithin num minutes after the pipe is cast the concrete forming the exposed top portion of the pipe shall be cured as follows section num num the pipe shall be covered with a polyethylene film conforming to the requirements of aashto m num except that the nominal thickness shall be num inches .
the film shall be white opaque or clear and shall be held in place with loose soil to assure continuous contact .
the loose soil shall not be greater than six inches in depth at any point and shall conform to the requirements herein before specified under pipe backfill .
this curing method shall be used when the ambient temperature exceeds num degrees f. for ambient air temperatures equal to or less than num degrees f the pipe may be sprayed with a liquid membraneforming compound conforming to the requirements of subsection numc .
if the contractor elects to spray the pipe with a liquid membrane such procedure shall be completed within num minutes .
during the curing period the inside of the pipeline shall be kept in a humid condition for at least seven days following placement of the concrete .
to prevent air drafts from drying the fresh concrete openings in the pipeline shall be covered during the seven day period except at locations where work on the pipe is required and only during the time that such work is actually in progress .
f backfilling backfilling shall not start until the concrete has developed a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch .
the type of backfill material the placement of pipe and trench backfill material and compaction shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
g pipe repair the contractor shall perform all interior crack repairs only after backfilling .
transverse cracks num inches or more in width shall be cleaned and filled with an elastomeric compound approved by the engineer .
the elastomeric compound shall penetrate into the crack at least num inches .
a longitudinal crack shall be defined as one which is generally oriented within num degrees of the alignment of the pipe .
longitudinal cracks will be a cause for rejection under any of the following conditions .
num a crack which has caused a surface fault within the pipe with a displacement greater than num inches .
section num num num a crack width greater than that determined by the formula num x o.d .
and that can be penetrated by a standard machinist gauge leaf designated in aashto t num .
num a crack width greater than num inches and that can be penetrated by a standard machinist gauge leaf designated in aashto t num .
longitudinally cracked pipes meeting any of the three rejection criteria above may be allowed to remain in place if approved by the engineer .
if the engineer allows such rejectable pipe to remain all longitudinal cracks meeting any of the three criteria above shall be repaired by full depth epoxy grouting .
any section of pipe rejected by the engineer shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
h pipe wall thickness the contractor shall measure the thickness at the invert and crown by probing at numfoot intervals during the placement of concrete .
the probe shall be a numinch round bar at least two inches longer than the wall thickness to be measured .
the measurements shall be reported on the daily observation form .
the wall thickness will be measured for acceptance .
one hole each shall be drilled at the invert and on each side of the springline within numfoot intervals .
the drill locations will be determined by the engineer .
the engineer may require additional holes on curves or in areas which appear to be defective .
all holes shall have a minimum diameter of num inch .
if the wall thickness is less than the specified minimum thickness a core shall be drilled adjacent to the drilled hole .
all cores shall have a minimum diameter of three inches .
the length of the core will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
if the length of the drilled core is deficient additional cores shall be taken at intervals not to exceed ten feet in each direction from the deficient core until one core which is not deficient is obtained in each direction .
the pipe between these two acceptable cores will be rejected .
the rejected pipe section shall be removed and replaced with pipe of the specified thickness at no additional cost to the department .
at all locations where drilled holes or cores have been made the resulting holes shall be filled with concrete in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num method of measurement section num num pipe will be measured by the linear foot parallel to the central axis of the pipeline and shall include the length of fittings .
tees wyes and other branches will be measured as pipe along the central axis of the pipes to the point of intersection of said central axes .
pipe reducers will be measured as pipe of the larger diameter along the central axis .
the end of pipe in closed structures will be considered to be at the intersection of the central axis and the inside face of the wall and for masonry and concrete headwalls it will be considered to be at the intersection of the central axis and the face of the headwall .
end sections will be measured by the number of units installed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of pipe measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place .
except as hereinafter specified no separate measurement or payment will be made for excavating trenches and for furnishing placing and compacting bedding and backfill material as described and specified herein and on the project plans the cost thereof being considered as included in the contract unit price per foot of pipe .
payment for the removal of rock hard pan other unyielding material or soft spongy or other unstable soil below the vertical limits as shown on the plans and the backfilling of these overexcavated areas as specified herein and as directed by the engineer will be paid for in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w hen an embankment is constructed prior to the digging of a trench and the installation of a pipe payment for the construction of the embankment will be made under the appropriate item such as roadway excavation or borrow .
removal of rock hard pan other unyielding material or soft spongy or other unstable material from the trench within the embankment will not be considered for payment .
the repairing of the damage to existing pipe ends to which new pipe is to be joined and which can not be seen in order to be assessed and the removal of any portion of a damaged existing pipe as specified under subsection numb will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for furnishing and placing filter material plating material fittings collars bands and the joining of new and existing pipes .
for castinplace pipe no separate measurement or payment will be made for the excavation or preparation of the trench for furnishing section num num placing and compacting backfill material for pipe repair when authorized by the engineer or for quality control activities the cost being considered as included in the unit price per foot of pipe .
end sections measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place .
section num structural plate pipe pipearches and arches num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and erecting structural plate pipe pipearches and arches of the sizes thicknesses and dimensions shown on the project plans .
they shall be installed at the locations specified on the project plans or as directed by the engineer in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the project plans or as established by the engineer and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials materials shall conform to the requirements of section num unless otherwise specified .
plates shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of either aashto m num aashto m num or federal specification w w pnum .
concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for the class and strength shown on the project plans .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements excavating bedding and backfilling for the structural plate pipe pipearches and arches shall be performed as specified under section num and as specified herein and on the project plans .
excavating and backfilling for the concrete footings shall be performed as specified under subsection num .
placement of reinforcing steel and structural concrete shall conform to the requirements of sections num and num respectively .
w hen backfill material is placed around and over arches before headwalls are in place the material shall first be placed midway between the ends of the arch forming as narrow a ramp as possible until the top of the arch is reached .
the ramp shall be constructed evenly from both sides and the material shall be compacted as it is placed .
after the two ramps have been constructed to the top of the arch the remainder of the material shall be placed from the top of the section num num arch both ways from the center to the ends and as evenly as possible on both sides of the arch .
w hen the headwalls are constructed before any backfill material is placed around and over the arch the material shall first be placed adjacent to one headwall until the top of the arch is reached after which it shall be dumped from the top of the arch toward the other headwall and as evenly as possible on both sides of the arch .
in multiple installations extreme care shall be taken so that the backfill material is brought up evenly on each side of each arch so that unequal pressures will be avoided .
plates shall be formed to provide lap joints with the upstream plate lapping over the downstream plate .
the bolt holes shall be so punched that all plates having like dimensions curvature and the same number of bolts per foot of seam shall be interchangeable .
each plate shall be curved to the proper radius so that the crosssectional dimensions of the finished structure will be as indicated on the project plans .
plates for forming skewed or sloped ends shall be cut to give the angle of skew or slope specified .
burned edges shall be free from oxide and burrs and shall present a workmanlike finish .
legible identification numerals shall be placed on each plate to designate its proper position in the finished structure .
steel plates shall be punched so that bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form longitudinal seams in the finished structure will be staggered in rows two inches apart with one row in the valley and one on the crest of the corrugation .
bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form circumferential seams in the finished structure shall provide for a bolt spacing of not more than num inches .
the minimum distance from center of hole to edge of plate shall be not less than num times the diameter of the bolt .
the diameter of the bolt holes in the longitudinal seams shall not exceed the diameter of the bolt by more than num inch .
aluminum plates shall be punched so that bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form longitudinal seams in the finished structure will be on a double row with a centertocenter dimension of num inches .
in all structures the longitudinal seam shall be comprised of two bolts in each valley and crest of each corrugation .
the standard centertocenter dimensions of bolt holes that will form the circumferential seam in the finished structure shall be num inches .
the minimum distance from the center of hole to the edge of the plate shall not be less than num times the diameter of the bolt .
tolerance of all hole diameters and spacing shall be as indicated on the project plans or in the special provisions .
plates shall be erected in their final position by connecting the plates with bolts at longitudinal and circumferential seams .
drift pins may be section num num used to facilitate matching of holes .
all plates shall be placed in the order recommended by the manufacturer with joints staggered so that not more than three plates come together at any one point .
all bolts shall be drawn tight without overstress before beginning the backfill .
steel bolts for structuralplate sections shall be torqued during installation to a minimum of num footpounds and a maximum of num footpounds .
for powerdriven tools the holdon period may vary from two to five seconds .
the bolts for aluminum structuralplate sections shall be torqued during installation to a minimum of num footpounds and a maximum of num footpounds .
bolts shall be of sufficient length to provide a full nut .
after structural plate pipe has been erected all spots where damage has occurred to spelter shall be given two coats of an approved hot asphalt paint or shall be wire brushed and given two coats of zinc paint as specified in subsection num as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement structural plate pipe pipearches and arches will be measured either by the linear foot or by the lump sum for each structure installed in place completed and accepted .
if measurement is made by the linear foot measurement will be made along the invert center line for pipe and pipearches and the average of the springline lengths for arches .
structural concrete and reinforcing steel used for headwalls and footings will be measured by the cubic yard and by the pound respectively .
structural excavation and structure backfill for footings will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of work under this section measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price or the contract unit price per linear foot for the different sizes and thickness of structural plate pipe pipearches and structural plate arches designated in the bidding schedule complete in place including excavating and furnishing placing and compacting backfill material .
payment for structural concrete used in footings and headwalls will be made as provided in subsection num .
payment for reinforcing steel used in footings and headwalls will be made as provided in subsection num .
payment for structural excavation and structure backfill for footings will be made as provided in subsection num .
section num num section num concrete catch basins num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing or reconstructing concrete catch basins including excavation concrete removal and backfill .
w ork shall be done at the locations designated on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for class b concrete .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel bars or mesh shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num masonry mortar masonry mortar shall be composed by volume of one part portland cement two parts fine aggregate onefifth part hydrated lime and sufficient water to provide a plastic mixture .
the lime shall be considered as an addition to and not as replacing any cement .
fine aggregate shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
portland cement and water shall conform to the requirements of section num .
hydrated lime shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type n. mortar that has been mixed more than one hour shall not be used .
retempering of mortar will not be permitted .
num structural steel structural steel parts shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements num catch basins excavation and backfill for the catch basin shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
section num num catch basins shall be castinplace or at the option of the contractor may be precast units .
a list of approved precast units may be found on the departments approved products list apl available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
the h dimension for catch basins shall be determined in the field prior to casting .
the contractor is advised to acquaint itself with conditions peculiar to the project which might limit the use of precast items .
castinplace catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of section num and reinforced where called for on the plans in accordance with the requirements of section num in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans and shall meet adjacent sidewalk curb or gutter surfaces with no appreciable offsets .
catch basin grates and frames shall be fabricated and installed so that the bearing surfaces of the grate rest securely on the bearing surfaces of the frame .
proper equipment shall be provided for lowering the precast sections to position .
the tongue end of the section shall be placed in contact with the base structure unless otherwise directed .
not more than two holes shall be cast or drilled in the shell of each section for the purpose of handling and placing .
if such holes are provided they shall be filled and finished with mortar after placing the catch basins .
immediately before joining precast sections mortar shall be placed continuously around the circumference of the receiving sections contact surface .
any precast section damaged during handling or placing shall be repaired or replaced at the option of the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
w hen specified on the project plans aprons shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
aprons shall be constructed from portland cement concrete or from asphaltic concrete .
w hen specified on the project plans or ordered by the engineer corrugated metal pipe shall be installed as temporary drain for the roadway .
the pipes shall be subsequently filled with concrete .
backfilling of the completed structure shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
preformed bituminous joint filler shall be installed where the catch basin concrete will meet new or existing concrete curb pavement .
num reconstruct catch basins catch basins shall be reconstructed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
the existing frame and grate shall be carefully removed and cleaned .
after removal of the frame the top of the catch basin shall be trimmed to provide a suitable foundation section num num for the new material .
frames and grates shall then be reinstalled according to the requirements of subsection num .
w here reconstruction of a catch basin requires partial removal of concrete sufficient concrete shall be removed to permit new reinforcing steel to be spliced to existing reinforcing steel in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
existing reinforcing incorporated into the new work shall be thoroughly cleaned of all adhering material before being embedded in new concrete .
new concrete shall be placed according to the requirements of section num .
num frame and grate the fabrication of frame and grate units shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
w hen reconstruct catch basin is specified in accordance with subsection num and when an existing frame and grate is unsuitable for further use a new frame and grate shall be furnished and installed .
w here an existing frame and grate is suitable for reuse but is either lost or damaged by the contractors operations to the extent that it is unacceptable for reuse it shall be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement catch basins will be measured as a unit for each catch basin including frame and grate for each catch basin reconstructed or for each frame and grate furnished .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of catch basins of reconstruct catch basins and of frame and grate for catch basin measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including aprons temporary construction drains excavation and backfill .
the removal of unsuitable material below the required depth and the furnishing and placing of material in the voids thus created will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num standpipes num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing standpipes for irrigation or drainage pipes including excavation backfill covers and gates at the locations designated on section num num the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete concrete shall be class b portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
num concrete pipe concrete pipe materials shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num mortar mortar for pipe joints shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num metal covers materials furnished for structural steel plate and bars in steel plate covers shall conform to the requirements of section num for structural carbon steel .
num metal gates materials furnished for metal gates shall conform to the requirements specified on the plans or in the special provisions .
num construction requirements for a standpipe using reinforced concrete pipe the pipe shall be placed so that the bell or grooved end is uppermost to receive the cover .
all connections to new or existing pipes will be considered as being a part of the standpipe .
mortar joints shall be made in accordance with the details shown on the plans and shall be watertight .
concrete standpipes shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num method of measurement standpipes of the types specified on the project plans will be measured as a unit for each type constructed .
num basis of payment section num num the accepted quantities of standpipes measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including excavation and backfill .
the removal of unsuitable material below the required depth and the furnishing and placing of material in the voids thus created will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num manholes num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing complete manholes including frames and covers furnishing and installing manhole frames and covers or removing and resetting existing manhole frames and covers at the locations designated on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete materials furnished for portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for class b concrete except precast manholes .
precast manholes shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except that the compressive strength of each unit will be determined and accepted in accordance with subsection num .
num reinforcing steel materials furnished for reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num brick brick shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
num mortar mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num frames and covers frames and covers shall conform to the requirements of subsection num for drainage structure castings .
the bearing face of the frame shall be machined so that the cover will lie flat in any position in the ring and have a uniform bearing throughout its entire circumference .
before leaving the foundry the frames and covers shall be thoroughly cleaned .
section num num at the option of the manufacturer manhole covers may be supplied from the foundry with the adot logo embossed in the center at no additional cost to the department .
the current adot logo design at the time of cover installation shall be used .
manhole covers with outdated logo designs will not be accepted for installation or payment .
num construction requirements num manhole excavation and backfill for the manhole shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
all connections for lateral pipes will be considered a part of the manhole .
the invert channel may be lined with split pipe .
manhole sidewalls shall be constructed of castinplace or precast concrete or brick as shown on the project plans .
the base of all manholes shall be castinplace concrete .
a list of approved precast units will be found in the special provisions .
castinplace concrete shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
bricks for sidewalls shall be wetted before being used and shall be laid in full mortar beds .
mortar that has been mixed for more than one hour shall not be used .
retempering of mortar will not be permitted .
proper equipment shall be provided for lowering the precast sections to position .
the tongue end of the section shall be placed in contact with the base structure unless otherwise directed .
not more than two holes shall be cast or drilled in the shell of each section for the purpose of handling and placing .
if such holes are provided they shall be filled and finished with mortar after placing .
any precast section damaged during handling or placing shall be repaired or replaced at the option of the engineer and at no additional cost to the department .
joints for precast concrete manhole sections shall be made with portland cement mortar rubber gaskets mastic joint fillers or by a combination of these types or other approved type .
the completed mortar joint shall be formed with a bead on the outside and finished smooth on the inside of the sections and suitably cured .
the rubber ring gaskets shall be installed so as to form a flexible watertight seal .
the mastic joint filler shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations so as to form a watertight seal .
w here frames and covers for new manholes are to be set in new bituminous mix or asphaltic concrete surfaces they shall not be set until the roadway has been surfaced .
w here a bituminous seal coat or section num num asphaltic concrete finishing course is to be placed on the new surfacing the frames and covers shall be set after the surface course has been completed and prior to the placement of the seal coat or the finishing course .
steel plates of a size approved by the engineer shall be placed over the manhole prior to surfacing operations .
after surfacing operations are completed the steel plates shall be removed and the frames and covers set in concrete at the proper elevation so that the cover will be flush with the adjacent finished surface .
care shall be taken that the base and surfacing materials are not disturbed beyond the edges of the plate .
concrete and reinforcing steel shall be placed around the frame as detailed on the plans .
the concrete shall be protected during the curing period .
upon completion each manhole shall be thoroughly cleaned and kept clean until final acceptance of the work .
the contractor shall observe all the ordinances of the city or town in which the work is located .
streets shall be kept open for passage of traffic and protection for the public shall be provided when the manhole excavation is exposed and dangerous .
the manhole construction work shall be completely and adequately covered when no work is being done .
every precaution shall be taken to prevent water pumped from manholes from flooding streets alleys sidewalks and private property .
num frame and cover for manhole w here an existing frame and cover for a manhole is unfit for further use a new frame and cover shall be furnished and installed as specified under subsection num .
w here necessary existing sidewalls shall be adjusted to the required grade by removing portions of or adding to the existing walls .
such adjustments shall conform to the details of the existing manhole unless otherwise detailed on the project plans .
num reset manhole frame and cover existing frames and covers to be reset shall be carefully removed and reset to the required grade in accordance with the requirements of subsection num however at the contractors option and with approval of the engineer adjustable extension rings of the type which do not require the removal of the existing frame may be used .
the extension device shall provide positive locking action with the existing frame and shall permit adjustment in height to conform to the new finish pavement surface .
the material for the extension device shall be compatible with the existing frame and conform to the requirements of section num .
manhole frames and covers to be reset which are lost or damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
section num num num method of measurement manholes will be measured as a unit for each manhole including frame and cover for each frame and cover or for each existing frame and cover removed and reset .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of manholes frame and cover for manhole and reset manhole frame and cover measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including excavation and backfill .
the removal of unsuitable material below the required depth and the furnishing and placing of material in the voids thus created will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num underdrains num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor equipment and materials to construct an underdrain system in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as directed by the engineer .
w hen more than one type of pipe is allowed to be installed at underdrain installations the underdrain will be designated as alternative pipe underdrain on the plans and in the bidding schedule .
the type of pipe to be installed shall be selected by the contractor from the allowable types of pipe shown on the plans .
num materials num pipe materials certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for all pipe materials .
a perforated clay pipe perforated clay pipe shall conform to the requirements for extrastrength perforated clay pipe as specified in aashto m num except that plain end pipe complying in all other respects with the stated aashto m num specification may be used .
design modifications to the bell socket end of the pipe which will facilitate positioning of the perforations or placement of the pipe may be made provided that such modifications are approved by the section num num engineer prior to use .
pipe so modified shall conform to all performance requirements and tests specified in aashto m num .
if plain end pipe is used couplers which are capable of holding the pipe in alignment shall be used to join the pipe .
b perforated steel pipe perforated steel pipe and coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num and m num with the following modifications the pipe shall conform to any one of the fullcircle types specified in aashto m num and perforations in the pipe shall be either drilled or punched .
the perforations shall be located either in the inside crests or in the flat tangent portion of all corrugations but not in both locations in a given length of pipe .
c perforated aluminum pipe aluminum underdrain pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with the following modifications the pipe shall conform to type iii pipe according to aashto m num .
perforations in the pipe shall be either drilled or punched .
the minimum thickness of sheet shall be num inches .
d perforated plastic pipe perforated plastic pipe shall be either smoothwall polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe corrugated polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe with a smooth interior surface or corrugated polyethylene plastic tubing .
smoothwall polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
corrugated polyvinyl chloride plastic pipe with a smooth interior surface shall conform to the material and structural requirements of aashto m num .
the pipe shall have perforations located in the bottom half of the pipe and the perforations shall consist of slots meeting the size and opening area requirements listed in aashto m num .
the inside diameter and diameter tolerances shall conform to the requirements of either aashto m num or m num .
corrugated polyethylene plastic tubing shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num or m num .
polyvinyl chloride pipe shall be connected with belled ends or with sleevetype or stoptype couplings conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
polyethylene tubing shall be connected with snapon screwon or wraparound fittings and couplings conforming to the requirements of aashto m num or m num .
solvent cementing of joints will not be required .
section num num num underdrain outlets and risers certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for all underdrain outlet and riser materials .
underdrain outlets and underdrain terminal risers vertical risers and numdegree risers consisting of covers pipes band couplers pipe elbows tees and wyes shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and as specified in these specifications .
underdrain outlets and risers shall be fabricated of the same material as the underdrain pipe or of corrugated metal pipe .
except for covers and coupling band fastening hardware aluminum and steel shall not be mixed in any installation .
outlet and riser pipe and fittings shall not be perforated .
the welded metal cover for risers shall conform to the details shown on the plans .
w elded steel covers shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the provision in subsection num galvanizing .
w elding shall be in accordance with the requirements in subsection num w elding .
covers shall be fitted and bolted into the riser pipe or elbow .
the covers shall seat uniformly and shall not be subject to rocking .
num drain aggregate the drain aggregate shall conform to the following gradation when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num for underdrains within the roadway prism the percent of fractured coarse aggregate particles for material retained on the no .
num sieve shall be at least num when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the combined bulk specific gravity range for the aggregate shall be num to num .
the combined water absorption range for the aggregate shall be num to num .
section num num resistance to abrasion for aggregate will be determined in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num and shall meet the following requirements maximum loss of num percent at num revolutions .
maximum loss of num percent at num revolutions .
num drainage geotextile fabric the drainage geotextile fabric shall be as specified in subsection num .
num construction requirements num general the trench for the underdrain shall be excavated to the lines and grades shown on the project plans .
the bottom of the trench shall be shaped in accordance with the details shown on the plans and prepared to provide full firm and uniform support for the drainage geotextile fabric aggregate and perforated pipe .
num weather limitations drainage fabric placement and underdrain installation shall not be done when weather conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable to allow placement or installation .
exposure of geotextiles to the elements between lay down and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize damage potential .
num fabric placement surfaces to receive drainage fabric immediately prior to placing shall be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the fabric during installation .
the fabric shall be aligned and placed in a wrinklefree manner .
successive sheets or rolls of fabric shall be overlapped a minimum of num inches in the direction of water flow .
the drain aggregate shall also be placed in the trench in the direction of water flow if possible .
should the fabric be damaged during placing the torn or punctured section shall be either completely replaced or shall be repaired by placing a piece of fabric that is large enough to cover the damaged area and to meet the overlap requirement .
damage to the fabric resulting from the contractors vehicles equipment or operations shall be replaced or repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num underdrain construction details section num num aggregate materials shall be placed with great care in a manner which does not damage the fabric .
pins or piles of aggregate can be used to hold the drainage fabric in place while aggregate is being placed .
aggregate materials shall be compacted in sixinch maximum lifts with a minimum of three passes of a vibratory plate type compactor .
perforated pipes shall be laid with the perforations down .
outlets riser pipes and associated fittings shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and specifications and as directed by the engineer .
the outlet for each underdrain shall be clean at the time of installation and shall be free of obstructions after installation .
pipes that are found to be plugged shall be replaced by the contractor including replacement of aggregate materials surfacing and backfill materials at no additional cost to the department .
after placing the drain aggregate the geotextile drainage fabric shall be folded over the top of the drain aggregate to produce a minimum overlap of num inches for trenches greater than num inches wide .
in trenches less than num inches in width the overlap shall be equal to the width of the trench .
the geotextile drainage fabric shall then be covered with the subsequent course .
num method of measurement underdrains will be measured by the linear foot along the centerline of the pipe .
measurement will be made endtoend to the nearest foot along the actual length of pipe .
the pay length shall not exceed the length staked or ordered by the engineer .
elbows wyes tees risers outlets and other branches will be measured by the linear foot for the size and type of underdrain pipe they are connected to .
elbows outlets and risers will be measured along centerline .
w yes tees and other branches will be measured along centerlines to the point of intersection .
the total linear feet measured of each type and size of underdrain pipe shall be the sum of the above measured quantities .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of each type and size of underdrain measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place .
the contract price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals involved in installing perforated pipe drainage fabric and aggregate material as specified in the plans and specifications and as directed by the engineer .
the contract unit price shall also include connecting outlets to drainage facilities welded metal covers and any necessary excavation and backfill .
section num num section num edge drains num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor equipment and materials to construct an edge drain system in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and as directed by the engineer .
the edge drain system shall include installation of plastic pipe edge drains and edge drain outlets vents and cleanouts and furnishing and placing permeable drain material filter fabric and miscellaneous appurtenances as shown on the plans and as specified in these specifications and special provisions .
num materials num pipe materials certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for all pipe material .
pipe and pipe fittings for edge drains and edge drain outlets vents and cleanouts shall be of the size shown on the project plans .
pipe installed in trenches to be backfilled with asphalttreated permeable material shall be polyvinyl chloride pvc num oc electric plastic conduit epcnum or epcnum conforming to the requirements of nema specification tcnum .
all pipe for edge drains and edge drain outlets vents and cleanouts shall at the contractors option conform to one of the following a pvc num oc electric plastic conduit epcnum or epcnum conforming to the requirements of nema specification tcnum .
b pvc plastic pipe schedule num or schedule num conforming to the requirements of astm d num .
the type grade and design stress designation of the pipe shall be either num num num num num or num as specified in astm d num .
pipe shall be straightend or bellend .
bell and sockets shall conform to the requirements of astm d num except for the marking .
in addition pipe designated as slotted on the plans shall have three rows of slots in the pipe .
the rows shall be in the longitudinal direction of the pipe and the slots shall be cut in the circumferential direction of the pipe .
the three rows shall be spaced equally around the circumference of the pipe .
each row shall have num one uniformly spaced slots per linear foot of pipe .
the slots shall be num to num inches wide and of such length as to provide a minimum of num square inches of slot opening per linear foot of pipe .
other suitable section num num configurations of slots which provide drainage equal to or better than the above slot requirements may be used if approved in writing by the engineer .
except as otherwise provided for wye fittings fittings for pvc num oc electric plastic conduit shall conform to the requirements of nema specification tcnum and the fittings for pvc plastic pipe shall be sockettype fittings conforming to astm d num for schedule num pipe and astm d num for schedule num pipe .
w ye fittings shall be shop fabricated from pipe conforming to the requirements for the type of edge drain pipe installed .
the fitting shall provide an unobstructed passageway through both legs of the wye .
num treated permeable material permeable material for edge drains shall be asphalt treated permeable material or cement treated permeable material .
the type of treatment asphalt or cement for the permeable material shall be at the contractors option .
treated permeable material shall be stored proportioned and mixed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
a asphalt treated permeable material aggregates shall be clean and free from decomposed materials organic material and other deleterious substances .
the gradation of the aggregate shall meet the following requirements when tested in accordance with arizona test method num sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num aggregate shall conform to the following quality requirements prior to the addition of asphalt tests test method requirement fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num min .
num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max .
num sand equivalent aashto t num min .
num section num num the combined bulk specific gravity range for the aggregate shall be num to num .
the combined water absorption range for the aggregate shall be zero to num .
asphalt to be mixed with the aggregate shall be pg num unless otherwise specified or approved by the engineer .
aggregates and asphalt for asphalt treated permeable material shall be stockpiled proportioned and mixed in the same manner provided for in subsection num except as follows the aggregate need not be separated into sizes .
the temperature of the aggregate before adding the asphalt binder shall not be less than num degrees f nor more than num degrees f. asphalt treated permeable material stored in excess of two hours shall not be used in the work .
the aggregate shall be combined with num percent paving asphalt by weight of the dry aggregate .
after testing samples of the contractors proposed aggregate supply the engineer may order an increase or decrease in the target asphalt content .
if such increase or decrease is ordered and the increase or decrease shall be less than num percent by weight of the dry aggregate no additional compensation for this increase or decrease of asphalt content will be payable to the contractor for the asphalt treated permeable material .
once the target asphalt content is determined the asphalt cement content will be accepted in accordance with subsection num .
b cement treated permeable material aggregates shall be clean and free from decomposed materials organic material and other deleterious substances .
all natural aggregates shall be thoroughly and uniformly washed before use .
the gradation of the aggregate shall meet the following requirements when tested in accordance with arizona test method num sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num aggregate shall conform to the following additional quality requirements prior to the addition of cement section num num tests test method requirement fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num min .
num abrasion aashto t num num rev .
max .
num sand equivalent aashto t num min .
num the combined bulk specific gravity range for the aggregate shall be num to num .
the combined water absorption range for the aggregate shall be zero to num .
aggregates and cement for cement treated permeable material shall be stockpiled proportioned and mixed in the same manner provided for in subsection num except as follows dividing of the aggregate into sizes will not be required .
the portland cement content of cement treated permeable material shall be no less than num pounds per cubic yard .
the watercement ratio the ratio of the amount of water exclusive only of that absorbed by the aggregate to the amount of cement by weight shall be approximately num .
the exact watercement ratio shall be as specified or approved by the engineer .
c drainage geotextile fabric the drainage geotextile fabric shall be as specified in subsection num .
d miscellaneous materials concrete for splash pads shall conform to the requirements of class b concrete .
mortar placed where edge drain outlets and vents connect to drainage pipes and existing drainage inlets shall be composed of portland cement fine aggregate and water proportioned and mixed as specified herein .
the proportion of cement to fine aggregate measured by volume shall be onetotwo num unless otherwise specified .
all materials used in the mortar shall conform to the requirements listed in subsection num .
the mortar shall contain only enough water to permit placing and packing .
concrete areas in contact with the mortar shall be cleaned of all loose or foreign material that would in any way prevent bond between the mortar and the concrete surfaces and shall be flushed with water and section num num allowed to dry to a surface dry condition immediately prior to placing the mortar .
the mortar shall completely fill and shall be tightly packed into recesses and holes on surfaces under structural members and at other locations as specified .
after placing all surfaces of mortar shall be cured by the water method as provided for in subsection numb for a period not less than three days .
all improperly cured or otherwise defective mortar shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
expansion type pressure plugs for cleanouts shall seat firmly against the lip of the pipe and shall be an expandable plug manufactured from neoprene or commercial quality expandable duct plugs .
the expandable plug shall consist of reinforced polypropylene rigid threaded plug with a commercial quality thermoplastic rubber sealing ring .
num construction requirements num general edge drains edge drain outlets vents cleanouts treated permeable material and filter fabric shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and as specified herein unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
prior to excavating trenches in existing paved areas the outline of the paved areas to be removed shall be cut to a neat line to a minimum depth of two inches with a powerdriven saw or a wheel type rock cutting excavator .
cuts along the joint between existing asphalt concrete and existing portland cement concrete pavement will not be required .
num weather limitations drainage fabric placement and edge drain installation shall not be done when weather conditions in the opinion of the engineer are not suitable to allow placement or installation .
exposure of geotextiles to the elements between lay down and cover shall be a maximum of num days to minimize damage potential .
num fabric placement surfaces to receive drainage fabric shall immediately prior to placing be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the fabric during installation .
the fabric shall be aligned and placed in a wrinklefree manner .
successive sheets or rolls of fabric shall be overlapped a minimum of num inches in the direction the section num num material is being spread .
should the fabric be damaged during placing the torn or punctured section shall be either completely replaced or shall be repaired by placing a piece of fabric that is large enough to cover the damaged area and to meet the overlap requirement .
damage to the fabric resulting from the contractors vehicles equipment or operations shall be replaced or repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num edge drain construction details pipe and fittings shall be joined by solvent cementing .
the solvent cement and primer shall be of commercial quality specifically manufactured for use with rigid pvc plastic pipe and fittings .
the solvent cement and primer used shall be made by the same manufacturer .
the color of the primer shall contrast with the color of the pipe and fittings .
the solvent cement and primer shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers printed instructions .
treated permeable material shall be spread only when the atmospheric temperature is above forty degrees f and in layers not to exceed eight inches .
w hen edge drains are to be installed adjacent to an asphalt treated permeable base the treated permeable material may be spread with the treated permeable base except for the lower six inches of asphalt treated permeable material which shall be spread in a separate operation .
asphalt treated permeable material shall be placed at a temperature of not less than num degrees f nor more than num degrees f. w hen asphalt treated permeable material is spread with asphalt treated permeable base the placement shall conform to the temperature requirements for spreading asphalt treated permeable base .
treated permeable material spread with adjacent treated permeable base shall be compacted in the same manner as specified for compacting the base .
all other layers of treated permeable material shall be compacted with a vibrating shoetype compactor connected to a spreading device .
the vibrating shoetype compactor shall be in operation only when the material is being spread in the trench .
cement treated permeable material which is not covered with asphaltic concrete within num hours after compaction of the permeable material shall be cured by either sprinkling the material with a fine spray of water every four hours during daylight hours or covering the material with a white polyethylene sheet not less than six mils thick .
the above curing requirements shall begin at num a.m. on the morning following compaction of the cement treated permeable material and continue for the next num hours or until the material is covered with asphaltic concrete whichever is less .
the cement treated permeable material shall not be sprayed with water during the first num hours after section num num compacting but shall be covered with the polyethylene sheet from the completion of the compaction to the beginning of the cure period .
trenches in the existing embankment areas shall be backfilled with native material and compacted as directed by the engineer .
aggregate base for backfilling trenches in existing paved areas shall be class num num or num aggregate base .
aggregate base backfill shall be spread and compacted by methods that will produce a uniform base firmly compacted and free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
asphaltic concrete for backfilling trenches in existed paved areas shall be dense graded asphaltic concrete material as approved by the engineer .
prior to placing the asphaltic concrete backfill a tack coat of asphaltic emulsion shall be applied to the vertical edges of existing pavement at an approximate rate of num gallons per square yard .
asphaltic concrete backfill shall be spread and compacted in approximately two equal layers by methods that will produce an asphaltic concrete surfacing of uniform smoothness texture and density .
each layer shall be compacted before the temperature of the mixture drops below num degrees f. surplus excavated materials shall become the property of the contractor and shall be disposed of in accordance with the specifications outside the right of way .
the locations of outlets vents and cleanouts will be marked with soil anchored flexible delineator posts in accordance with the plans and as approved by the engineer .
the edge drain outlet vent and cleanout pipes shall be clean at the time of installation and shall be free of obstructions after installation .
the contractor shall use a high pressure flexible hose with a nominal oneinch diameter nozzle containing flushing and propelling jets .
the hose shall be inserted into each edge drain outlet vent and cleanout pipe and pushed through the pipe with a minimum num pounds per square inch water pressure so that the entire edge drain system will be penetrated by the flushing nozzle .
pipes that are found to be plugged shall be replaced by the contractor including replacement of treated permeable material surfacing and backfill materials at no additional cost to the department .
outlet and vent covers consisting of commercial quality numinch mesh galvanized metal screens or grates with polyvinyl chloride slip joint nut fittings shall be installed at the end of each outlet pipe and vent pipe .
num method of measurement the various sizes of edge drains drain outlets splash blocks vents and cleanouts as shown on the plans will be measured by the linear foot along the centerline of the pipe and shall include the length of fittings .
tees wyes and other branches will be measured as pipe along section num num the central axis of the pipes to the point of intersection .
measurement will be made end to end to the nearest foot along the actual length of pipe .
the pay length shall not exceed the length staked or ordered by the engineer .
the total linear feet measured of each type and size of underdrain pipe shall be the sum of the above measured quantities .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of each type and size of edge drain measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place .
the contract price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals involved in installing perforated pipe drainage fabric and treated permeable material as specified in the plans and specifications and as directed by the engineer .
this contract unit price shall also include outlet and vent covers expansion plugs flexible markers for future location concrete splash pads connecting outlets and vents to drainage facilities and any necessary excavation and backfill of aggregate base asphaltic concrete asphalt emulsion tack coat and native materials .
no deduction in the length of plastic pipe will be made for gaps in edge drain pipe at locations of dual outlet dual vent or dual outlet and vent connections to the edge drain .
section num num section num concrete structures num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing structures or parts of structures to the forms shapes and dimensions shown on the project plans and to the lines and grades established by the engineer and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
w hen the structures or parts of structures are precast the work shall also include transporting and erecting the units .
concrete structures such as cattle guards catch basins median barriers headwalls and other small miscellaneous structures of sizes which can readily be precast as units and furnished and installed in place are hereby defined as minor structures .
minor structures at the option of the contractor may be either constructed of castinplace concrete or furnished and installed as precast units providing they are fabricated in accordance with drawings submitted and approved in accordance with requirements which may be found in the special provisions .
num materials num general portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for class s or class b concrete as shown on the project plans .
w here a strength is shown on the project plans but a class of concrete is not indicated it shall be construed to mean class s concrete having the required minimum compressive strength shown at num days .
liquid membraneforming compound shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
materials furnished for expansion joint filler and joint seal shall conform to the requirements of section num .
materials furnished for water stops shall conform to the requirements of section num .
preformed bearing pads and elastomeric bearing pads shall conform to the requirements of section num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements num foundations section num num foundations for structures shall be placed on suitable earth or rock bearing on a concrete foundation seal or on piling as shown on the project plans .
excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
no concrete shall be placed under water or against waterbearing strata except where a tremie concrete procedure is allowed by the engineer .
num falsework and forms a design and drawings the contractor shall be responsible for designing and constructing safe and adequate falsework and forms which provide the necessary rigidity support the loads imposed and produce in the finished structure the lines grades and dimensions shown on the project plans and established by the engineer .
forms shall be any system of structural elements which provides horizontal support or restraint to the lateral pressure of concrete .
falsework shall be any system of structural elements that provides temporary support for loads from plastic concrete forms reinforcing steel structural steel loads from placement operations or other related loads and continues to provide support until the concrete has attained adequate strength and the structure is capable of selfsupport .
the design load for falsework shall consist of the sum of dead and live vertical loads and an assumed horizontal load .
the minimum total design load for any falsework shall be not less than num pounds per square foot for the combined live and dead load regardless of slab thickness .
dead loads shall include the weight of concrete reinforcing steel forms and falsework .
the weight of concrete reinforcing steel and forms shall be assumed to be not less than num pounds per cubic foot for normal concrete and not less than num pounds per cubic foot for lightweight concrete .
live loads shall consist of the actual weight of any equipment to be supported by falsework applied as concentrated loads at the points of contact and a uniform load of not less than num pounds per square foot applied over the area supported .
the assumed horizontal load to be resisted by the falsework bracing system shall be the sum of the actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes and an allowance for wind but in no case shall the assumed horizontal load to be resisted in any direction be less than two percent of the total dead load .
the falsework shall be designed so that it will have sufficient rigidity to resist the assumed horizontal load without considering the weight of the concrete .
section num num if the concrete is to be prestressed the falsework shall be designed to support any increased or readjusted loads caused by prestressing forces .
falsework shall be designed by the working stress design method and stresses under all loads shall not exceed the maximum allowable stresses provided for in the current edition of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
the maximum allowable stresses provided for in the national design specification for wood construction nds may be used as an alternate to the aashto specifications for timber design .
the maximum allowable horizontal shear stress in timber shall not exceed num pounds per square inch after all applicable modification factors have been applied .
no increase in allowable stresses for repetitive member uses will be allowed .
unless otherwise specified on the plans deflection of the falsework span due to the weight of concrete only shall not exceed num of the falsework beam span irrespective of the fact that the deflection may be compensated for by camber strips .
in the case of posttensioned structures the falsework deflections shall not produce stresses in the structure at any time prior to posttensioning greater than num times the modulus of rupture for plain concrete unless approved by the engineer .
falsework over or adjacent to roadways or railroads which are open to traffic shall be designed and constructed so that the falsework will be stable if subjected to impact by vehicles .
falsework posts which support members that cross over a roadway or railroad shall be considered as adjacent to roadways or railroads .
other falsework posts shall be considered as adjacent to roadways or railroads only if they are located in the row of falsework posts nearest to the roadway or railroad and the horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to the edge of pavement or to a point num feet from the centerline of track is less than the total height of the falsework and forms .
the vertical load used for the design of falsework posts and towers but not footings which support the portion of the falsework over openings shall be increased to not less than num percent of the design load calculated in accordance with the provisions for design load previously specified .
falsework posts adjacent to roadways or railroads shall consist of either steel with a minimum section modulus about each axis of num inches cubed or sound timbers with a minimum section modulus about each axis of num inches cubed .
each falsework post adjacent to roadways or railroads shall be mechanically connected to its supporting footing at its base or otherwise laterally restrained so as to withstand a force of not less than num pounds applied at the base of the post in any direction section num num except toward the roadway or railroad track .
such posts also shall be mechanically connected to the falsework cap or stringer .
such mechanical connection shall be capable of resisting a load in any horizontal direction of not less than num pounds .
for falsework spans over roadways all exterior falsework stringers and stringers adjacent to the ends of discontinuous caps the stringer or stringers over points of minimum vertical clearance and every fifth remaining stringer shall be mechanically connected to the falsework cap or framing .
such mechanical connections shall be capable of resisting a load in any direction including uplift on the stringer of not less than num pounds .
such connections shall be installed before traffic is allowed to pass beneath the span .
for falsework spans over railroads all falsework stringers shall be so connected to caps .
w hen timber members are used to brace falsework bents which are located adjacent to roadways or railroads all connections for such timber bracing shall be of the bolted type using num inch diameter or larger bolts or shall be connected in a manner that will equal num percent capacity of the smaller member connected .
the falsework shall be located so that falsework footings or piles are at least three inches clear of railing posts and barriers and all other falsework members are at least one foot clear of railing members and barriers .
falsework bents within num feet of the center line of a railroad track shall be sheathed solid in the area between num and num feet above the track elevation on the side facing the track .
sheathing shall consist of plywood not less than num inch thick or lumber not less than one inch thick nominal .
bracing on such bents shall be adequate so that the bent will resist the required assumed horizontal force or num pounds whichever is greater .
drawings shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the drawings shall be complete and fully detailed working drawings showing the dimensions and material for all parts arrangement spacing and connections and all provisions for adjustment and for measuring displacement .
the falsework foundations any connections or contacts with previously built structures or other works and the means of protecting such other works from damage shall be detailed .
the above data may be presented as convenient either on the drawings or in the design summary which shall also describe the assumptions and types of calculations used in the design and the stresses and deflections found for critical points .
for any embankments used the equivalent of the above drawings and data shall be submitted and in addition the source classification and compaction requirements for the material and the results of any tests performed on the material .
in no case shall the embankment be compacted to less than num percent compaction and the top three feet shall be compacted to a minimum of section num num num percent compaction when tested in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
the embankment shall be topped with a lean concrete waste slab screeded to the required grades .
falsework design will require written approval by the engineer prior to commencing work and shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
except as provided for on the project plans supports for deck falsework forming or screed supports shall not be welded to steel girders shear connectors slab ties or girder stirrups .
modification of girders to support falsework and forming will not be allowed except as approved by the engineer .
this includes connections of any type in girder webs to support deck forming .
w hen modification of girders to support the deck falsework and forming has been approved by the engineer shop drawings for both the girders and the falsework and forming shall be submitted concurrently so that the review and approval of the drawings can be coordinated .
the tops of the erected girders shall be surveyed by the contractor in the field prior to placement of the deck forming falsework .
this survey shall be submitted to the engineer for evaluation .
if the top of erected girder elevations are higher than the screed elevations minus the combined deck slab and the buildup thicknesses adjustments will have to be made in the roadway profile or in the girder bearing seat elevations .
encroachment into the deck slab of up to num inch will be allowed for random occurrences .
b falsework construction the falsework shall be constructed to conform to the falsework drawings .
the materials used in the falsework construction shall be of the quality necessary to sustain the stresses required by the falsework design .
the workmanship used in falsework construction shall be of such quality that the falsework will support the loads imposed on the falsework .
falsework shall be founded on a solid footing safe against undermining and capable of supporting the loads imposed .
no concrete shall be placed in any forms supported by falsework until the contractors professional engineer has inspected the completed falsework and has issued a properly signed and sealed certificate that the falsework has been constructed according to the approved falsework drawings .
w edges screws or jacks shall be used in connection with falsework to set the forms to required grade and uniform bearing prior to placing concrete .
section num num all wedges shall be in pairs to insure uniform bearing .
laminated sections will not be permitted .
if additional material is required under wedges either single blocks or thicker wedges will be required .
a sufficient number of wedges shall be used to cover the entire bearing area .
the contractor shall provide telltales attached to the soffit forms and readable from the ground in enough systematically placed locations to determine the total settlement of the entire portion of the structure where concrete is being placed .
if any weakness develops during the placing of the concrete or the falsework shows any undue settlement or distortion the work shall be stopped and the falsework corrected and strengthened .
c forms construction num general requirements forms shall be of wood metal or other suitable material conforming to the requirements specified herein .
forming plans for castinplace bridge girders shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the forms shall be mortar tight and shall be designed constructed braced and maintained so that the finished concrete will be true to line and elevation and will conform to the required dimensions and contours .
they shall be designed to withstand the pressure of concrete with consideration given to rate of concrete placement temperature of the concrete use of setretarding admixtures or pozzolanic materials in the concrete the effects of vibration as the concrete is being placed and all loads incidental to the construction operations without distortion or displacement .
stayinplace forming shall not be used unless specified on the plans or approved by the engineer .
expanded metal meshes may be used to form construction joints providing a threeinch edge cover is maintained and b use in bridge decks is prohibited .
forms reused shall be maintained at all times in good condition as to accuracy of shape strength rigidity watertightness and smoothness of surface .
forms or form lumber unsatisfactory in any respect shall not be used .
forms shall be constructed so that portions may be removed without disturbing forms that are to remain .
forms to be used when a class ii finish or ornamental work is required shall be constructed of metal fiberglass coated panels or plywood .
all form joints shall be taped or section num num caulked in an acceptable manner .
forms for this work shall be equivalent to first class pattern work .
forms shall be filleted num inch at all exposed sharp corners of the concrete .
all forms shall be treated with an approved form release agent before concrete is placed .
any material which will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not be used .
forms shall be cleaned of all dirt sawdust water and other foreign material prior to placing concrete in the forms .
for narrow walls and columns where the bottom of the form is inaccessible provisions shall be made for cleaning out extraneous material immediately before placing the concrete .
the cells of box girders shall be cleared of all loose materials prior to the completion of deck forming when such forming is to remain in place .
w hen the deck forming is to be removed the cells of the box girders shall be cleared of all loose materials after removal of the forms .
num wood forms all lumber used for forms shall be free from defects affecting the accuracy of shape strength rigidity watertightness and smoothness of the surface .
all lumber for forms above stream bed shall be plywood .
all form lumber shall be securely fastened to the studding so that cupping can not occur .
chamfer strips shall be of selected material dressed to true line and uniform dimensions .
the interior surfaces of all forms in contact with concrete surfaces which will be exposed in the finished work shall be smooth and even .
no uneven or offset joints or single boards projecting so that their impressions are left in the concrete will be allowed .
forms as far as practicable shall be so constructed that the form marks will conform to the general lines of the structure .
in general grain of the lumber and direction of side joints shall be horizontal on wide faces and walls and vertical on narrow faces .
if varying widths of panels are used the wider panels shall be placed on the bottom and the narrower ones near the top .
panel end joints shall be staggered not less than three feet .
spreaders made of wood shall not be left in the concrete .
num metal fiberglass and other forms the same provisions as specified under wood forms shall apply to metal and fiberglass forms and in addition the following shall apply all bolts and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
clamps rods pins or other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and allow removal without injury to the concrete .
forms which do not present a smooth surface or are not properly aligned shall not be used .
section num num care shall be exercised to keep the forms free of dust grease or other foreign matter which will tend to discolor the concrete .
metal forms shall be used for the casting of precast ibeams box beams and voided or flat slabs where the contract number of units combined dictates production runs equal to or longer than the precasting bed length .
a limited number of units having a total combined length at least one unit length less than bed length may be cast with alternate forms as approved by the engineer .
dimensional tolerances using alternate forms shall conform with subsection numb .
w aste slabs used as a part of the forms shall be finished to the appropriate grade including any camber .
the finished slab shall not vary more than num inch from the theoretical grade nor more than num inch from a num foot straightedge in any direction .
num internal cells internal cells or voids in precast box beams shall be constructed with either wood forms conforming to subsection numcnum or with solid expanded polystyrene .
w hen solid expanded polystyrene is used the entire top surface of the polystyrene of the internal void shall be covered with num inch thick exteriorgrade plywood .
butt joints of the plywood sections shall be at least two feet away from any joined section of polystyrene .
polystyrene sections shall be securely held together by an adhesive recommended by the manufacturer of the polystyrene .
all wood forms or polystyreneplywood sections shall be securely held in place by nails waterproof adhesive or other means approved by the engineer .
internal cells shall be completely sealed so no plastic concrete is allowed to enter the formed cell .
d removal of falsework and forms no falsework or forms shall be relieved of load and no forms shall be removed without approval of the engineer .
falsework excluding bridge deck cantilevered overhangs for castinplace prestressed structures shall not be removed until after the prestressing steel has been tensioned and a minimum of num hours after the prestressing steel has been grouted .
falsework for the cantilevered bridge deck overhang shall be removed prior to prestressing but shall not be removed within seven days of concrete placement unless the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
in no case shall falsework be removed within five days of concrete placement .
on bridges with both transverse and longitudinal stressing the deck or overhang falsework shall not be removed until after the transverse prestressing has been completed unless shown otherwise on the plans .
the deck section num num overhang falsework shall then be removed prior to performing the longitudinal prestressing .
falsework for castinplace nonprestressed structures or composite superstructures excluding concrete above the bridge deck shall not be removed until either num at least num days after the last concrete has been placed in each continuous span and until the compressive strength of all placed concrete has attained at least num percent of the required numday compressive strength or num at least five days after the last concrete has been placed in each continuous span and until the concrete has attained the required numday compressive strength .
the sloped exterior girders of castinplace box girder bridges shall be laterally braced or supported until the top slab deck concrete has been placed and has attained at least num percent of the required numday compressive strength .
side forms for footings beams girders box culverts columns railings curbs or other members wherein the forms do not resist dead load bending may be removed after the concrete has set and the contractor shall cure and protect the concrete thus exposed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the contractor shall assume all risks and responsibility resulting from such removals .
forms for castinplace concrete unless otherwise specified herein shall not be removed until at least seven days after concrete has been placed in the forms without the approval of the engineer .
placement of backfill material shall be in accordance with subsection numb .
w here backfill is to be placed against both sides of a structural element the backfill elevations on one side of the element shall not exceed the backfill elevations on the opposite side of the element by more than five feet .
forms for precast concrete shall stay in place a minimum of eight hours .
the period of time between the placement of concrete in the top slab of a standard concrete box culvert num foot span or less and the removal of the slab support forms may be reduced to num hours if the top slab remains supported along the center line of the culvert span by a continuous beam and line of posts erected as a part of the original slab form and which will remain in place undisturbed a minimum of seven days .
if the engineer allows the removal of forms before the specified curing period has elapsed the contractor shall cure the concrete for the remaining required curing time by one of the methods specified in section num .
section num num forms for castinplace concrete above the bridge decks that require a class ii finish may be removed after the concrete has set providing the required surface finishing of the concrete is completed within four days .
if finishing can not be completed within four days the forms shall remain in place for seven days .
all forms shall be removed except forms used to support the deck of box girders when no permanent access to the cells is available .
care shall be taken in removing falsework and forms so as not to deface or damage the structure .
methods of removal likely to damage or cause overstressing of the concrete shall not be used .
all falsework shall be removed from under bridge superstructures prior to opening the structure to traffic .
falsework shall be removed in such a manner that excessive stresses are not induced into the structure .
holes shall not be drilled into the structure to facilitate removal of the falsework .
round blockouts may be used for such purpose providing the contractor can submit evidence that the blockouts are not detrimental to the structure and the engineer approves the use of the blockouts .
the maximum blockout diameter shall not exceed six inches .
num placing concrete a general requirements no concrete shall be placed in any structure until the placement of reinforcing steel and the adequacy of the forms and falsework have been approved by the engineer .
adequate time shall be given to the engineer to check all form dimensions embedded items and placement of reinforcing steel .
concrete shall not be placed until all necessary corrections have been made by the contractor and all work required for the proposed pour has been completed .
reinforcing steel shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of section num and the plans .
the sequence of concrete placement shall be as shown on the project plans or as approved by the engineer when not shown on the project plans .
concrete shall be placed and consolidated by methods that will not cause harmful segregation and will result in a dense homogeneous concrete free of honeycomb or voids .
concrete shall be placed in horizontal layers not over num inches in depth unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
section num num concrete shall be placed as nearly as possible in its final position and the use of vibrators for shifting the mass of fresh concrete will not be permitted .
dropping the concrete more than eight feet without the use of approved pipes or tubes will not be allowed .
care shall be taken to fill all areas within the forms and to force the concrete under and around the reinforcement without displacing the reinforcement or other embedded items .
conveying equipment shall be capable of providing a supply of concrete to the point of placement without segregation or interruptions sufficient to permit loss of plasticity between successive increments .
concrete placed in slabs and floors other than bridge decks shall be struck off by means of a screed .
the screed may be selfpropelled screed equipment or the type specified under subsection numd fixed formmanual methods .
no concrete that has partially hardened or been contaminated by foreign materials shall be deposited in the structure .
the rate of concrete placement and consolidation shall be such that the formation of cold joints within monolithic sections of any structure will not occur .
any portion of any structure displaying apparent cold joints will be rejected unless the contractor at no additional cost to the department can submit evidence that will indicate that either a cold joint does not exist or that a cold joint is not detrimental to the structure .
the engineer shall be the sole judge in determining the existence of a cold joint and whether its existence is detrimental to the structure .
the rate of concrete placement for major structures shall not be less than num cubic yards per hour unless otherwise specified or approved in writing by the engineer .
this rate shall not apply to precast concrete members .
the rate of concrete placement for the bottom slabs and girder walls of castinplace box girder superstructures shall not be less than num cubic yards per hour when the volume of concrete to be placed exceeds num cubic yards .
b bridge deck the placing of concrete will not be permitted until the engineer is satisfied that the rate of producing and placing concrete shall be sufficient to complete the proposed pour and finishing operations within the scheduled time that experienced concrete finishers are available to finish the deck and that all necessary finishing tools and equipment are on hand at the site of the work and are in satisfactory condition for use .
concrete shall be placed for the full width of the panel to be poured .
after the concrete has been placed it shall be consolidated and then struck off by means of selfpropelled screed equipment .
section num num screed equipment shall be designed to operate as close as practicable to bridge curbs or other obstructions .
screed equipment shall travel on steel rails .
rails shall be substantially supported by adjustable steel supports of adequate size securely fastened in place and spaced at sufficiently close intervals to prevent any appreciable deflection in the rails .
steel supports shall be of such types and installed in such manner that when the rail and adjustable support have been removed there will be no void in the concrete .
the steel rails for placing and finishing equipment shall be set to the correct elevation shown on the project plans or as established by the engineer .
the rails shall extend beyond both ends of the scheduled length for placement a sufficient distance that will permit the screed and finishing equipment to reach all areas of the concrete placed .
placement of the deck concrete shall be in accordance with the placing sequence shown on the project plans .
the contractor shall submit a drawing showing the placement sequence construction joint locations directions of the concrete placement and any other pertinent data to the engineer for review .
the drawing shall be submitted at least four weeks prior to the date of deck placement .
screed beams or rollers shall be made of metal or the bottom of the beam shall be metal clad .
roller screeds shall be constructed so that there will be no sag or deflection in the screeds .
screed assemblies shall be equipped with vibrators .
the screed assemblies shall be so designed that the vibrating units do not contact any reinforcing steel .
vibration shall be transmitted to the concrete in such a manner that when the motion of the machine is stopped all vibration will cease .
a slight excess of concrete shall be maintained in front of the screed at all times during the screeding operation .
the screed shall make as many passes over the slab as may be necessary to obtain a uniform surface .
the contractor shall furnish a minimum of two transverse work bridges from which floating straight edging and curing operations may be accomplished .
the work bridges shall be reasonably rigid and free of excessive deflections .
the selfpropelled mechanical bridge used for texturing the bridge deck may be substituted for one of the required work bridges .
the floating operation shall follow the screeding if required .
the float shall have a minimum diameter of three inches and have a minimum length of num feet .
the float shall be constructed so that the surface will be maintained true at all times .
section num num prior to placing concrete the screed shall be traversed the length of the proposed pour and the clearance from the screed to the reinforcing steel and deck thickness shall be checked .
the method of determining the clearance shall be approved by the engineer prior to making such checks .
the clearance shall be as indicated on the project plans with a permissible variation of num inch .
deflection of the screed rails as a result of the weight of the screed equipment will not be permitted .
all corrections necessary as a result of this operation shall be performed prior to beginning the pour .
c pumping concrete w here concrete is conveyed and placed by mechanically applied pressure the equipment shall be of suitable type and shall have adequate capacity for the work .
the concrete shall not flow either over or through any piping fittings or equipment which is fabricated of aluminum or aluminum alloys .
the operation of the pump shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
excessive segregation due to high velocity discharge of the concrete will not be permitted .
w hen pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline if it is to be used shall be ejected in such a manner that there will be no contamination of the concrete or segregation of the ingredients .
standby equipment shall be readily available to replace initial pumping equipment should breakdown occur .
d vibrating concrete all concrete in structures shall be consolidated by means of approved vibrators together with any other equipment necessary to perform the work as specified herein .
the minimum frequency of the internal vibrators shall be num vibration cycles per minute .
vibration shall be applied in the area of the freshly deposited concrete .
vibrators shall penetrate to the bottom of the concrete layer and at least six inches into the preceding layer .
the vibration shall be of sufficient duration and intensity to consolidate the concrete thoroughly within num minutes after it has been deposited in the forms .
vibration shall not be continued at any one point to the extent that localized areas of grout are formed .
application of vibrators shall be at points uniformly spaced and not farther apart than twice the radius over which the vibration is visibly effective .
revibration of concrete may be required at any time as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide sufficient equipment to insure uninterrupted and continuous vibration of concrete .
e placing concrete in water tremie concrete section num num tremie concrete shall be deposited in water only if either specified on the project plans or when directed and then only under the engineers supervision .
w hen depositing in water is allowed the concrete shall be carefully placed in a compact mass in the space in which it is to remain by means of a tremie bottom dump bucket or other approved method that does not permit the concrete to fall through the water without adequate protection .
the concrete shall not be disturbed after being deposited .
no concrete shall be placed in running water and forms which are not reasonably watertight shall not be used for holding concrete deposited under water .
a head of concrete shall remain above the discharge end of the tremie tube at all times .
f bridge deck widening w here the roadway portion of a bridge deck widening section is more than num feet in width concrete shall be placed in the roadway portion in accordance with the requirements of subsection numb .
w here the roadway portion of a bridge deck widening section is num feet or less in width the spreading and floating of concrete in the roadway portion shall conform to the requirements of subsection numd .
g pedestrian rail and fence this work shall consist of furnishing and constructing combination pedestriantraffic bridge railing pedestrian fence for bridge railing and twotube bridge rail including all hardware and materials in accordance with the requirements of the project plans .
h bridge barriers and transitions this work shall consist of furnishing and constructing bridge concrete barrier and transition including all hardware and materials in accordance with the requirements of the project plans .
i approach and anchor slabs this work shall consist of furnishing and constructing reinforced concrete approach and anchor slabs for bridges including all tools equipment labor and materials .
all work shall be in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num joints in major structures a construction joints except as otherwise specified herein construction joints shall be constructed at the locations specified on the project plans .
section num num construction joints shall be placed in the locations shown on the project plans or as approved by the engineer .
except under emergency conditions construction joints shall be planned and located in advance of placing concrete .
all construction joints shall be perpendicular to the principal lines of stress and in general located at points of minimum shear and moment .
construction joints shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
before new concrete is placed against concrete which has hardened forms shall be drawn tight against the face of the concrete wood keys shall be removed and the exposed steel or dowels and the entire surface of the construction joint shall be thoroughly cleaned .
immediately ahead of placing fresh concrete on the construction joint the old concrete shall be thoroughly saturated with water .
after placing of concrete has been completed to the construction joint and before placing fresh concrete the exposed reinforcing steel and the entire surface of the construction joint shall be thoroughly cleaned of surface laitance curing compound and other materials foreign to the concrete and clean coarse aggregate exposed .
surfaces of concrete that have been in place for eight hours or more shall be cleaned by abrasive blast methods .
surfaces of concrete that have been in place for less than eight hours may be cleaned with air and water jets provided that surface laitance and curing compound is removed .
after the concrete surfaces have been treated as specified they shall be cleaned of all dust and abrasive material .
b deck joint assemblies num description this work shall consist of furnishing and installing expansion devices including the seals anchorage system and hardware in conformity with the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials elastomer seals shall be of the compression seal or strip seal type and shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
steel shapes and plates shall conform to the requirements of astm a num or a num .
num construction requirements a general deck joint assemblies shall consist of elastomer and metal assemblies which are anchored to the concrete at the joint .
the seal armor shall section num num be cast in the concrete .
the completed assembly shall be in planned position shall satisfactorily resist the intrusion of foreign material and water and shall provide bumpfree passage of traffic .
for each size of seal on a project one piece of the material supplied shall be at least num inches longer than required by the project plans .
the additional length will be removed by the engineer and used for testing by adot materials group .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
b shop drawings prior to fabrication the contractor shall submit eight sets of shop drawings to the engineer for approval in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the shop drawings shall show complete details of the method of installation to be followed including a temperature correction chart for adjusting the dimensions of the joint according to the ambient temperature and any additions or rearrangements of the reinforcing steel from that shown on the project plans .
deck joint assemblies for prestressed concrete structures shall be installed at the narrowest joint opening possible to allow for long term creep .
c elastomer seals seals shall conform to the requirements hereinbefore specified .
d welding all welding shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num. e armor all metal for castinplace seal assemblies shall be steel conforming to the requirements hereinbefore specified .
f galvanizing all metal parts of strip seal assemblies shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of astm a num and a num unless astm a num steel is used .
bolts shall be high strength conforming to the requirements of astm a num with a protective coating of cadmium or zinc followed by a chromate and baked organic coating according to astm f num grade num num num num or num and color code a .
section num num metal parts of compression seal assemblies do not require galvanizing plating or painting .
g joint preparation and installation the contractor shall form the joint with a secondary concrete pour .
the surface of the existing concrete shall be coated prior to the concrete being placed with an approved adhesive specifically formulated for bonding new concrete to old concrete .
joints to be sealed shall be covered or otherwise protected at all times prior to installing the elastomer portion of the assembly .
the elastomer shall be installed at such time and in such manner that it will not be damaged by construction operations .
the seal element shall be installed subject to these specifications and the approval of the engineer .
immediately prior to the installation of the seal element the metal contact surfaces of the joint armor shall be clean dry and free of oil rust paint or foreign material .
any perforation or tearing of the seal element due to installation procedures or construction activities will be cause for rejection of the installed seal element .
c water stops w ater stops of rubber or plastic shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
w here movement at the joint is provided for the water stops shall be of a type permitting such movement without injury .
they shall be spliced welded or soldered to form continuous watertight joints .
d joints in deck units after erection and at the time directed by the engineer the longitudinal joints or shear keys shall be thoroughly packed with a prepackaged nonshrink grout or a sandcement grout with an expansion agent approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall then transversely connect the deck units with the connection rods stressing and anchoring them as shown on the project plans .
num finishing concrete a general requirements the appropriate finish as specified herein shall be applied to each surface of all concrete structures .
all formed surfaces will require a class i finish .
formed surfaces shall be finished immediately after the removal of forms in accordance with the requirements specified herein .
if rock pockets or honeycomb are of such an extent and character as to affect the strength of the structure section num num and to endanger the steel reinforcement the engineer may declare the concrete defective and require the removal and replacement of that portion of the structure affected at the expense of the contractor .
formed surfaces normally in view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or not covered by fill material shall present a pleasing appearance of uniform color and texture commonly achieved by the use of clean smooth plywood forms joined tightly or taped at the joints preformed metal forms paper tubing forms or speciallycoated forms .
if a pleasing appearance has not been achieved either in the formed surface or at the joints the engineer will order that the surface be finished in accordance with the requirements for a class ii finish .
b class i finish all bolts wires snapties and rods shall be clipped and recessed one inch below the surface of the concrete .
all holes honeycomb rock pockets and other surface imperfections shall be cleaned to sound concrete thoroughly moistened and carefully patched with mortar .
mortar shall be composed of one part cement two parts of fine sand water and an adhesive of a type approved by the engineer .
a portion of the required cement shall be white as required to match the color of the surrounding concrete .
small voids due to entrapped air and water in precast members need not be patched .
c class ii finish the surface shall be patched and pointed as specified herein for class i finish .
w hen the mortar used in patching and pointing has set sufficiently the surface shall be rubbed with cork wood or rubber floats polystyrene or a mechanical carborundum stone .
during the rubbing process a thin mortar matching the color of surrounding concrete may be used to facilitate producing a satisfactory lather .
the mortar used to produce a lather shall not be used in quantities sufficient to cause a plaster coating to be left on the finished surface .
rubbing shall continue until irregularities are removed and there is no excess material .
at the time a light dust appears the surface shall be brushed or sacked .
brushing or sacking shall be carried in one direction so as to produce a uniform texture and color .
d finishing bridge deck w hen specified on the project plans bridge decks that will be covered with a special riding surface or waterproofing membrane shall not be textured and shall be finished to a smooth floated surface free of mortar ridges hollows and any other projections prior to curing .
the finishing operation shall be completed before the water sheen disappears .
w ater shall not be applied to the deck surface at any time during floating or finishing except that a fog spray may be applied .
section num num fogging equipment shall be capable of applying water to the concrete in form of a fine fog mist in sufficient quantity to curb the effects of rapid evaporation of mixing water from the concrete .
the finished surface of the concrete shall be tested with a num foot straightedge placed on the deck surface .
the surface plane shall not vary by more than num inch as measured from the bottom of the straightedge on deck surfaces exposed directly to traffic .
deck surfaces to be covered with a special riding surface or waterproofing membrane shall not vary by more than num inch as measured from the bottom of the straightedge .
areas showing deviations greater than those specified shall be corrected in a manner approved by the engineer .
all corrected areas shall be textured to match the finish of the surrounding deck surface .
w here the surface will be exposed directly to traffic it shall be textured transversely after final floating in the plastic concrete or after the completion of the curing period to produce a uniformly grooved surface .
w idened bridge decks shall be finished to match the existing deck surface texture .
the apparatus producing the textured grooves in the plastic concrete shall be mechanically operated from an independent selfpropelled bridge .
the bridge shall be used for texturing only and shall be supported on the same steel rails used for the screed equipment .
the timing of the texturing operation in the plastic concrete is critical .
the texturing shall be completed before the surface is torn or unduly roughened by the texturing operation .
grooves that close following the texturing will not be permitted .
hand tine brooms shall be provided and available at the job site at all times when texturing plastic concrete .
bridge sidewalks shall be finished to a light broomed texture .
num curing concrete curing castinplace concrete and curing precast concrete members shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num supporting handling and transporting precast concrete items after prestressing precast members for major structures shall be handled or supported at or near the final bearing points for storage .
precast items shall be supported during transporting in a manner that will allow reasonable conformity to the proper bearing points .
at all section num num times the items shall be handled or supported securely in an upright position .
items that have been damaged in shipment will be rejected at the point of delivery .
lifting devices shall not project above the surface of the item after placement unless they will be embedded in a subsequent concrete pour will have a minimum concrete cover of two inches and will not interfere with the placement of reinforcing steel or concrete .
num backfilling structure backfill shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of subsection numb .
num vertical restrainers a description the contractor shall furnish and install restrainer units consisting of cables and assemblies and associated materials or components in conformance with the details shown on the project plans and in accordance with these specifications .
components required for each restrainer unit type will be detailed on the project plans and shall include various combinations of the following cables clips no .
num rebar duct tape expanded polystyrene hardboard and incidentals .
b materials cables shall be num inch diameter preformed num by num wire strand core or independent wire rope core iw rc galvanized astm a num class a coating right regular lay manufactured of improved plow steel with a minimum breaking strength of num tons .
two certified copies of mill test reports of each manufactured lengths of cable used shall be furnished to the engineer .
free ends of cable restrainer units shall be securely wrapped at each end to prevent separation .
the cable assemblies shall be shipped as a complete unit .
a minimum of one test loop assembly per bridge or one test loop assembly for every num cable assemblies which ever is greater shall be furnished to the engineer for testing .
the test loop assembly shall be fabricated from the same lot of material wire rope and fittings or clips as the cable assemblies .
the test loop assembly shall be not less than num inches or more than num inches long when pulled taut .
section num num tempered hardboard shall conform to federal specification lllbnum type ii smooth one side plain .
hardboard shall be num inch minimum thickness unless shown or specified otherwise .
expanded polystyrene shall be a commercially available polystyrene board .
expanded polystyrene shall have a flexural strength of num pounds per square inch minimum determined in accordance with astm c num and a compressive yield strength of between num and num pounds per square inch at five percent compression .
w hen shown on the plans surfaces of expanded polystyrene shall be faced with hardboard .
other facing materials may be used provided they furnish equivalent protection .
all boards shall be held in place by nails waterproof adhesive or other means approved by the engineer .
c construction requirements restrainers shall be installed as indicated on the project plans .
the contractor shall provide means of holding the cable assemblies in their planned positions .
the contractor shall be responsible for determining the required length of the cable assemblies .
num tests on finished structures num surface texture the grooves for decks exposed directly to traffic shall be num to num inch in width and num to num inch in depth .
the textured groove depth will be measured in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the center spacing of the grooves shall be num to one inch .
num dimensional tolerances a castinplace concrete the maximum allowable tolerances or deviations from dimensions shown on the project plans or the approved shop drawings shall be as follows num variation from plumb in the lines and surfaces of columns piers abutment and girder walls in any numfootorless length num inch maximum for the entire length num inch section num num num variation in crosssectional dimensions of columns piers girders and in the thickness of slabs and walls num inch num inch num girders alignment deviation from straight line parallel to center line of girder measured between diaphragms num inch per every num feet in length num variation in footing cross sectional dimensions in project plans num inches num inch num variation in footing thickness greater than specified no limit less than specified num percent of specified thickness up to a maximum of one inch does not apply to reinforcing steel placement .
num subgrade tolerances slab poured on subgrade excepting footing thickness num inch num inch num girder bearing seats deviation from plane surface flatness num inch in ten feet .
deviation from required elevation num inch num inch num castinplace concrete box girder superstructures deviation in overall depth num inch num inch section num num deviation in slab and wall thickness num inch num inch deviation of posttensioning ducts num inch b precast concrete structures num general precast units that do not comply with the dimensional tolerances specified herein will be rejected .
precast units that show evidence of cracks pop outs voids or other evidence of structural inadequacy or imperfections that will reduce the aesthetics of the unit after final placement will be rejected .
num precast concrete ibeams the maximum allowable tolerances of deviations from dimensions and details shown on the project plans or the approved shop drawings shall be as follows a length num inch b w idth flanges and fillets num inch num inch c depth overall num inch num inch d w idth web num inch num inch e depth flanges and fillets num inch f bearing plates ctr .
to ctr .
num inch per num but not greater than num inch g horizontal alignment deviation from straight line parallel to centerline of member num inch per every num feet in length h stirrup bars deviation from top of beam num inch num inch i tendon position num inch c.g .
of strand group and individual strands j horizontal position of deflection points for deflected strands num inches section num num k position of handling devices num inches l bearing plates ctr .
to end of beam num inch m side inserts ctr .
to ctr .
and ctr .
to end num inch n exposed beam ends deviation from square or designated skew horizontal num inch vertical num inch per foot of beam depth o bearing area deviation from plane num inch p stirrup bars longitudinal spacing num inch q position of posttensioning duct num inch r position of weld plates num inch num precast concrete box beams and flat slabs the maximum allowable tolerances or deviations from dimensions and details shown on the project plans or the approved shop drawings shall be as follows a length num inch b w idth overall num inch c depth overall num inch d w idth web num inch e depth top slab num inch f depth bottom slab num inch num inch g horizontal alignment deviation from straight line parallel to center line of member num inch per every num in length h camber differential between adjacent units not greater than num inch i position of tendons num inch c.g .
of strand group j longitudinal spacing of stirrup bars one inch section num num k position of handling devices num inches l slab void position num inch from end of void to center tie hole num inch adjacent to end block m square ends deviation from square num inch n skew ends deviation from designated skew num inch o beam seat bearing area variation from plane surface when tested with a straightedge through middle half of member num inch p dowel tubes spacing between the centers of tubes and from the centers of tubes to the ends and sides of members num inch q tie rod tubes spacing between the center of tubes and from the centers of tubes to the end of the member num inch r tie rod tubes spacing from centers of tubes to the bottom of the beams num inch s total width of deck theoretical width num per joint t position of side inserts num inch u position of weld plates num inch num precast minor structures the maximum allowable tolerances or deviations from the dimensions shown on the drawings shall be as follows a overall dimensions of member num inch per num feet maximum of num inch b crosssectional dimensions sections six inches or less num inch sections num inches or less and over num inches num inch sections num inches or less and over num inches num inch sections over num inches num inch c deviations from straight line section num num not more than num inch per num feet all exposed sharp corners of the concrete shall be filleted num inch with a maximum allowable deviation of num .
num compressive strength and acceptance sampling and testing for compressive strength and acceptance for compressive strength will be in accordance with the requirements of this section and subsection num .
num opening to traffic no vehicular traffic will be allowed on the structure until after the structure has been prestressed tendons grouted and all falsework removed from under the superstructure for castinplace prestressed structures .
no vehicular traffic will be allowed on the structure until at least num days after the last concrete has been placed in each continuous portion of a structure and until the compressive strength of all placed concrete has reached the required numday compressive strength on structures in which castinplace concrete has been used .
num method of measurement w hen concrete is to be paid for by the cubic yard measurement will be made in accordance with the dimensions shown on the plans or such other dimensions as may be ordered in writing by the engineer .
no deduction will be made for the volume occupied by reinforcing steel structural steel prestressing materials or pile ends embedded in the concrete .
the quantity of precast prestressed structural members shall be measured to the nearest linear foot for each type and size of girder box beam or voided slab as shown on the bidding schedule installed in place complete and accepted .
each member shall include the concrete steel reinforcement and prestressing steel enclosures for prestressing steel anchorages plates nuts elastomeric bearing pads and such other materials contained within or attached to the unit .
deck joint assemblies will be measured by the linear foot .
measurement will be made along the center line of the joint and at the surface of the roadway or sidewalk from faceofcurb or barrier to faceofcurb or barrier .
measurement will be to the nearest linear foot .
no measurement will be made for that portion of the deck joint assembly required by plan details to extend through the faceofcurb or barrier such being considered as incidental to the sealing of the joint .
measurement for vertical restrainers will be made for each restrainer acceptably installed in place for each bridge .
section num num combination pedestriantraffic bridge railing will be measured to the nearest linear foot from the outside dimensions of the parapet .
pedestrian fence for bridge railing and twotube bridge rail will be measured to the nearest linear foot from endpost to endpost .
bridge concrete barrier and transition will be measured to the nearest linear foot .
reinforced concrete approach slab will be measured to the nearest square foot .
reinforced concrete anchor slab will be measured to the nearest square foot .
no measurement will be made for the reinforced concrete anchor lugs .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for grooving of the bridge deck the cost being considered as included in contract items .
num basis of payment class s or class b concrete measured as provided above will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection numb .
the contract price paid for class s or class b concrete shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all work involved in furnishing placing and curing concrete and transporting and erecting falsework forms precast concrete items water stops roadway drains scuppers metal hinges and bearing pads to provide a concrete structure complete in place as shown on the project plans as specified herein and as directed by the engineer .
the accepted quantities of deck joint assemblies measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place including the seal anchorage system galvanizing equipment and labor .
the accepted quantities of vertical restrainers as measured above will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num lump sum payment for structures .
payment for minor structures will be made under the various sections of the specifications covering that particular minor structure .
the accepted quantities of combination pedestriantraffic bridge railing pedestrian fence for bridge railing and twotube bridge rail measured as provided above will be paid at the contract unit price complete in place including all concrete reinforcing steel rail other materials and labor .
reinforcing steel embedded below the parapet shall be included in the bridge railing .
section num num the accepted quantities of bridge concrete barrier and transition measured as provided above will be paid at the contract unit price complete in place including all concrete reinforcing steel rail other materials and labor .
reinforcing steel embedded below the barrier or transition shall be included in the barrier and transition .
the accepted quantities of reinforced concrete approach slab measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including all concrete reinforcing steel labor tools equipment and incidentals .
the accepted quantities of reinforced concrete anchor slab measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including all concrete reinforcing steel labor tools equipment and incidentals .
no payment will be made for furnishing all materials and constructing reinforced concrete anchor lugs the cost being considered as included in the contract bid item for the reinforced concrete anchor slab .
section num prestressing concrete num description the work under this section shall consist of prestressing precast and castinplace concrete by furnishing placing and tensioning of prestressing steel in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the work under this section shall also include the furnishing and installation of any appurtenant items necessary for the particular prestressing system to be used including but not limited to ducts anchorage assemblies and grout used for pressure grouting ducts for posttensioning systems and strand deflection devices such as holddowns and holdups for pretensioning systems .
prestressing for precast concrete members shall be performed by the pretensioning method .
prestressing for castinplace concrete structures shall be performed by the posttensioning method .
num materials num reinforcing steel and prestressing steel materials furnished for reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
prestressing steel shall be hightensile steel wire hightensile sevenwire strand or hightensile alloy bars as shown on the project plans .
section num num hightensile steel wire shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
hightensile sevenwire strand shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for grade num .
in addition to the numinch diameter prestressing steel shown on the project plans numinch diameter sevenwire strand may be used for castinplace prestressed structures .
hightensile alloy bars shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
all prestressing steel shall be satisfactorily protected from damage by abrasion moisture rust or corrosion and shall be free of dirt rust oil grease or other deleterious substances when installed and when tensioned .
num ducts duct enclosures for posttensioning steel shall be rigid galvanized ferrous metal .
num grout cement grout for bonding posttensioning tendons shall consist of not more than five gallons of water to one numpound bag of portland cement and may contain chemical admixtures if approved by the engineer .
chemical admixtures shall conform to the requirements of subsection num except no admixtures containing chlorides or nitrates shall be used .
portland cement shall be type ii conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
w ater shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num structural steel material furnished for structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num portland cement concrete portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for the class and strength of concrete shown on the project plans .
num construction requirements num shop drawings a general section num num shop drawings of the proposed prestressed concrete members shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the drawings shall show the method and procedure of jacking and the type size and properties of the strands and number of strands .
the size shapes dimensions and concrete cover shall be shown for the reinforcing steel including any reinforcing steel to be relocated or added .
calculations shall be submitted showing the elongation of the strands at the time of jacking the initial forces in the strands and the final working forces .
these calculations may be submitted separately from the drawings and should also include the latest calibration certifications for the jacking system .
in addition a graph shall be prepared showing the gauge pressure in pounds per square inch and force in thousands of pounds plotted through the whole range of the tensioning calibration .
not more than two years shall have elapsed between any jack calibration .
in addition to all required working drawings the contractor shall prepare composite drawings in plan elevation and section which show to scale the relative positions of all items that are to be embedded in the concrete and their embedment depth for the portions of the structure that are to be prestressed .
such embedded items include the prestressing ducts vents anchorage reinforcement and hardware reinforcing steel anchor bolts earthquake restrainers deck joint assemblies drainage systems utility conduits and other such items .
such drawings shall be adequate to ensure that there will be no conflict between the planned positions of any embedded items and that concrete cover will be adequate .
if during the preparation of such drawings conflicts are discovered the contractor shall revise its working drawing for one or more of the embedded items or propose changes in the dimensions of the work as necessary to eliminate the conflicts or provide proper cover .
any such revisions shall be approved by the engineer before work on an effected item is started .
b pretensioning method the shop drawings shall show the strand locations and harping points of the strands .
the drawings shall identify the type of finish or surface condition on the top of the precast member .
c posttensioning method the drawings shall show the type size and properties of the strands or bars and the anchorage assemblies .
the number of strands per tendon shall be shown .
details in addition to those shown on the contract plans shall be included for any additional reinforcing steel required to resist the concrete bursting stresses in the vicinity of the anchorage section num num assemblies .
the force or stress diagram shall be shown on the drawings .
the sizes shapes dimensions and concrete cover shall be shown for the ducts .
layout dimensions for locating the ducts along the tendon path shall not exceed numfoot intervals .
vent locations and details of the vents shall also be included on the drawings .
calculations shall be submitted showing the stresses in the anchorages and distribution plates .
the drawings shall include complete details of the method materials and equipment proposed for use in the prestressing operations .
such details shall outline the method and sequence of jacking complete details of the prestressing steel anchoring devices type of enclosures blockouts and all other data pertaining to the posttensioning system or operations .
num approval of prestressing systems the contractor is responsible for furnishing either basic or special anchorage devices which satisfy the anchor efficiency requirements of aashto division ii article num .
the anchor efficiency test shall be conducted by an independent testing agency acceptable to the engineer .
a basic anchorage device is an anchorage device meeting the restricted bearing compressive strength limits and the minimum plate stiffness requirements as specified in aashto article num division i design .
if basic anchorage devices are used the contractor is responsible for the design of the anchorage device and for determining the required concrete strength .
a special anchorage device is an anchorage device whose adequacy must be proven experimentally in the standardized acceptance test and met the acceptance criteria specified in aashto article num division ii construction .
if special anchorage devices are used the contractor is responsible for furnishing anchorage devices that satisfy the acceptance test requirements of division i article num and of division ii article num .
this acceptance test shall be conducted by an independent testing agency acceptable to the engineer .
the contractor shall provide records of the acceptance test in conformance with division ii article num to the engineer and shall specify auxiliary and confining reinforcement minimum edge distance minimum anchor spacing and minimum concrete strength at time of stressing required for proper performance of the local zone .
posttensioning systems which have been tested and approved by the california department of transportation caltrans will be considered an acceptable alternate to the aashto testing criteria .
a copy of the approval letter from the caltrans division of new technology and research including any details associated with the approval shall be submitted with the shop drawings by the posttensioning company .
section num num the contractor shall provide a calibration of the posttensioning jacking system and shall provide the appropriate control settings for the departments transducer electrohydraulic load cell system by testing the jacking system in a manner that has been preapproved by the engineer .
any deviation from the approved materials and details will not be permitted unless new details are submitted by the contractor and approved in advance of use .
the approval of any proposed method material or equipment shall not operate to relieve the contractor in any respect of full responsibility for successfully completing the prestressing in accordance with details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num aashto m num and as specified herein .
samples from each size and each heat of prestressing bars from each manufactured reel of prestressing steel strand from each coil of prestressing wire and from each lot of bar couplers to be used shall be furnished for testing .
w ith each sample of prestressing steel wires bars or strands furnished for testing there shall be submitted a certificate of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num stating the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the sample furnished .
all materials for testing shall be furnished by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor shall have no claim for additional compensation in the event its work is delayed awaiting approval of the materials furnished for testing .
all bars of each size from each mill heat all wire from each coil and all strand from each manufactured reel to be shipped to the job site shall be assigned an individual lot number and shall be tagged in such a manner that each lot can be accurately identified at the job site .
each lot of anchorage assemblies and bar couplers to be installed at the job site shall be likewise identified .
all unidentified prestressing steel anchorage assemblies or bar couplers recovered at the job site will be rejected .
num anchorage and distribution for posttensioned structures all posttensioned prestressing steel shall be secured at the ends by means of approved permanent type anchoring devices .
section num num the load from the anchoring device shall be distributed to the concrete by means of approved devices that will effectively distribute the load to the concrete by meeting the requirements of a basic anchorage device or a special anchorage device .
both basic and special anchorage devices must also meet the following anchor efficiency test criteria the anchorage device shall hold the prestressing steel without exceeding anticipated set at a load producing a stress of not less than num percent of the guaranteed minimum tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
num duct installation for posttensioned structures duct enclosures for prestressing steel shall be mortartight and accurately placed at the locations shown on the project plans or approved by the engineer .
ducts shall be fabricated with either welded or interlocked seams .
galvanizing of the welded seam will not be required .
ducts shall have sufficient strength to maintain their correct alignment during placing of concrete .
joints between sections of duct shall be positive metallic connections which do not result in angle changes at the joints .
w aterproof tape shall be used at all connections .
transition couplings connecting ducts to anchoring devices need not be galvanized .
all ducts or anchorage assemblies shall be provided with pipes or other suitable connections for the injection of grout after prestressing .
ducts for prestressing steel shall be securely fastened in place to prevent movement and displacement during concreting .
ducts shall be placed within num inch of the dimensions shown on the approved shop drawings .
after installation in the forms the ends of ducts shall at all times be covered as necessary to prevent the entry of water or debris .
if prestressing steel is to be installed after the concrete has been placed the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer that the ducts are free of water and debris immediately prior to installation of the steel .
prior to placing forms for closing slabs of box girder cells the contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer that all ducts are unobstructed and if the prestressing reinforcement has been placed that the steel is free and unbonded in the duct .
prior to placing the forms for closing slabs of box girder cells the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineer by aerostatic or hydrostatic tests that the duct system will not permit leakage of grout into the box girder cells .
for ducts completely encased in concrete such tests shall be performed with a charging pressure of num pounds per square inch .
once the charging pressure is attained the mechanical shutoff valve shall be closed for a period of not less than section num num five minutes .
a retained pressure of num pounds per square inch or greater after five minutes will be considered an indication of acceptable performance .
ducts not completely encased in concrete shall have the exposed areas sealed with an epoxy compound and then pressure tested to num pounds per square inch for five minutes .
a retained pressure of num pounds per square inch or greater after five minutes will be considered an indication of acceptable performance .
all leaks shall be repaired and the ducts retested prior to placing the forms .
if after two attempts to repair leaks the ducts still do not comply with the above performance requirements the engineer may accept the ducts if the engineer is satisfied that no significant leakage of grout will occur .
after completing each aerostatic or hydrostatic test the ducts shall be blown dry with oilfree compressed air .
num prestressing a general unless otherwise shown on the project plans the stresses in the prestressing steel shall not exceed those specified in the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
however when low relaxation strands are used in posttensioning castinplace concrete the jacking force shall not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
w orking force will be considered as the force remaining in the prestressing steel after all losses including creep and shrinkage of concrete elastic compression of concrete losses in prestressing steel due to sequence of stressing friction and all other losses peculiar to the method or system of prestressing have taken place or have been provided for .
all prestressing steel shall be tensioned with hydraulic jacks so that the force in the prestressing steel shall not be less than the value shown on the project plans .
each jack used shall be equipped with either a pressure gauge or a load cell to determine the jacking force .
all jacks and gauges shall be calibrated as a unit and shall be accompanied by a certified calibration chart .
all gauges shall be either a reading dial at least six inches in diameter or a digital display indicator .
the increments shown on the reading dial gauge shall not exceed two percent of the jacking force .
the digital display indicator shall be readable by normal vision at a distance greater than num feet .
all gauges shall show a load accuracy of one percent of the load from one percent to one hundred percent of the capacity of the gauge .
the certified calibration charts for the hydraulic jacks and pressure gauges may be checked before and during jacking operations with section num num departmentfurnished load cells .
if the certified calibration is found to be in error the operation shall be immediately discontinued until a new certified calibration is performed by the contractor .
w elding or a welding ground shall not be done near prestressing steel and ducts .
w elding near prestressed work shall be done only if specified on the project plans or directed by the engineer .
the tensioning process shall be so conducted that the force being applied and the elongation of the prestressing steel may be measured at all times .
the actual elongation obtained from the calibrated force value shall be compared with the theoretical calculated elongation .
if the actual measured elongation differs by more than five percent of the theoretical calculated elongation the entire operation shall be carefully checked and the source of the error determined and corrected before proceeding with the tensioning .
a record of the prestressing force and elongations shall be kept at all times and submitted to the engineer for approval .
b pretensioning precast concrete the tensioning force in pretensioned strands shall not be transferred to the member until tests on cylinder specimens made and cured under the same conditions as the member indicates the required compressive release strength has been attained .
this shall constitute the end of the curing period .
detensioning shall be performed immediately following the curing period if the concrete has been heatcured .
the release of the strands shall be from one or both ends of the casting bed depending upon which method will produce the least movement of members in the casting bed and the least horizontal eccentricity of the initial prestressing force in the member .
all pretensioned members shall be tensioned either by single strand or multiple strand jacks .
jacking the prestressing steel shall be performed in two increments .
an initial tension shall be applied to the strands to straighten them to eliminate slack and provide a starting or reference point for measuring elongation .
the final tension shall then be applied and elongation of strands measured .
anchoring devices shall be capable of holding strands with a minimum of differential slippage .
stringing of following lengths of strand incorporating points previously gripped within lengths to be stressed will not be permitted .
any rotation of the strand shall be limited to not more than one revolution per num feet of exposed strand .
splicing of strands will be permitted but only one splice per strand will be allowed .
strands to be spliced shall have the same lay or direction of twist .
splicing will not be permitted within the member .
section num num w hen ordered by the engineer prestressing strands in precast members if tensioned individually shall be checked by the contractor for loss of force not more than three hours prior to placing concrete for the members .
the method and equipment for checking the loss of force shall be subject to approval by the engineer .
all strands which show a loss of prestress in excess of three percent shall be retensioned to the original jacking force .
w hen concrete has not been placed within seventytwo hours of the tensioning of the prestressing strands retensioning of all strands will be required prior to placing of the concrete .
c posttensioning castinplace concrete prestressing steel for posttensioning which is installed in structures prior to placing and curing of the concrete shall be continuously protected against rust or other corrosion until grouted by means of an approved corrosion inhibitor placed in the ducts or applied to the steel in the duct .
if the strands are in the duct at the time concrete is placed no tensioning will be allowed until it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that the prestressing strands are free and unbonded in the duct .
w hen prestressing steel for posttensioning is installed in the ducts after completion of concrete curing and if stressing and grouting are completed within num calendar days after the installation of the prestressing steel rust which may form during the num days will not be cause for rejection of the steel .
except as herein provided castinplace concrete shall not be prestressed until at least seven days after the last concrete has been placed in the structure to be prestressed and until the compressive strength of all placed concrete has reached the required strength for jacking .
prestressing steel shall be tensioned by jacking from each end of the tendon for continuous structures unless otherwise noted on the project plans .
such jacking of both ends need not be done simultaneously unless specifically indicated on the plans or in the special provisions .
prestressing steel may be tensioned by jacking from one end only for simple span structures .
should the contractor elect to furnish an anchoring device of a type which is sufficiently large and which is used in conjunction with a steel grillage embedded in the concrete that effectively distributes the compressive stresses to the concrete the steel distribution plates or assemblies may be omitted .
w here the end of a posttensioned assembly will not be covered by concrete the anchoring devices shall be recessed so that the ends of section num num the prestressing steel and all parts of the anchoring devices will be at least two inches inside of the end surface of the members unless a greater embedment is shown on the project plans .
following posttensioning the recesses shall be filled with concrete for the structure and finished flush .
at no time will a cutting torch be allowed for cutting prestressing steel for castinplace prestressed structures .
num grouting of posttensioned members posttensioned prestressing steel shall be bonded to the concrete by completely filling the entire void space between the duct and the tendon with grout .
all of the tendons in a castinplace concrete structure shall have been fully tensioned and anchored prior to any grouting operation .
the grout shall be mixed in mechanical mixing equipment of a type that will produce uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
w ater shall be first added to the mixer followed by cement .
retempering of grout will not be permitted .
all grout shall pass through a screen with numinch maximum clear openings prior to being placed in the grouting equipment and shall be continuously agitated until it is pumped .
the quality of the grout shall be determined by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the efflux time of a grout sample immediately after mixing shall be not less than num seconds .
the maximum temperature of the grout shall be num degrees f and the minimum num degrees f. grouting equipment shall be capable of grouting at a pressure of at least num pounds per square inch and shall be furnished with a pressure gauge having a full scale reading of not more than num pounds per square inch .
maximum grouting pressure shall not exceed num pounds per square inch .
standby flushing equipment capable of developing a pumping pressure of num pounds per square inch and of sufficient capacity to flush out any partially grouted ducts shall be provided and available at the job site .
equipment capable of providing dry oil free compressed air for removing water from the ducts shall be available at the site .
all ducts shall be clean and free of deleterious materials that would impair bonding of the grout or interfere with grouting procedures .
compressed air used to blow out the ducts shall be oil free .
grout injection pipes shall be fitted with positive mechanical shutoff valves .
ejection pipes shall be fitted with valves capable of withstanding the pumping pressures .
valves shall not be removed or section num num opened until the day following the grouting operation unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
draped tendons exceeding num feet shall be vented at all high points .
grout vents shall be made of rigid tubing or pipe with threaded fittings and shutoff valves .
grout shall be injected at the low end of the duct and continuously wasted at the outlet until no visible slugs of water or air are ejected .
the outlet pipe shall then be closed and the duct shall then be pressurized .
the pressurized duct shall maintain a minimum pressure of num pounds per square inch for a minimum time of one minute .
the valve at the inlet shall then be closed while maintaining this minimum pressure .
w hen hot weather conditions would contribute to quick stiffening of the grout the grout shall be cooled by approved methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping operations .
the use of an approved chemical admixture should also be considered for increasing the pumping efficiency andor time of set .
w hen freezing weather conditions will prevail during and following the placement of grout the contractor shall provide adequate means to protect the grout in the ducts from damage by freezing .
the surfaces of concrete against which concrete encasement over anchorage assemblies is to be placed shall be abrasive blast cleaned and aggregate exposed after grouting of the ducts has been completed .
num finishing precast concrete the finishing of precast concrete bridge members shall comply with the requirements of subsection num .
in addition those exterior surfaces of exterior bridge members normally in the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be finished in accordance with the requirements for a class ii finish .
unless otherwise specified on the plans the top surface of ibeams box beams and flat slabs shall be roughened with a hand tine rake while the concrete is still plastic .
all projecting strands that are not scheduled to remain for future embedment shall be cut off at the surface of the concrete .
strands that are to remain shall be cut and bent to the dimensions shown on the plans .
if the end of the precast bridge member will not be embedded in castinplace concrete then all the strands shall be cut or ground flush with the surface of the concrete and thoroughly coated with a bitumastic type sealant .
exposed uncoated reinforcing bars and strand shall be cleaned of concrete laitance and other foreign materials .
if concrete laitance are allowed to harden and other foreign materials to remain on the bars then abrasive blast methods will be conducted for cleaning .
the cleaning of exposed epoxycoated reinforcing steel shall be limited to section num num methods not damaging to the coating the actual cleaning to be completed while the concrete laitance are still plastic .
any damage done to the epoxy coating shall be repaired in accordance with subsection numb .
the work described in this subsection shall be accomplished in the production yard of the precast manufacturer .
w hen the fabrication of any precast bridge member has been successfully completed as determined by inspection the unit will then be approved for transportation .
num method of measurement no measurement or direct payment will be made for prestressing precast concrete the cost being considered as included in the cost of the precast concrete item .
prestressing concrete in castinplace structures will be measured by the approximate station for which a lump sum item is listed in the bidding schedule for such work .
num basis of payment prestressing castinplace concrete will be paid at the contract lump sum price complete in place .
furnishing and placing reinforcement not shown on the project plans and required only for anchorage zone recesses blocks duct ties and grillage assemblies as recommended by the posttensioning system used shall be considered as included in the lump sum price paid for prestressing castinplace concrete .
furnishing and placing concrete used in girder web flares and for concrete used in external anchorage blocks including cover of distribution plates shall be considered as included in the contract lump sum price paid for prestressing castinplace concrete .
partial payments may be made in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
payments will be made on the basis of the following num installation of ducts num percent of contract lump sum num installation of tendons num percent of contract lump sum num completion of tensioning num percent of contract lump sum num completion of grouting num percent of contract lump sum section num num section num piling num description the work under this section shall consist of the furnishing and driving piles at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
piling shall consist of steel piles castinplace concrete piles precast concrete piles and timber piles and shall be of the kinds sizes and lengths shown on the project plans .
w hen load test piles are shown on the project plans pile loading tests shall be performed on said test piles in accordance with the requirements of the special provisions and as directed by the engineer .
num materials num steel piles steel piles shall be of the section shown on the project plans and shall be structural steel conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
pile points when specified on the project plans or ordered by the engineer shall be cast steel and be specially manufactured for hard pile driving .
num castinplace concrete piles castinplace concrete piles shall consist of steel shells driven permanently to the required bearing value and penetration and filled with concrete .
concrete for filling castinplace concrete piles shall be class s portland cement concrete of the compressive strength shown on the plans and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
steel shells shall be of the diameter thickness length and design shown on the project plans .
the shells shall be of sufficient strength and rigidity to permit driving and to prevent distortion caused by soil pressures or the driving of adjacent piles .
the shells shall also be sufficiently watertight to exclude water during the placing of the concrete .
unless otherwise shown on the plans or ordered by the engineer steel shells shall be equipped with closed driving tips .
driving tips shall be not more than num inch greater in diameter than the diameter of the shell at the tip .
closed driving tips may consist of flat steel plates of sufficient strength to suit pile driving conditions or may be cast steel points suitable for driving conditions .
the use of wedge tips constructed of flat steel plates will not be permitted .
section num num reinforcing steel shall be as shown on the project plans and shall conform to the provisions of section num .
num precast concrete piles precast concrete piles shall be either conventionally reinforced concrete piles or precast prestressed piles with prestressed steel strands .
concrete shall be class s concrete of the compressive strength shown on the plans and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
precast concrete piles shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of section num .
prestressing shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num using the pretensioning method .
steel reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of section num .
precast concrete piles shall be fabricated on casting beds founded on permanent concrete foundations using steel forms unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
outer forms shall enclose all except the top horizontal surface of the pile .
the side forms may have a maximum draft on each side not exceeding num inch per foot .
all corners shall be chamfered two inches or rounded to a twoinch radius .
forms for piles shall be such as to avoid the formation of fins at the intersection of the surfaces .
the top of the concrete casting shall be given a uniformly smooth finish to match the finish surface at the formed sides .
pile ends shall have plane surfaces and be perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile .
the maximum sweep deviation from straightness measured along two perpendicular faces of the pile while not subject to bending forces shall not exceed num inch in any num feet of its length num inch in any num feet or num inch times total length in feet divided by num feet .
pickup points for piles shall be plainly marked on all piles after removal of the forms unless special lifting devices are attached for pickup and all lifting shall be done at these points .
the use of special embedded or attached lifting devices the employment of other pickup points or any other method of pickup shall be subject to written approval by the engineer .
num timber piles all timber piles shall conform to the requirements of astm d num .
treated timber piles shall be either southern yellow pine ponderosa section num num pine douglas fir or larch .
all piles for permanent structures shall be cleaned .
timber piles requiring treatment shall be pressure treated in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
treated piles will be inspected for grade and quality before treatment and each piece accepted for treatment will be hammermarked on the butt end with the registered brand of the inspector .
num paint paint for steel piles or metal shells shall be of the type shown on the project plans and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num certificates certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be furnished for all steel piling and steel shells used .
num construction requirements num general w hen the project plans or specifications permit the use of more than one type of pile the same type of pile shall be used for all piles within each individual footing unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for furnishing piling of sufficient length to obtain the penetration and bearing value required .
num predrilled holes piles to be driven through embankment constructed by the contractor shall be driven in holes drilled or spudded through the embankment when shown on the project plans or ordered by the engineer .
the hole shall have a diameter of not less than the greatest dimension of the pile cross section plus six inches .
after driving the pile the space around the pile shall be filled to ground surface with dry sand or pea gravel or as specified on the plans .
num equipment a general steam or air hammers shall be furnished with boiler or air capacity at least equal to that specified by the manufacturer of the hammers to be used .
the boiler or compressor shall be equipped with an accurate pressure gauge at all times .
the valve mechanism and other parts of steam air or diesel hammers shall be maintained in first class condition so that the length of stroke and number of blows per minute section num num for which the hammer is designed will be obtained .
inefficient steam air or diesel hammers shall not be used .
b hammers for steel piles steel piles shall be driven with a steam or air or diesel hammer which shall develop an energy per blow of not less than num footpounds unless otherwise specified on the project plans .
c hammers for metal shells metal shells for castinplace concrete piles shall be driven with a steam or air or diesel hammer .
for shells driven with the aid of a mandrel the combined weight of the shell and the mandrel shall be considered as the weight of the pile .
the hammer shall develop an energy per blow of not less than one footpound for each pound of weight driven .
in no case shall the total energy developed by the hammer be less than num footpounds per blow for driving shells with a mandrel .
hammers used to drive metal shells without a mandrel shall develop an energy per blow of not less than num footpounds .
d hammers for timber piles drop hammers may be used for timber piles and shall weigh not less than num pounds and shall be equipped with efficient leads and hoisting equipment .
the fall of the hammer shall not exceed num feet .
e leads pile driver leads shall be constructed in such a manner as to afford freedom of movement to the hammer and they shall be blocked or braced so that the initial driving of the pile can be done without rotation or shifting of the pile and to assure concentric hits on the piles .
f followers driving of piles with followers will not be permitted .
num driving piles a general all piles shall be driven to a minimum bearing value or to a required tip elevation or a combination of both as follows w here a minimum bearing value is specified all piles shall be driven to a bearing value not less than that specified regardless of tip elevation .
w here a required tip elevation is specified and no bearing value is specified all piles shall be driven to at least the required tip elevation using a hammer that is capable of overcoming the soil resistance to reach that elevation without causing damage to the pile .
w here a section num num minimum bearing value and a required tip elevation are both specified the piles shall be driven to a bearing value not less than that specified and in addition if the required tip elevation has not been attained shall be driven further to the required tip elevation .
the required tip elevation shall be the estimated tip elevation shown on the project plans or the adjusted elevation when allowed by the project plans for increased bearing value .
piles shall not be driven until after the excavation or embankment in the area of the piling is complete .
any material forced up between the piles shall be removed to correct elevation without cost to the department before concrete for the foundation is placed .
piles shall be accurately spaced and shall be driven either vertically or to the batter shown on the project plans .
for trestle work and for piles which extend above ground in the completed structure care shall be exercised to obtain proper alignment .
piles materially out of line shall be pulled and redriven or additional piles shall be driven as directed .
piles which are to be capped shall be accurately cut off so that true bearing is obtained on all piles without the use of shims .
piles cut off otherwise shall be replaced .
insofar as practicable the driving of individual piles shall be a continuous operation .
b driving steel piles the heads of steel piles shall be cut squarely and a cast or structural steel driving head or cap shall be used to hold the axis of the pile in line with the axis of the hammer and to prevent excessive upsetting of the pile head under extremely hard driving conditions .
c driving metal shells an approved driving head as furnished by the manufacturer or equal which shall be of proper size and design for the particular size and type of hammer to be used shall be provided to distribute properly the hammer blows and to prevent damage to the shell while driving .
the contractor shall have available at all times a suitable light of an approved type for thoroughly illuminating the interior of the pile shells for their entire length after being driven .
any shell that shows bends kinks or other deformations incurred during the process of driving that would impair the strength or efficiency of the completed pile shall be replaced as directed by the engineer and at the expense of the contractor .
after all the shells have been driven to proper alignment spacing and elevation and cut off at the required elevation they shall be given a final inspection before they are filled with concrete .
any water or other foreign substance found in them shall be removed .
any required reinforcing steel shall be placed into the shell and supported and blocked to hold it in position during the concreting operation .
section num num upon approval the shells shall be filled with concrete in the presence of the engineer .
the concrete shall be placed in layers and vibrated in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
d driving timber piles long piles shall be adequately supported against lateral buckling during the driving process .
all timber piles shall have square recut heads and tips and when necessary the heads shall be accurately shaped or chamfered to take rings or head blocks .
collars bands or other devices shall be provided where necessary to prevent splitting or brooming of the timber piles .
tips shall be properly formed to take shoes if in the judgment of the engineer shoes are found necessary .
they shall be furnished and attached to the piles by the contractor as directed .
the contractor shall do all work necessary or incidental to the furnishing and proper fitting and fastening of said shoes to the piles and any other work necessary in driving the piles .
treated timber piles shall be carefully handled so that the outer fibers are not broken or unduly injured .
treated piles which have been roughly handled in shipment or driving will be rejected .
all treated piles shall be handled by fiber rope slings or other means which will not break the outer fibers .
the use of peavies cant hooks or other sharp tools will not be allowed .
the heads or butts of all treated timber piles except those to be encased in concrete shall be treated .
after the piles have been driven and cut off to the proper elevation for the cross cap the sawed surface shall be either covered with three applications of a mixture of num percent creosote oil and num percent roofing pitch or the surface shall be thoroughly brush coated with three applications of hot creosote oil and covered with hot roofing pitch .
a covering of no .
num gauge galvanized steel six inches in diameter larger than the diameter of the pile shall then be placed on the pile head and bent down over the sides of the pile to shed water .
e driving precast concrete piles the heads of concrete piles shall be protected from direct impact of the hammer by a cushion driving block .
the cushion shall be maintained in good condition during the entire driving operation .
f defective piles the methods used in driving piles shall not subject them to excessive and undue abuse producing crushing and spalling of concrete injurious splitting splintering and brooming of the wood or deformation of the steel .
manipulation of piles to force them into proper position if considered by the engineer to be excessive will not be permitted .
section num num a concrete pile will be considered defective if it has a visible crack or cracks extending around the entire periphery of the pile or any defect which as determined by the engineer affects the strength or life of the pile .
defective or damaged piles piles which are driven materially out of position or timber piles which have been cut too short will be rejected .
rejected piles and any falsework piles shall be removed or cut at least two feet below the final ground surface except that rejected piles which will interfere with the work shall be removed .
rejected shell piles which are left in place shall be filled with utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
all piles pushed up by the driving of adjacent piles or by any other cause shall be driven down again .
num pile splices timber piles shall not be spliced except upon written permission of the engineer in which case the method of splicing shall be in accordance with a working drawing submitted by the contractor to the engineer for approval .
metal shells and steel piles shall be spliced in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the indiscriminate splicing of steel piles will not be allowed .
splicing of metal shells and steel piles shall be accomplished only by welders who have been prequalified and certified for the type of weld required .
precast concrete piles shall not be spliced but instead shall be extended by casting a further length on top of the pile in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
precast piles shall not be extended unless specified on the project plans or authorized in writing by the engineer .
if further driving is required it shall not be done until the concrete has reached its numday strength .
in any case where the project plans do not show details of a splicing method splices shall not be made until the engineer has approved the method proposed by the contractor .
num pile cutoff after driving has been completed all piles shall be cut at the elevation determined by the engineer .
cutoff material determined to be worth salvaging shall be stockpiled at an accessible and approved location on the site for removal by department forces .
material determined to be unsatisfactory for salvaging shall be removed from the site and disposed of by the contractor .
steel piles and steel shells which are section num num less than five feet in length will be considered unsatisfactory for salvage and shall become the property of the contractor .
each pile shall be cut on a plane normal to its axis .
embedment and anchorage into concrete caps or footings shall be provided as shown on the project plans .
unless otherwise shown on the project plans precast concrete piles shall be trimmed off to three inches above the bottom of the cap or footing and the edges beveled .
vertical reinforcement shall be cut off to provide num inches of embedment and prestressing strands shall be cut off to provide num inches of embedment into the cap or footing .
any concrete damaged below cutoff elevation in the driving or cutting shall be removed to solid material and the pile built back up to elevation as specified under subsection num .
num painting metal piles w hen steel piles or metal shells for castinplace concrete piles are driven and portions of these piles either extend above the ground or above the water surface all surface thereof that will be exposed in the completed work shall be protected by three coats of paint .
the protection shall extend from an elevation two feet below the ground surface or two feet below low water level when the piles are in water to the top of the exposed portion of the pile .
painting of piles shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num determination of bearing values the bearing value of each pile that is driven by a hammer shall be measured by the driving formula as specified herein .
the contractor shall provide facilities and cooperation to the engineer as needed to obtain the data required for this purpose .
section num num table num type of pile type of hammer formula timber and steel drop p num f h s num .num metal shells for singleacting power p num f h s num .num castinplace concrete timber and steel doubleacting power use either formula p num h f ap s num .num p num e s num .num p safe allowable bearing value of piles in pounds .
f force of striking parts of the hammer in pounds .
h fall of hammer in feet .
s average penetration in inches per blow for the last five to num blows for drop hammers and the last num to num blows for steam or air and diesel hammers .
a effective area of piston in square inches .
p mean effective steam or air pressure in pounds per square inch .
e manufacturers rating of energy developed by the hammer in footpounds per blow .
the formulas in table num are applicable only when the hammer has a free fall except for doubleacting hammers .
the head of the pile is not broomed or crushed .
the penetration is reasonably uniform .
there is no appreciable bounce after the blow .
if there is an observable bounce the value of h shall be reduced by twice the bounce height .
num method of measurement num furnishing piles furnishing piles will be measured to the nearest linear foot of piles furnished in accordance with the lengths specified on the project plans or ordered by the engineer except that no measurement for payment will be made for furnishing piles which are subsequently damaged in handling or driving to the extent that they are unusable .
num driving piles driving piles will be measured to the nearest linear foot from the tip to the required cutoff point of all piles satisfactorily driven .
section num num num splicing piles splicing piles will be measured as a unit for each splice made when splicing is required because of pile lengths driven in excess of those specified on the project plans or ordered by the engineer .
no measurement for payment will be made of splices made to obtain pile lengths in accordance with the details shown on the project plans or ordered by the engineer .
num basis of payment num general the accepted quantities of each of the items of work listed on the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price as follows w hen more than one type of piling is shown each type will be listed on the bidding schedule and paid for separately .
num furnishing piles the contract price for furnishing piles shall include full compensation for furnishing precast concrete piles steel piles pile points or shoes metal shells or pipe casings for castinplace concrete piles or timber piles delivered to the site of the work in the quantities types and sizes specified and lengths specified or ordered in a condition ready to be driven .
furnishing fitting and fastening metal shoes for timber piles will be paid for in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num driving piles the contract price for driving piles shall include full compensation for placing piles and metal shells or pipe casings and driving them at the locations specified and to the required bearing value and tip elevation furnishing and placing portland cement concrete and reinforcing steel in metal shells for castinplace concrete piles for cutting piles off and furnishing and installing anchoring devices and for painting piling as required .
the contract price for driving piles shall also include full compensation for jetting drilling blasting or other similar work as necessary to obtain the required tip elevation and furnishing and attaching brackets lugs core stoppers or other similar devices to increase the bearing value of the piles when such work or materials is specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
section num num w hen the work and materials described in the preceding paragraph are not specified on the project plans but the engineer determines or it has been demonstrated to the engineers satisfaction that the required tip elevation can not be reached without jetting drilling blasting or other similar work or that the required bearing value can not be obtained without the use of brackets lugs core stoppers or other similar devices the engineer will order such work to be performed and such materials to be furnished as the engineer considers necessary under the conditions encountered in order that the required tip elevation or bearing value may be obtained .
materials and labor necessary to accomplish the requirements will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
num splicing piles the contract price for splicing piles shall include full compensation for furnishing all materials and labor and splicing piles in accordance with the specifications and the details shown on the project plans .
payment for splicing piles will be made at the contract unit price per splice determined by multiplying the contract unit price per linear foot for furnishing the pile by a factor of five .
the total quantity of splicing piles necessary to complete the work may vary considerably from the quantity shown in the bidding schedule however no adjustment in the contract unit price due to an increase or decrease in quantity as provided for in subsection num will be made for this item .
section num steel structures num description the work under this section shall consist of constructing steel structures in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the work shall include furnishing fabricating erecting and painting the structural steel and other metals and performing all work required to complete the bridge structures and other structures .
num materials num structural steel structural steel shall conform to the requirements of astm a num unless otherwise specified or shown on the plans .
all rolled section girders or structural steel plate used for the fabrication of tension flanges web plates eyebars and hanger plates and for splice plates of tension flanges and eyebars shall meet the section num num longitudinal charpy vnotch impact value requirements specified herein .
sampling procedures shall conform to the provisions in astm a num .
the h heat frequency of testing shall be used for structural steels conforming to astm a num a num and a num .
the p piece frequency of testing shall be used for structural steel conforming to astm a num .
charpy vnotch impact values shall be determined in accordance with astm e num .
charpy vnotch cvn impact values shall conform to the following minimum values impact value material footpounds at temp .
of astm a num num at num of astm a num num at num of astm a num num inches and under num at num of astm a num over num to num inches num at num of astm a num num inches and under num at num of astm a num over num to num inches num at num of if yield point of material exceeds num psi the temperature for cvn impact value for acceptability shall be reduced num of for each increment of num psi above num psi .
num steel structural rivets steel structural rivets shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num highstrength bolts nuts and washers high strength bolts shall conform to astm a num except as may be modified herein .
the maximum hardness for astm a num bolts shall be num r c. nuts and washers appropriate to the type of high strength bolt to be used shall conform to astm a num or a num for nuts and f num for washers respectively .
nuts shall be grade numh or dh for black or galvanized bolts .
for galvanized bolts the nuts shall be over tapped to the minimum amount required for the bolt assembly .
all nuts bolts and washers shall have the manufacturers markings on them .
a certificate of analysis each lot of bolts nuts or washers shall be accompanied by a certificate of analysis .
section num num the certificate of analysis shall provide a lot number corresponding to that appearing on the shipping package .
the certification shall note when and where all testing was done including the rotationalcapacity tests indicated herein and shall include zinc thickness when galvanized bolts and nuts are used .
testing to be included in the certificate of analysis shall be done according to the shipping lot method .
the minimum testing required is as follows num rotationalcapacity test high strength bolts both black and galvanized shall be subjected to a rotationalcapacity test astm a num section num and shall meet the following requirements when tested by the manufacturer a the tested bolts shall go through twotimes the required number of turns from snug tight conditions indicated in the aashto bridge specification table numb in a skidmorew ilhelm calibrator or equivalent tension measuring device without stripping or failure .
b during this test the maximum recorded tension shall be equal to or greater than num times the required fastener tension as specified in aashto table numa .
c the measured torque to produce the required fastener tension shall not exceed the value obtained by the following equation torque num pd w here torque measured torque in footpounds p measured bolt tension in pounds d diameter in feet num proof load tests proof load tests performed by the manufacturer are required for the bolts astm a num and for the nuts astm a num or a num .
the proof load tests for nuts to be used with galvanized bolts shall be performed after galvanizing over tapping and lubricating .
b acceptance testing highstrength bolts nuts and washers will be field sampled at random by the engineer according to the shipping lot method upon receipt of the bolt shipment by the contractor .
a minimum of three bolts with corresponding nuts and washers or num percent of the lot for lots in excess of num will be sampled for acceptance testing for each bolt diameter .
samples will be submitted to adot materials group or a designated testing laboratory for the following tests section num num num wedge test bolts shall be tested in accordance with astm test method f num w edge test method as described in section num of that standard .
fracture shall be in the body or threads of the bolt without any fracture at the junction of the head and body .
num rockwell hardness rockwell hardness shall be determined in accordance with astm e num within the specified maximum shown above for bolts .
nuts and washers will only be tested for rockwell hardness in accordance with astm e num to confirm compliance with astm a num or a num for nuts and f num for washers .
if any of the test bolts fail either of the above acceptance tests the entire lot which it represents will be rejected .
similarly if any of the nuts or washers fail the rockwell hardness test the entire lot of nuts or washers will be rejected .
c installation all galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye so that a visual check can be made for the lubricant at the time of field installation .
black bolts must be oily to the touch when installed .
w eathered or rusted bolts shall be cleaned and relubricated prior to installation .
installation of all high strength bolts shall be in accordance with paragraph num installation of the aashto bridge specifications .
of particular importance is obtaining the snug tight condition as defined in paragraph num for any method of final tightening .
a skidmorew ilhelm calibrator or other acceptable bolt tension indicating device will be provided by the department at each job site for use during bolt installation .
periodic tests daily when calibrated wrench tightening is used will be performed by the department to ensure the asinstalled boltnutwasher assembly meets the above requirements .
for short grip bolts direct tension indicators dti with solid plates may be used to perform this test .
the dti shall be checked with a longer grip bolt in the skidmorew ilhelm calibrator first .
the cost of furnishing test bolts nuts and washers will not be directly reimbursed but will be considered incidental to the cost of related contract items .
suitable nuts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num and suitable hardened washers shall conform to the requirements of astm f num .
section num num num bolts and nuts bolts and nuts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num steel forgings steel forgings shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num castings carbon steel castings gray iron castings and malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num bronze castings and copperalloy plates bronze castings and copperalloy bearings and expansion plates shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num welded stud shear connectors shear connector studs shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grades num num or num and to the requirements of section num division ii construction steel structures of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num bearing pads a preformed fabric pads preformed fabric pads shall conform to the requirements of section num .
b elastomeric bearing pads elastomeric bearing pads shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num certification of structural steel certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
the certificates shall include mill heat test reports showing the properties of each heat number .
mill test reports for structural steel used for those items specified in subsection num shall also include the results of the charpy vnotch impact test values .
num construction requirements num shop and working drawings section num num prior to fabrication the contractor shall prepare shop and working drawings in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w orking drawings for steel structures shall show complete fabrication and erection details including full detailed dimensions and sizes of component parts of the structure and details of miscellaneous parts such as pins nuts bolts and rivets .
num fabrication fabrication of all metal for steel structures shall be in accordance with the approved shop drawings and shall conform to the requirements of division ii construction section num steel structures of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges except as specified herein .
the structural steel fabricating plant shall be certified under the aisc quality certification program as follows category i fabrication of simple or continuous rolled beam bridges .
category iii fabrication of all bridge structures other than simple or continuous rolled beam bridges .
fabrication of steel components shall not begin until arrangements have been made for shop inspection .
in planning the surfaces of expansion bearings the cut of the tool shall be in the direction of expansion .
num substitutions substitutions of structural steel sections having different dimensions or properties of equal or greater value than those shown on the project plans may be made only when approved in writing by the engineer .
num shop inspection in order that shop inspection may be provided for structural steel fabrication written notice shall be given to the engineer at least three months prior to beginning work in the shop and the engineer shall be verbally notified at least num hours prior to the need for inspection in the shop .
the contractor shall furnish all facilities for the inspection of material and workmanship in the shop in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
inspection at the shop is intended as a means of facilitating the work and avoiding errors and it is expressly understood that it will not relieve section num num the contractor from any responsibility in regard to defective material or workmanship and the necessity of replacing defective material or doing the work again .
reinspection costs incurred by the department due to contractor errors shall be reimbursed by the contractor .
num galvanizing a structural steel for bridges shall only be galvanized when specified on the project plans .
w hen galvanizing is so specified the members shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the weight of the coating total for both sides shall be the weight specified .
b structural steel for minor structures and miscellaneous work shall be galvanized when specified on the project plans .
w hen galvanizing is so specified the members shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the weight of the coating total for both sides shall be the weight specified .
steel posts shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num or astm a num .
steel fittings hardware etc .
shall be galvanized when specified in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the weight of the coating shall be as specified in astm a num .
num welding all welding and inspection of welding for structural steel except for tubular structures shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the most recent edition of the ansiaashtoaw s bridge w elding code .
all other references to the american w elding society aw s structural welding code aw s dnum and the aashto standard specifications for welding of structural steel highway bridges are deleted .
the use of electroslag welding process on structural steel will not be permitted .
in addition to the above requirements welding of fracture critical members fcms shall be performed in accordance with the aashto guide specifications for fracture critical nonredundant steel bridge members num revised to date .
num painting all steel and iron surfaces shall be cleaned and painted in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num erection section num num erection of steel structures shall be in accordance with the requirements of division ii construction section num steel structures of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
straightening of bent metal members will not be permitted unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
num method of measurement structural steel for steel structures will be measured by the pound or will not be measured but will be paid for on a lump sum basis in accordance with the following a weight basis unless otherwise specified this method of measurement shall conform to the requirements of article num division ii construction section num steel structures of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges and the pay quantities of structural steel will be determined on the basis of computed net weights .
the weights of plates num inches or less in width will be computed on the basis of the nominal weight for their width and thickness as shown on the project plans .
num structural steel all rolled section girders welded plate girders structural steel plate or shapes used for splice plates stiffeners or diaphragms shear connectors corresponding weld metal nuts and bolts will be measured for payment as structural steel .
num structural steel miscellaneous all other structural steel items including rockers rollers bearing plates pins and nuts brackets plates shapes for sign mounts on bridges steel traffic rail corresponding weld metal nuts and bolts and similar steel items not covered in other contract items will be measured for payment as structural steel miscellaneous .
b lump sum basis the project plans will show an estimated net weight of structural steel required for the structure work .
this quantity shall be considered as approximate only .
it shall be the responsibility of the bidder to determine the exact quantities of structural steel from computations based upon the details and notes shown on the project plans .
no measurement of the quantities of structural steel determined by the contractor will be made unless an alteration in the work is ordered .
w hen an alteration in the work is ordered which increases or decreases section num num the quantity of structural steel required the amount of the increase or decrease will be measured by the pound .
num basis of payment structural steel for use in steel structures will be paid at the contract unit price per pound or at the contract lump sum price complete in place .
w hen the lump sum basis of payment is specified and an alteration in the work is ordered which increases or decreases the quantity of structural steel required a theoretical unit price determined by dividing the lump sum bid price by the total estimated quantity of structural steel shown on the project plans will be the basis for payment for the increase or decrease in quantity .
the theoretical unit price will be subject to adjustment all in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for any additional weight resulting from substitution of structural steel sections as specified in subsection num .
partial payment may be made in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num steel reinforcement num description the work under this section shall consist of fabricating furnishing and placing steel reinforcement of the quality coating type size shape and quantity designated all in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials steel reinforcing bars wire and welded wire fabric shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements num general w hen the project plans show a bar list and bending diagram the contractor shall carefully check the schedule against the details in advance of ordering materials .
w hen bar bending diagrams are not shown on the project plans shop drawings and lists showing the bending of reinforcement bars shall be submitted by the contractor to the engineer for approval but such section num num approval shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the correctness of such drawings and lists .
any discrepancy or error found by the contractor in checking a bar list or bending diagram shown on the project plans or in preparing shop drawings or lists shall be reported immediately to the engineer and the discrepancy or error shall be corrected in advance of fabrication and delivery of materials .
steel reinforcement shall be protected at all times from damage .
w hen placed in the work all reinforcement shall be free of dirt oil paint and grease .
rust surface irregularities or mill scale shall not be cause for rejection provided the weight dimensions crosssectional area and tensile properties of a manually wire brushed test specimen are not less than the requirements of these specifications .
w hen bending is required it shall be done without the use of heat and bars having cracks or splits at the bends will be rejected .
grade num bars which are no .
num and larger and all sizes of grade num bars shall not be rebent at the same location .
grade num bars which are size no .
num and smaller may be rebent once at the same location .
reinforcement shall be accurately fabricated and placed as shown on the plans and shall be firmly held in place by wire ties at all intersections and splices with num gauge or heavier tie wires and with precast mortar blocks or ferrous metal chairs spacers metal hangers supporting wires or other approved supports at the spacing necessary to maintain the specified clearance of the reinforcing steel .
the use of pebbles broken stone concrete masonry blocks brick metal pipe or wood blocks will not be permitted for the purpose of spacing or support .
w here reinforcement spacing is less than num inches in each direction alternate intersections may be tied .
tack welding of reinforcement will not be permitted unless approved in writing by the engineer .
if tack welding of reinforcement is approved the reinforcement shall be deformed and shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
before placing the pier column and superstructure reinforcement the contractor shall insure that the vertical reinforcing steel will not interfere with the horizontal cap reinforcing steel and tendon ducts .
reinforcing steel shall not be cut to facilitate installation .
the following tolerances will be allowed when placing tying and supporting reinforcing steel in slabs and beams horizontal bars shall be within num inch measured vertically of the position indicated on the plans .
in vertical walls columns wings and similar members clearance from the forms shall be within num inch of the clearance shown on the plans .
section num num in slabs or walls long runs of bars may vary up to two inches in spacing however the specified number of bars shall be placed .
no concrete shall be placed until reinforcement in the member has been inspected and approved by the engineer .
reinforcement which does not conform to the above tolerances shall be adjusted or repaired prior to concrete placement .
w hen required by the project plans all reinforcement and all other steel elements to be encased in the concrete of a bridge deck or bridge barriers shall be epoxy coated .
reinforcement that is to be partially within these concrete elements but extends into other structural elements will not require coating on that part which is to be outside the bridge deck or bridge barrier concrete .
num splicing and lapping all reinforcement shall be furnished in the full lengths indicated on the project plans .
splicing of bars except as shown on the plans will not be permitted without the engineers approval .
splices shall be staggered as far as possible .
the type and method of splices or connections shall be approved by the engineer .
the contractor may use either lap splices full welded splices or mechanical connections for reinforcement bars up to and including bar size no .
num .
w here the bar size exceeds no .
num full welded splices or mechanical connections shall be used .
w elded splices shall not be used on epoxycoated bars and no welding shall be performed close enough to epoxycoated bars to cause any heating of the coating .
all exterior surfaces of positive connectors for epoxycoated bars shall have the same coating as the bar .
in lapped splices the bars shall be placed in contact with one another and wired together in such a manner as to maintain a clearance of not less than the minimum clear distance to other bars and the minimum distance to the surface of the concrete as specified in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
lap lengths shall be as shown on the plans .
a full welded splice is one in which the bars are butted and welded to develop in tension at least num percent of the specified yield strength of the bar .
test requirements shall be as specified in aw s d num .
w elding shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
a mechanical connection is one in which the bars are connected to develop an ultimate strength in tension or compression as required of at least num percent of the specified yield strength of the bar .
except as otherwise specified mechanical splices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as approved by section num num the engineer .
as a condition of approval the contractor shall make three test splices in the presence of the engineer of each size it intends to splice .
two of the test splices shall be tension tested to num percent of the specified yield strength of the bar and one splice shall be tested to destruction by an approved laboratory and certified reports of the tests shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
field splices shall be subject to visual inspection and physical testing .
a minimum of two percent of the field splices chosen at random by the engineer shall be removed and tested to num percent of specified yield strength by the engineer .
samples shall be at least num inches long with the splice at mid length .
sheets of welded wire fabric or bar mat reinforcement shall overlap each other sufficiently to maintain a uniform strength and shall be securely fastened at the ends and edges .
the edge lap shall not be less than one mesh width .
num epoxycoated reinforcement a general the requirements of this subsection for epoxycoated reinforcement are in addition to the previous requirements which apply to uncoated reinforcement .
b field operations epoxycoated bar reinforcement all handling systems for coated bars shall have padded contact areas for the bars wherever possible .
all bundling bands shall be padded and all bundles shall be lifted with a strong back multiple supports or a platform bridge so as to prevent bar to bar abrasion from sags in the bar bundle .
the bars or bundles shall not be dropped or dragged .
all hardware that will remain permanently in concrete using epoxy coated reinforcement shall be made of or coated with a dielectric material .
such hardware includes reinforcement chairs tie wires screed rail supports or any other item that would be a potential source of corrosion .
the specific hardware that the contractor proposes to use shall be approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall be required to field repair damaged areas of the coating and to replace items exhibiting severely damaged coatings .
the material used for field repair shall be that supplied by the coating applicator .
field repair shall be required wherever the area of coating damage exceeds two percent of the surface area of the bar in a onefoot length and the damaged spot is larger than num by numinch .
field repair will not be allowed on bars which have severely damaged coatings .
a severely damaged coating is defined as a coating which has a total damaged area greater than five percent of the surface area section num num of the reinforcing bar .
the engineer shall be the sole determiner of the severity of damaged area for purposes of repair or replacement .
a reinforcing bar having a coating determined by the engineer to be severely damaged shall not be incorporated in the work and it shall be removed from the work site .
all such bars shall be replaced in kind by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num dowel placement dowel placement shall consist of drilling or coring dowel holes furnishing and placing setting materials and placing metal dowels in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of the specifications .
the diameter of dowel holes shall be num inch larger than the diameter of the dowels to be placed and the depth of the holes shall be as shown on the plans .
setting materials shall be an approved epoxy adhesive unless otherwise specified on the plans .
the minimum tensile pull out strength of the dowel anchorage shall be as specified on the plans .
if required by the engineer the contractor shall submit details of the anchorage system to the engineer prior to dowel placement .
num method of measurement num general no measurement for payment will be made for steel reinforcement whether coated or uncoated as required which is included in a precast concrete item which is listed in the bidding schedule as a unit to be paid for at a lump sum price .
steel reinforcement that is required on the plans to be epoxycoated for use in bridge concrete and that is partially within the deck yet projects into other structural elements shall be included in the measurement and payment for reinforcing steel epoxy coated .
the contractor is required to coat only that part of the reinforcement that is contained in the deck or concrete bridge barriers .
except for that contained in a precast concrete item to be measured as a unit steel reinforcement will be measured as a lump sum item or by the pound as listed in the bidding schedule .
epoxycoated reinforcement will be measured separate from uncoated reinforcement .
dowel placement will be measured by the unit each .
num lump sum basis section num num the project plans will show an estimated net weight of reinforcing steel required for the work .
this quantity shall be considered as approximate only .
it shall be the responsibility of the bidder to determine the exact quantities of all reinforcing steel required by computations based upon the details and notes shown on the project plans .
it is understood that the quantities of all reinforcing steel required for the work shall be furnished by the contractor including samples for testing .
measurement of the quantity furnished will be made either when an alteration in the work is ordered or when evidence shows or there is good reason to believe that the actual quantity of reinforcing steel varies from the total quantity shown on the project plans by three percent or more .
w hen an alteration in the work is ordered or when the quantity varies as herein specified the actual quantity of reinforcing steel will be computed by the engineer and the amount of the increase or decrease will be measured by the pound .
num weight basis reinforcing steel will be measured in pounds based on the total computed weight for the size and lengths of bars wire or welded wire fabric as shown on the plans or authorized .
the weight of bars will be calculated from weight shown in table num .
the weight of welded wire fabric will be computed from the theoretical weight of plain wire of the corresponding gauge .
if the weight per square foot is shown on the plans that weight will be used .
in measurement of the weight of epoxycoated steel reinforcement no addition to or deduction from the weights shown in table num will be made because of additional requirements for blast cleaning and epoxy coating .
w hen laps are made for splices other than those shown on the plans for the convenience of the contractor the extra steel will not be included in the measurement for payment .
the measurement of samples for testing will be the weight in pounds of the samples selected by the engineer or the weight in pounds of the full length of reinforcing steel bars supplied for sampling purposes when sampling is done at the construction site .
section num num table num deformed bar designation no .
weight pounds per linear foot nominal diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note the nominal diameter of a deformed bar is equivalent to the diameter of a plain round bar having the same weight per foot as the deformed bar .
bar numbers are based on the number of eighths of an inch included in the nominal diameter of the bars .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of reinforcing steel of the type shown in the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price or the contract unit price per pound complete in place .
the lump sum price or unit price per pound shall also include the cost of chairs supports fasteners connections tie wire and any splices not specifically shown on the plans .
if the engineer permits the substitution of larger bars than those specified or splices not shown on the plans payment will be made only for the amount of steel which would have been required if the specified size and length had been used .
the accepted quantity of dowels placed measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place .
steel reinforcement furnished for dowels will be measured and paid for under the reinforcing steel item .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for furnishing and placing dowels which are required to replace existing reinforcing steel that is damaged as a result of the contractors operations .
section num overhead sign structures num description section num num the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing overhead sign structures in accordance with the details shown on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
sign structures shall be of the following types bridge truss cantilever truss tubular overhead tubular cantilever bridge tapered tube single beam cantilever tapered tube double arm and sign attachment structure for existing bridge .
the type of sign structure to be installed at each location will be shown on the project plans .
num materials num general certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for all structural steel .
mill test reports for structural steel used as specified under subsection num shall include the results of the charpy vnotch impact test values .
num structural shapes plates and bars shapes plates and bars for trusses columns and walkway assemblies of the sign structures shall be fabricated from structural steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num .
structural steel used for the fabrication of column or girder flanges web plates and truss chord angles shall be in accordance with longitudinal charpy vnotch impact test values specified in subsection num .
num tapered tubes tapered tube beams arms and poles for the bridge single beam sign structures and for the cantilever double arm sign structures shall be fabricated from structural steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num grade a .
num pipe poles for cantilever truss poles shall be welded or seamless steel pipe conforming to the requirements of astm a num type e or s grade b .
num bolts nuts and washers highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
all other bolts and nuts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num and shall be furnished with commercial quality washers .
anchor bolts for the sign foundations shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
section num num all bolts nuts and washers except highstrength bolts and anchor bolts shall be cadmium plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num or zinc plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
num concrete concrete for all sign structure foundations shall be class s f c num pounds per square inch conforming to the requirements of section num .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel bars shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
reinforcing steel wire shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num nonshrink grout nonshrink grout shall conform to the requirements of the corps of engineers specification for nonshrink grout crdc num and shall be approved be the engineer .
grout shall be mixed handled and placed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num construction requirements num shop drawings the contractor shall furnish shop drawings for approval by the engineer prior to fabrication of the sign structure material .
shop drawings shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the foundation shall be set at the elevation called for in the project plans and the embankment graded to match the top of the foundation as directed by the engineer .
num fabrication fabrication of component parts of the sign structures shall be in accordance with the approved shop drawings and shall conform to the requirements of division ii construction section num steel structures of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
fabrication of steel components shall not begin until arrangements have been made for shop inspection .
shop inspection of structural steel fabrication shall conform to subsection num .
num welding w elding of tubular structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num of aw s dnum structural w elding code of the american section num num w elding society .
the welding of all other structural steel shall conform to subsection num .
num galvanizing all steel surfaces of sign structures shall be galvanized after fabrication .
galvanizing shall conform to the requirements of astm a num and a num .
num foundations reinforced concrete foundations for the sign structures shall be constructed to conform to the details shown on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of subsection num through num .
concrete shall be placed finished and cured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num method of measurement overhead sign structures will be measured by the unit of each type or types of sign structures furnished and erected .
foundations for the sign structures will be measured by the unit of each type or types of foundations constructed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of various types of overhead sign structures and foundations measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit prices complete in place .
the contract unit price paid per unit for each type and size of sign structure designated in the bidding schedule shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in furnishing and erecting the sign structures complete in place including painting galvanizing if necessary furnishing and placing nonshrink grout furnishing tapered tube sign mounting brackets and all necessary hardware except for anchor bolts which are considered as part of the foundations all as shown on the plans and as specified in these specifications .
the contract unit price for each type of sign structure foundation designated in the bidding schedule shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in constructing foundations complete in place including steel reinforcement furnishing and installing anchor bolts all necessary excavation backfilling and disposing of excess excavated material all as shown on the plans and as specified in these specifications .
section num num section num roadside sign supports num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing roadside sign supports in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
sign supports shall consist of breakaway perforated and uchannel sign posts .
the type size and installation location of the sign posts will be shown on the project plans .
num materials num general certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for breakaway sign post shapes certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for perforated sign posts and uchannel sign posts .
num breakaway sign post shapes posts shall be fabricated from structural steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num grade num or astm a num at the option of the contractor .
base plates for the breakaway connections and friction fuse plates and back plates for the post hinge assembly shall be fabricated from the same type structural steel selected for the sign posts .
all plate holes shall be drilled and all plate notches shall be saw cut except that flame cutting will be permitted provided all edges are ground .
flange holes shall be drilled or subpunched and reamed .
the posts shall be saw cut for the hinge and bolted as detailed on the plans .
bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
posts and plates shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
bolts nuts and washers shall be cadmium plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num or zinc plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
num perforated sign posts single and telescoping perforated posts shall be square tube fabricated from galvanized sheet steel .
the sheet steel shall have a thickness of section num num num inches num gauge or num inches num gauge as required by the project specifications .
sheet steel shall conform to the requirements of astm a num for either sq grade num or sq grade num class num and be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of coating designation gnum .
the posts shall have a wall thickness including coating of num to num inches for num gauge and num to num inches for num gauge .
posts shall be welded directly in the corner by high frequency resistance welding or equal .
the outside edges of the posts shall be scarfed as necessary to produce a standard corner radii of num num inch .
external welded surfaces and scarfed areas shall be regalvanized after fabrication .
holes num num inch in diameter shall be provided on oneinch centers along all four sides over the entire length of the post .
the holes shall be laterally centered on the longitudinal centerline of each face .
hole positioning and spacing shall be the same on all four faces such that the hole centerlines for each group of four holes shall pass through a common point on the longitudinal centerline of the tube .
for telescoping posts holes shall be in proper alignment to allow numinch diameter bolts to pass through the entire post .
the finished posts shall be straight and have a smooth uniform finish .
all consecutive sizes of posts shall be freely telescoping for not less than num feet of their length without the necessity of matching any particular face to any other face .
perforated sign posts shall be manufactured by an approved manufacturer .
a list of approved manufacturers of perforated sign posts is shown on the departments approved products list apl .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
bolts shall conform to the requirements of sae specification j num grade num or astm a num type num .
nuts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade a. w ashers shall conform to the requirements of astm f num .
bolts nuts and washers shall be zinc coated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num or cadmium plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
num uchannel sign posts uchannel posts shall be fabricated from rerolled rail steel or hotrolled carbon steel bars .
section num num prior to rerolling the rail steel the rail nominal weight shall be num pounds per yard and shall meet the requirements of astm a num pertaining to quality assurance .
yield point of the steel shall be num pounds per square inch minimum .
the cast heat analysis of the steel shall conform to the following requirements element composition percent carbon num num manganese num num phosphorus max .
num sulfur max .
num silicon num num posts shall be a uniform modified flanged channelsection as shown in the plans .
w eight of the posts shall be three pounds per lineal foot plus or minus five percent .
the post shall be punched with continuous numinch diameter holes on oneinch centers .
the first hole shall be one inch from top and bottom of post .
the post shall consist of two parts a sign post and a base post .
the sign post lengths shall be supplied in sixinch increments up to num feet as required for the installation location .
the base posts shall be num inches in length pointed at one end and have at least eighteen holes in the base post starting one inch from the top and continuing at oneinch increments .
posts shall be machine straightened to have a smooth uniform finish free from defects affecting their strength durability or appearance .
all holes and rough edges shall be free from burrs .
the permissible tolerance for straightness shall be within num inch in three feet .
posts shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
bolts nuts washers and spacers shall be cadmium plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num or zinc plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
for shipment the posts shall be nested and fastened in such a manner that they will not slip .
care shall be taken during shipping to minimize the rubbing of posts together resulting in damage to the galvanized finished surface .
excessive damage to the finish of the posts during shipping or handling will result in rejection of the damaged posts .
posts shall be bundled in groups of no more than num .
uchannel base posts shall be driven into the ground to a depth of num inches .
w here rock is encountered the rock shall be cored drilled or removed to a minimum diameter of eight inches and to a depth sufficient to place portland cement concrete two inches below the section num num bottom of the base post and fill the hole to within one inch of the top .
solid rock coring or drilling is not required to continue beyond num inches in depth regardless of the depth at which the rock is encountered .
the base post may be cut at the bottom prior to being set in portland cement concrete where rock does not permit use of full length base post .
num concrete concrete for breakaway sign post foundations shall be class b except that utility concrete may be used for foundations using stub post sizes s num x num and s num x num .
class b concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num and utility concrete to the requirements of section num .
concrete for perforated sign posts foundations and uchannel sign post foundations when required shall conform to the requirements of subsections num and num .
foundation stub posts shall be fabricated from the same type of steel selected for the appropriate sign posts .
breakaway stub posts shall be galvanized a minimum of num inches down from the top of the stub .
galvanizing shall be in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
reinforcing steel bars for breakaway sign post foundations shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
reinforcing steel wire shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num construction requirements fabrication of the breakaway sign posts stub posts and base plates shall conform to the requirements of subsection num except that shop drawings will not be required .
breakaway sign post lengths will be determined by the engineer at the time of construction staking and will be furnished to the contractor prior to ordering fabrication of the sign posts .
perforated and uchannel sign post lengths shall be determined by the contractor at the time of construction staking .
posts shall be cut to the proper lengths in the field .
splicing will be permitted for single perforated posts however splices will be limited to one per each post installation and the splicing shall be accomplished in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the minimum length of any spliced piece of post shall be two feet .
foundations for the breakaway sign posts perforated sign posts and when required uchannel posts shall be constructed to the details and dimensions shown on the plans .
concrete shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of section num or num as the case may be .
excavation shall conform to the requirements of subsection numa .
section num num sign posts shall be erected plumb and shall be bolted to the foundation stub or base posts in accordance with the procedure specified on the plans .
num method of measurement breakaway sign posts will be measured by the linear foot for each size of post furnished and erected .
the length of each size of post will be measured from the bottom of the upper base plate to the top of the post measured to the nearest num feet .
the total length of all posts of the same size will be rounded to the nearest foot .
perforated sign posts will be measured by the linear foot of each type of post furnished and installed .
the length of each type of post will be measured from the top of the concrete post foundation to the top of the post measured to the nearest num feet .
the total length of all posts of the same type will be rounded to the nearest foot .
telescoping post members will be considered as one post after installation and will not be measured separately .
uchannel posts will be measured as each .
foundations for signposts will be measured by the unit for each type of foundation constructed except that concrete and excavation when required for setting uchannel base posts will be considered as part of the post .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of breakaway posts perforated posts uchannel posts and foundations for the sign posts measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit prices complete in place .
the contract unit price paid per linear foot for each size of breakaway sign post each type of perforated sign post and each installation of uchannel post designated in the bidding schedule shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in furnishing and erecting the sign posts complete in place including galvanizing and furnishing all metal plates and hardware all as shown on the plans and as specified herein .
the contract unit price paid per unit for each type of sign foundation designated in the bidding schedule shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all the work involved in constructing foundations complete in place including the steel stub posts lower base plate and steel reinforcement except for stub posts s num x num and s num x num for the breakaway sign post foundation the portion of perforated post within the foundations galvanizing the posts and excavation all as shown on the plans and as specified herein .
section num num section num sign panels num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing sign panels in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements set forth herein .
the sign panels shall be of the following types extruded aluminum sign panels w ith demountable characters flat sheet aluminum sign panels w ith directapplied or silkscreened characters w arning marker and regulatory sign panels route shields for installation on sign panels exit only for installation on sign panels num materials num general certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for all materials required for fabricating sign panels including retroreflective sheeting .
shipment storage and handling of sign panels shall conform to the recommendations of the manufacturers of the sign panel components .
fabricated signs and overlay sheets shall be shipped on edge .
damage to the sign panel or legend resulting from banding crating or stacking may be cause for rejection of the signs .
num extruded aluminum sign panels with demountable characters panels shall be fabricated from numinch wide aluminum extrusions formed from aluminum alloy numtnum conforming to the requirements of astm b num and fastened together by bolt connections as shown on the plans .
panel facing shall be covered with retroreflective sheeting of the color specified on the plans .
the retroreflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the letters numerals symbols borders and other features of the sign message shall conform to the requirements of subsection num demountable characters .
section num num panel surfaces to be covered with retroreflective sheeting shall be prepared in accordance with the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
panel surfaces not covered with sheeting shall be etched in accordance with the recommendations of the extrusion manufacturer to reduce glare from reflected sunlight .
after all fabrication has been completed including the cutting and punching of holes except holes for demountable letters numerals symbols and borders the aluminum extrusions shall be degreased and the retroreflective sheeting shall be applied .
aluminum extrusions shall be flat with num inch of tolerance allowed in an eightfoot length with proportionally greater tolerances permitted on lengths greater than eight feet .
flatness tolerance across the face of each extrusion shall be num percent of the width .
aluminum extrusions shall be bolted together on numinch centers with a maximum allowable gap of num inch between extrusions .
shop fabricated subassemblies shall be rigidly braced for transportation and erection .
hardware utilized to fasten panels to supports shall conform to the panel manufacturers recommendations .
each completed sign panel shall be provided with a side trim molding fabricated from extruded aluminum alloy numtnum conforming to the requirements of astm b num .
the trim molding shall be fastened to each individual numinch aluminum extrusion with two numinch diameter selfplugging aluminum blind rivets num inches from either edge .
the exposed surface of the side trim molding shall be treated by etching as recommended by the manufacturer to reduce glare from reflected sunlight .
each completed sign panel shall be shipped with sufficient bolt clamps placed to install the panel on the sign posts as shown in the plans .
bent bolt channels will be cause for rejection of the sign panel .
num blank num blank num blank num blank num flat sheet aluminum sign panels with directapplied or silkscreened characters panels shall be fabricated from numinch thick numhnum aluminum alloy conforming to the requirements of astm b num .
section num num panel facing shall be prepared and covered with retroreflective sheeting in accordance with the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
the color of the sheeting shall be as specified on the plans or as shown in the manual of approved signs .
all surfaces not covered shall be etched to reduce glare from reflected sunlight .
the retroreflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of section num .
splicing of retroreflective sheeting shall not be allowed on sign panels having a minimum dimension up to and including four feet .
messages shall be reflectorized white or if called for on the plans opaque black and shall be produced by either silk screening or directapplying lettering as specified under subsection num .
num blank num warning marker and regulatory sign panels panels shall be fabricated from flat sheet aluminum and shall be reflectorized as specified herein .
panels shall be fabricated in one piece from numinch thick numhnum or numtnum aluminum alloy conforming to the requirements of astm b num .
all surfaces of panels to be covered with retroreflective sheeting shall be prepared in accordance with the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
surfaces not covered shall be etched to reduce glare from reflected sunlight .
retroreflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of section num .
w arning signs shall be reflectorized with yellow retroreflective sheeting .
regulatory signs shall be reflectorized with silverwhite retroreflective sheeting .
reflectorized red signs shall be reflectorized with silverwhite retroreflective sheeting .
the red color shall be produced by silk screening .
regulatory signs with reflectorized red circles and slashes shall be reflectorized with silverwhite retroreflective sheeting .
the red color shall be produced by silk screening .
interstate route markers shall be cut to shape .
the colors and legend shall be as shown on the plans and shall be reflectorized with silverwhite retroreflective sheeting .
the interstate route colors shall section num num be silk screened .
the numerals may be silkscreened or directapplied characters .
united states state route and cardinal direction markers shall be reflectorized with silverwhite retroreflective sheeting unless otherwise shown on the plans .
splicing of retroreflective sheeting shall not be allowed on sign panels having the minimum dimension up to and including four feet .
sign panels shall be attached to the posts with bolts as shown in the plans .
a nylon washer conforming to ansi standard and having a diameter two times the bolt head diameter shall be placed between the bolt head and panel face .
fastening nuts shall be heavy hex however standard nuts may be used if a flat wash is placed between the nut and sign posts .
num blank num route shields for installation on sign panels route shields shall be cut to shape and shall consist of numinch thick numhnum aluminum alloy conforming to the requirements of astm b num .
the aluminum shall be degreased and etched in accordance with the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
retroreflective sheeting shall be silverwhite and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the size of the numerals shall be half the height of the shield .
route shields shall be attached to the sign panel with self plugging aluminum blind rivets with a numinch thick nylon spacer on each rivet between the route shield and the sign panel .
num exit only for installation on sign panels exit only panels shall be fabricated from numinch thick numhnum aluminum alloy conforming to the requirements of astm b num with yellow retroreflective sheeting adhered to the face side .
the aluminum shall be degreased and etched in accordance with the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer .
retroreflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of section num .
exit only panels shall be attached to the sign panel with selfplugging aluminum blind rivets with a numinch thick nylon spacer on each rivet between the exit only panel and the sign panel .
the letters arrows and borders shall consist of black embossed aluminum frames or flat sheet aluminum frames with no reflectors .
the height of the letters shall be num inches unless otherwise specified in the plans .
the panel shall be num inches in height unless otherwise specified in the plans .
section num num num retroreflective sheeting inks and opaque film retroreflective sheeting signmaking inks and opaque films shall conform to the requirements of section num .
signs shall be fabricated in accordance with the recommendations established by the manufacturer of the sign sheeting .
all processes and materials used to make a sign shall in no way impact the performance uniform appearance day and night or durability of the sheeting or invalidate the sign sheeting manufacturers warranty .
all sheeting used for letter and number text shall be of the same type and brand and shall be installed at a zerodegree orientation .
num demountable characters a general letters numerals symbols route shields borders and other features of the sign message shall consist of cutout flat sheet aluminum legends with directapplied sign sheeting or other finishes that are mounted to the sign panel with rivets as described herein .
all characters shall be placed on the signs in a straight and true fashion .
flat sheet aluminum substrates used for characters and borders shall be either aluminum alloy numhnum numhnum or num as specified in astm b num .
characters produced from the flat sheet aluminum alloy shall sit flat on the face of the sign panel without visible gap or deformation .
the thickness for letters and numbers shall be num inches .
the thickness for symbols route shields and borders shall be num inches .
all aluminum shall be chemically treated with a chromate acid conversion type coating or equivalent to form an oxidation resistant barrier film that is suitable for long term outdoor application .
the coating shall prevent the occurrence of oxidation that may cause streaking or discoloration on the sign .
the coating shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and shall have a minimum thickness of num inches .
all corners and edges of the characters shall be clean and welldefined with no apparent waviness tears delamination deformation or flaws .
burrs and waste material generated from the cutting process shall be removed so characters have a clean flat and correct appearance .
design of letters and numbers shall be in accordance with the project plans .
splicing of aluminum panels will be acceptable for diagrammatic arrows or other large symbols and shields exceeding num inches in more than section num num one direction .
splices when required shall include a continuous four to sixinch wide aluminum back plate that overlaps the joint .
the back plate shall ensure no gap at the splice joint when the symbol is assembled and attached to the sign .
borders on signs with demountable characters shall also be made of aluminum substrate panels unless otherwise specified .
however in all cases borders on signs with demountable characters shall be made of the same material as the legend .
b sheeting and colors sheeting or film applied to demountable characters shall be a continuous monolithic piece without splice or patch that covers the entire front face of the character .
splicing of the sheeting for demountable borders or characters which have a dimension larger than num inches in more than one direction will be allowed .
only one splice shall be allowed every four feet .
w hen a splice is necessary the adjoining edges shall be placed so there is no visible gap between the two pieces .
the adhesive system for sheeting and opaque films shall form a durable bond which tightly adheres to the aluminum or sign background .
after attachment the sheeting and opaque films shall not discolor crack craze blister bubble or delaminate .
sheeting and film adhesives must be warranted by the manufacturer against such defects as specified in section num .
only those sheeting and film products which provide the specified warranty will be acceptable .
the color for demountable letters numbers symbols and route shields on green blue and brown background signs shall be white and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
demountable legends on white and yellow background signs shall be black and shall be opaque and nonreflective .
acceptable finishes for black characters shall be porcelainenameled black powdercoated black or laminated black opaque acrylic film .
w hen borders are used with demountable characters white legend and border shall be used on green blue or brown sign backgrounds and black legend and border shall be used on white or yellow sign backgrounds .
sign sheeting conforming to section num shall be used for white borders .
black borders shall be porcelainenameled black powdercoated black or laminated black opaque acrylic film .
black porcelain enameling black powdercoatings or laminated black opaque acrylic film to be used for characters or borders as specified above shall be applied in accordance with the coating manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall provide copies of any warranties provided by the manufacturer for such coatings to the engineer .
section num num on combination signs such as a green background sign with white characters that also includes a smaller panel with yellow background and black characters the color scheme used for the characters and border for each portion of the sign shall be as specified above i.e .
white legend and border shall be used on the green background portion of the sign and black legend and border shall be used on the yellow background portion .
c attachment of characters and borders self plugging aluminum protruding regular head blind rivets shall be used to secure all demountable characters .
the rivets shall conform to the applicable requirements of international fasteners institute ifi num standard for break mandrel blind rivets .
all rivets shall be num inch in diameter with the appropriate grip range .
rivets shall be either ifi num grade num or num aluminum alloy rivets .
the rivets shall have an ultimate shear and tensile strength that has been determined by ifi num specification num and num .
the ultimate shear and tensile strength shall meet or exceed those values specified for a num inch num nominal rivet diameter per ifi num table num for grades num or num .
a higher strength and grade aluminum rivet can be used at the option of the sign fabricator .
rivets securing the characters to the back panel shall be of sufficient length to ensure a secure attachment and conform to the grip length specifications of the rivet manufacturer .
the determination of rivet grip length shall include the total thickness of the joint .
this thickness shall include the character sheeting and aluminum sheet spacer if applicable and the sign back panel sheeting and aluminum extrusion .
the hole size used to install the rivets shall conform to the recommendation of the rivet manufacturer and table num of ifi num .
rivets shall be placed a minimum of four times the diameter of the rivet from the edge of the character being attached e.g .
num inch clearance for a num inch diameter rivet .
clearance shall be measured to the outside of the rivet head .
minimum requirements for attaching demountable characters shall be as follows straight numerals and letters such as num shall have three rivets one at the top middle and bottom .
the more complex numerals and letters shall have from four to seven rivets .
letters such as w and m typically require seven rivets .
letters and numerals such as p h and num typically require six rivets .
letters and numerals such as g s num num and num typically require five rivets .
a rivet shall secure each corner of the letter or numeral .
for shields and symbols rivets shall be spaced evenly around the entire perimeter .
additional rivets shall be added in the middle of the shield or symbol as necessary to eliminate bowing .
rivets for borders shall be spaced evenly around the border .
section num num the actual number of rivets used will depend on the thickness configuration weight position with or without spacers size of the character being attached and the recommendations of the rivet manufacturer .
the number and location of rivets shall be sufficient to secure the character to the panel so it shall not missalign bend or move when subjected to wind loading .
additionally the number of rivets used shall ensure that the character does not bow or pull away from the back panel for the life of the sign .
rivets shall be placed in a defined evenly spaced pattern which is consistent from character to character .
the placement and pattern of rivets shall not interfere with the appearance of the sign from normal driveby viewing distances .
the contractor shall supply standard punch details prior to fabrication .
the protruding head and shaft of the rivets shall closely match the color of the character on which they are being applied e.g .
black characters shall be applied with black rivets .
aluminum colored rivets are acceptable for mounting white characters .
the coating used to color the rivets shall be a factoryapplied anodized type finish or equivalent that is suitable for long term outdoor application .
the coating shall have durable colorfastness and shall be capable of preventing the occurrence of oxidation that may cause streaking or discoloration on the sign .
nonfactory painting of the protruding heads of the rivets is not acceptable .
num silkscreened or directapplied characters silkscreened letters numerals arrows symbols and borders shall be applied on the retroreflective sheeting background of the sign by direct or reverse screen process .
messages and borders of a color darker than the background shall be applied to the retroreflective sheeting by direct process .
messages and borders of a color lighter than the sign background shall be produced by the reverse screen process .
opaque or transparent colors inks and paints used in the screen process shall be of the type and quality recommended by the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting .
the screening shall be performed in a manner that results in a uniform color and tone with sharply defined edges of legends and borders and without blemishes on the sign background that will affect intended use .
signs after screening shall be air dried or baked in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to provide a smooth hard finish .
any signs on which blisters appear during the drying process will be rejected .
directapplied letters numerals symbols borders and other features of the sign message shall be cut from black opaque or retroreflective sheeting of the color specified and applied to the retroreflective sheeting of the sign background in accordance with the instructions of section num num the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting and shall be applied by heat activation of the adhesive .
the retroreflective sheeting used for characters shall meet or exceed the minimum specific intensity per unit area sia of the background sheeting .
num construction requirements num fabrication fabrication of the sign panels shall be in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
if additional details for sign panel fabrication are required the contractor shall submit shop drawings in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
panels shall be cut to size and shape and shall be free of buckles warps dents cockles burrs and defects resulting from fabrication .
fabricated signs shall be stored indoors and kept dry during storage .
if packaged signs become wet all packaging material shall be removed immediately and the signs allowed to dry .
the signs may be repackaged using new dry materials .
if outdoor storage is necessary all packaging materials shall be removed .
signs shall be stored on edge above ground in an area where dirt and water will not contact the sign face .
materials used to support stored signs shall not contact sign faces .
num installation of sign panels the sign panels shall be installed on overhead sign structures and roadside sign supports in accordance with the details shown on the plans and in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturers of the sign panel components .
minor scratches and abrasions resulting from fabrication shipping and installation of panels may be patched however patching shall be limited to one patch per num square feet of sign area with the total patched area being less than five percent of the sign area .
panels requiring more patching than the specified limit will be rejected .
patches shall be edge sealed by a method approved by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer .
the heads of bolts on the panel face shall be anodized or painted to match the background or legend color in which they are placed .
the nylon washers on the panel face shall be the color of or shall be painted to match the background or legend color in which they are placed .
the sign manufacturers name and date of installation shall be placed on the back of each sign in black oneinch block letters .
use of felt markers for this purpose will not be permitted .
bolts shall be tightened from the back by holding the bolt head stationary on the face section num num of the panel .
twisting of the bolt head on the panel face will not be allowed .
the contractor shall provide two copies of a detailed list of all new signs installed on the project to the engineer .
the list shall include the sign identification code the date each sign was installed month and year the fabricator of the sign and the materials used to make the sign manufacturer type of sheeting ink and film .
the list shall be provided in a commonly used electronic spreadsheet format such as excel and the two copies shall be submitted on either cdrom disks or ibmformatted numinch floppy diskettes .
signs shall be listed in numerical order by route direction and milepost and where more than one sign is installed at the same general location a letter subscript .
signs shall be placed at the same orientation along the roadway so that the entire legend of the signs appear uniform under normal viewing conditions both day and night .
upon the installation of each finished sign the contractor shall place information on the back of the sign showing the sign identification code the sign fabricator the manufacturer of the sheeting used and the month and year of the installation .
the formatting of the required information shall be as shown on the plans .
the information shall be positioned to be readily visible from a vantage point outside the flow of traffic and not obstructed by sign posts extrusions stringers or brackets .
all letters shall be made of a long life material such as a black opaque acrylic film .
signs not marked as required will not be eligible for payment .
construction signs are exempt from the installation information requirement unless noted otherwise on the project plans .
bolts shall be tightened from the back of the sign by holding the bolt head stationary on the face of the panel to prevent damage to the sheeting surface .
num miscellaneous work sign panels the work under this section shall also include furnishing all miscellaneous materials tools equipment and labor necessary to relocate exit panels to the right side of the parent sign panel removing cutting and installing side trims and new or salvaged aluminum extrusions on existing sign panels relocating large guide and exit gore signs and cutting post tops on existing installations as required on the plans .
num inspection an inspection of the completely installed sign panels will be made by the engineer during the daytime and at night for proper appearance visibility color specular gloss and proper installation .
section num num each sign panel face shall be cleaned thoroughly just prior to the inspection by a method recommended by the manufacturer .
the cleaning solvent and cleaning material shall in no way scratch deface or have any adverse effect on the sign panel components .
all apparent defects disclosed by the inspection shall be corrected by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
if color variations or blemishes between sign panel increments are visible from a distance of num feet either during the day or at night the panels shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement sign panels will be measured by the square foot for each type or types of sign panels furnished and installed .
the area of each sign panel except for warning regulatory and marker sign panels will be measured per plans dimensions .
for warning regulatory and marker sign panels the area of each sign panel will be measured to the nearest square foot and the areas will be determined as follows the areas of each rectangular square or triangular sign panel will be determined from the dimensions shown on the plans .
the area of irregular shaped signs such as stop signs and route markers will be determined by multiplying the maximum height in feet by the maximum width in feet using the dimensions shown on the plans .
miscellaneous w ork sign panels will be measured on a lump sum basis .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of each type of sign panel designated in the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete in place .
payment shall be made on the total area of each type of sign panel to the nearest square foot except route shields and exit only for installation on sign panels which shall be paid for as part of the overall panel .
the contract unit price shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for performing all the work involved in furnishing and installing the sign panels complete in place including furnishing and applying all retroreflective sheeting all fastening hardware all necessary sign supports stringers and post ties all as shown on the plans and as specified herein .
section num num the accepted quantities of miscellaneous w ork sign panels measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as shown on the plans and as described and specified herein .
section num drilled shaft foundations num description num general the work under this section shall include furnishing all materials and constructing reinforced concrete shafts formed within a drilled excavation .
each drilled shaft foundation shall consist of a shaft section with or without casing left in place as directed or specified with or without a rock socket or a belled footing and shall be constructed in reasonably close conformity with the details and dimensions shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num certification the contractor shall be responsible to review all available geotechnical investigation reports and its signature on the proposal form shall certify that the firm performing the drilled shaft operations whether the prime contractor or a subcontractor has completed this review .
the geotechnical investigation reports are available at contracts and specifications section num w est jackson phoenix arizona .
num installation plan the contractor shall provide to the engineer for review and approval a detailed installation plan containing the following information num list of proposed equipment to be used including cranes drills augers bailing buckets final cleaning equipment desanding equipment slurry pumps sampling equipment tremies or concrete pumps casing etc .
num details of overall construction operation sequence and the sequence of shaft construction in bents or groups .
num details of shaft excavation methods including equipment and procedures for checking the dimensions and alignment of each shaft excavation .
num w hen slurry is required details of the method proposed to mix circulate and desand slurry and methods proposed to comply with the requirements of section num num subsections numa and numc including disposal of the slurry .
num details of methods to clean the shaft excavation .
num details of reinforcement placement including support and centralization methods lifting equipment and staging location for tied steel reinforcement cages prior to placement .
num details of concrete placement including concrete volumetric charts .
num details of casing dimensions material and splice details .
num details of concrete mix designs and mitigation of possible loss of slump during placement .
num list of work experience in previous similar projects .
num other information shown on the plans or requested by the engineer .
num emergency horizontal construction joint method if unforeseen stoppage of work or interruption in concrete delivery occurs .
num details of any special access or setup requirements needed to position the drill equipment to advance excavations .
the contractors installation plan shall be developed with input from subcontractors material suppliers and all others with drilled shaft responsibility .
the installation plan shall also identify which portion of the drill shaft construction the contractor and each of the subcontractors will be performing .
the documentation required above shall be submitted to the engineer not later than four weeks before work on shafts is to begin .
the engineer will review the initial submittal within ten working days and subsequent submittals as necessary within five working days .
a drilled shaft preconstruction meeting will be scheduled following the final approval of the installation plan and prior to commencement of drilling activity .
all parties named in the installation plan shall be represented at the preconstruction meeting .
no drilled shaft work shall be performed until the contractors final submittal has been approved by the engineer and the preconstruction meeting concluded .
such approval will not relieve the contractor of responsibility for results obtained by use of the installation plan or any of its other responsibilities under the contract .
the contractor shall be responsible to submit a modified installation plan each time a change is made to facilitate construction .
section num num unless otherwise specified in the special provisions light standard and sign post foundations of less than four feet in diameter and num feet in length shall be exempt from the requirement to submit an installation plan conduct a drilled shaft preconstruction meeting and construct a confirmation shaft .
num materials num concrete concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for the design criteria shown on the plans with the following additions or modifications a cement w here concrete is placed in drilled shaft excavations containing slurry or water the cement content of the concrete shall be between num and num pounds per cubic yard .
b aggregate maximum aggregate size shall be limited to num of minimum clear bar spacing vertical and horizontal not to exceed num inch for drilled shafts constructed with a wet method or with temporary casing excluding collaronly casings and one inch for drilled shafts constructed with a dry method .
c airentraining admixtures airentraining admixtures will be required for concrete drilled shafts in all areas where scour is anticipated as indicated in the geotechnical report .
in nonwater environments airentraining admixtures will be required for concrete drilled shafts when the top of the shaft is less than three feet below finished grade .
in either case when airentraining admixtures are required as specified above the entire drilled shaft shall contain the admixture .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
if approved in writing by the engineer grade num steel bars meeting all requirements of these specifications may also be allowed at no additional cost to the department .
the contractors request shall specify whether all bars are to be grade num or mixed with other grades .
w elded splices will not be allowed except as shown on the plans .
num casing section num num casing shall be steel and may be of unit or sectional construction .
the casing shall be of sufficient strength to withstand handling and driving stresses to withstand the pressure of concrete and the surrounding earth and to prevent seepage of water .
steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num grade a num unless otherwise specified .
should telescoped casing be used the contractor shall not allow concrete to overfill any interior casing .
spillage must be removed from the annulus or the shaft shall be declared deficient .
temporary casing shall be clean inside and out prior to placement in the excavation .
all casing shall be handled so as to limit distortion to plus or minus two percent of diameter .
no side shear capacity will be allowed where temporary casing installed becomes permanent .
if approved by the engineer and if conditions permit temporary casings may be corrugated and nonwatertight .
the contractor shall be responsible to compensate for loss of frictional capacity in the cased zone if temporary casing is abandoned in the shaft .
such modifications shall be at no additional cost to the department .
num construction requirements num general the methods and equipment used shall be appropriate for the intended purpose and materials encountered .
the allowable methods are the dry method wet method temporary casing method or permanent casing method as defined by aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii section num .
the most suitable of the listed methods for the conditions recorded in the geotechnical investigation report or a combination of these methods shall be used subject to approval of the engineer to produce sound durable concrete foundation shafts free of defects .
the permanent casing method shall be used only when required by the plans or authorized by the engineer .
if at any time during the construction of the drilled shafts the engineer determines that the equipment materials employees or procedures are such that defects in the work may occur the engineer may stop the work until appropriate changes are made by the contractor .
in no case shall the contractor be relieved of its responsibility for constructing acceptable drilled shaft foundations .
num confirmation shafts unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the contractor shall construct a confirmation shaft to determine the adequacy of the contractors equipment materials employees and procedures for completion of the drilled shaft foundations in accordance with the requirements of the plans specifications and installation plan .
section num num confirmation shafts may also be waived if directed in writing by the engineer .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer the confirmation shaft shall be the first drilled shaft foundation to be developed .
the engineer will specify the location of the confirmation shaft unless shown on the plans .
the confirmation shaft holes shall be completed in the same manner as other production shafts .
the contractor shall revise its methods and equipment as necessary at any time during the construction of the confirmation shaft hole to satisfactorily complete the excavation .
w hen the contractor fails to satisfactorily demonstrate the adequacy of its methods procedures or equipment or when unforeseen conditions require revision such as the need for slurry the installation plan shall be revised and the adjacent shaft shall be designated as the confirmation shaft for the revised installation plan as approved by the engineer .
w hen shown on the plans or when ordered by the engineer in writing the reaming of bells or development of rock sockets at specified confirmation shaft holes shall be required to establish feasibility in a specific soil strata .
num excavation the contractor shall perform all excavation required for the shafts rock sockets or belled footings through whatever substances encountered to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans or ordered by the engineer .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the maximum deviation from plumb shall be not more than one and one half percent .
the maximum permissible variation of the design center axis for both the borehole and rebar cage at the top shall be five percent of the shaft diameter not to exceed three inches from its project plan location .
the contractor shall determine plumbness by plumb lines in dry excavations and by kelly bar position readings at numfoot intervals in wet excavations or as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with these readings for each drilled shaft constructed to verify plumbness .
w hen bells or rock sockets are required they shall be excavated so as to form a bearing area of the size and shape shown on the plans .
if satisfactory material is not encountered at plan elevation the bottom of any drilled hole may be lowered at the direction of the engineer .
alteration of plan depth will be made to satisfactorily comply with design requirements .
reinforcing steel and concrete shall not be placed in the shaft until this final elevation has been established and the engineer is satisfied with the completed excavation .
raising of the foundation elevation shall require approval by the engineer .
if caving conditions are encountered no further drilling will be allowed until a construction method is employed that will prevent excessive caving and which is acceptable to the engineer .
if casing is proposed the shell shall be clean and shall extend to the top of the drilled shaft section num num excavation .
the inside diameter of the casing shall not be less than the specified size of the shaft unless approved by the engineer .
the outside diameter of the shaft shall not exceed plan dimension by more than six inches unless use of telescoping casing or surface casing is allowed by the installation plan .
adjacent shafts unless separated by a minimum of three shaft diameters shall not be drilled until the concrete in the first shaft has been in place for a minimum of num hours .
temporary surface casings may be used to aid shaft alignment and position and to prevent sloughing of the top of the shaft excavation if approved by the engineer .
w here temporary casing is used to stabilize excavations that include rock sockets the temporary casing shall be num to num inches larger than the rock socket diameter and centered on the rock socket .
if the engineer determines that the amount of caving is within acceptable limits and the contractor elects to drill under the same methods and procedures the excavation shall be filled with concrete at no additional cost to the department regardless of the extent .
any excavation beyond the dimensions shown on the plans where casings are not used shall be filled with concrete at no additional cost to the department .
if the use of drilling slurry is to be employed either with or without the use of casing the contractor shall use a method of construction which will allow completion of the drilled shaft in a continuous manner without any mixing of concrete and drilling slurry .
material excavated from shafts and bells and not incorporated elsewhere on the project shall be disposed of as approved by the engineer .
w hen the plans indicate drilled shafts are to be constructed within embankments the embankments shall be constructed prior to drilling except when approved otherwise by the engineer .
after the completion of the drilled shaft excavation and prior to the placement of the reinforcing steel cage and concrete all loose material shall be machine cleaned from the shaft .
a flight auger or other equipment approved by the engineer shall be used for cleaning dry excavations where slurry or ground water is not present .
w here slurry or ground water is present the excavation shall be cleaned with a cleanout bucket or similar type of equipment as approved by the engineer .
all open excavations shall be covered at the end of each shift in a manner approved by the engineer .
num drilling slurry section num num a general requirements the contractor shall provide a manufacturers representative with experience in the slurry drilling process to design and monitor the slurry .
the manufacturers representative shall be present at all times while the slurry method is under development and shall supervise the testing required in subsection numb .
once a method that consistently produces acceptable excavations has been developed and accepted by the engineer the contractor may substitute one of its employees for the representative provided that the employee has been suitably trained in the procedure .
the contractor shall also ensure that the manufacturers representative remains available to return to the site and supervise changes to the drilling slurry if needed .
only commercially prepared mineral slurries or synthetic slurries listed on the departments approved products list shall be employed when slurry is used in the drilling process .
mineral slurry shall have both a mineral grain size that will remain in suspension and sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport excavated material to a suitable screening system .
for all slurries the percentage and specific gravity of the material used to make the suspension shall be sufficient to maintain the stability of the excavation and to allow proper concrete placement .
during construction the level of the mineral slurry in the shaft excavation shall be maintained at a level not less than five feet above the highest expected piezometric pressure head along the depth of the shaft .
the level of polymer slurry shall be maintained at or near the ground surface or higher if required to maintain boring stability .
unless otherwise approved in advance by the engineer slurry shall be injected into the excavation immediately upon encountering ground water .
no further excavation shall be completed until slurry has been introduced into the boring .
in the event of a sudden significant loss of slurry to the hole the construction of that foundation shall be stopped until either a method to stop slurry loss or an alternative construction procedure has been approved by the engineer .
the slurry shall be premixed thoroughly with clean fresh water .
adequate time as prescribed by the slurry manufacturer shall be allotted for hydration prior to introduction into the shaft excavation .
slurry tanks of adequate capacity shall be required for slurry circulation storage and treatment .
no excavated slurry pits shall be allowed in lieu of slurry tanks .
no mixing of slurry shall be allowed in the drilled shaft excavation .
slurry shall not stand for more than four hours in the excavation without agitation .
if this is not possible excavation sidewalls shall be cleaned to remove filter cake and the slurry tested for compliance with table numa .
mineral slurry density shall be increased by adding barite only when sodium bentonite is the mineral .
desanding equipment shall be provided by the contractor as necessary to control slurry sand content within the acceptable values shown in table numa at any point in the bore hole .
desanding will not be required for setting casing .
the contractor shall take all steps section num num necessary to prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft .
such methods may include agitation circulation andor adjusting the properties of the slurry .
the contractor shall dispose of all slurry off site at an approved disposal site .
table numa sodium bentonite in fresh w ater range of values property units at time of introduction of slurry in hole at time of concreting test method density pcf num num num num density balance yield point pascals or viscosity secondsquart bentonite num num num num num maximum num num rheometer marsh cone ph num num ph paper or ph meter sand content by volume num num num num api sand content kit above num degrees f num pcf maximum when using barite .
b slurry inspection and testing the contractor shall have suitable apparatus available at the site capable of obtaining slurry samples at any depth within the drilled shaft excavation .
all equipment required for the tests specified in this section shall be provided by the contractor and the tests shall be performed by the contractor under the observation of the engineer .
control tests using suitable apparatus shall be carried out by the contractor on the mineral slurry to determine density viscosity or yield point ph and sand content .
a range of values for those physical properties is shown in table numa but in all cases at least the minimum value necessary to achieve borehole stability shall be utilized .
tests to determine density viscosity or yield point and ph value shall be done by the contractor during the shaft excavation to establish a consistent working pattern .
a minimum of four sets of tests shall be made during the first eight hours of slurry use .
w hen the results show consistent behavior the testing frequency may be decreased to one set every four hours of slurry use .
the contractor shall ensure that heavily contaminated slurry suspension which could impair the free flow of concrete has not accumulated in the bottom of the shaft .
prior to placing concrete in any shaft excavation the contractor shall take slurry samples using a section num num sampling tool suitable for recovery of slurry samples at any desired elevation in the excavation .
slurry samples shall be extracted from the base of the shaft and at num feet up the shaft until samples produce acceptable values for density viscosity or yield point ph and sand content .
w hen any slurry samples are found to be unacceptable the contractor shall take whatever action is necessary to bring the slurry within specification requirements .
concrete shall not be placed until resampling and testing results produce acceptable values .
reports of all tests required above signed by an authorized representative of the contractor shall be furnished to the engineer on completion of each drilled shaft .
num integrity testing drilled shaft integrity testing shall be performed by the contractor and will be reviewed by the engineer .
each drilled shaft foundation completed by a wet excavation method shall be inspected by means of a crosshole sonic logging survey .
the drilled shaft contractor shall furnish and install numinch schedule num pvc pipes for crosshole sonic logging .
the minimum number of pvcpipe inspection tubes shall be equal to the diameter of the drilled shaft measured in feet and roundedup to the next whole integer but not less that four or as specified in the plans .
the inspection tubes shall be uniformly distributed along the inside circumference of the reinforcing steel cage .
the pipes shall be joined to provide a clean watertight and unobstructed opening from the top of the drilled shaft foundation to within one foot of the tip in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the pvc pipes shall be capped on the bottom and filled with water prior to concrete placement .
the pipes shall be securely tied to the reinforcing steel in a straight line to prevent displacement during handling and concrete placement and to permit the logging device to pass from top to bottom .
the contractor shall provide the testing equipment perform the inspection and furnish test results to the engineer .
the contractor shall also provide documentation that the testing equipment has been calibrated and is functioning properly .
integrity testing shall be performed no sooner than num hours after placement of the concrete and all testing shall be finalized within seven days of placement .
readings from the crosshole sonic logging shall be taken with a maximum interval of two inches and shall include all possible ray paths .
the contractor shall provide an inspection report that contains the acquired raw data and an evaluation report prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer .
graphs of acoustic pulse arrival time versus depth and power of the arriving signal versus depth in each pair of tubes shall be provided .
all reports shall be provided to the engineer within three days of test completion .
section num num if the testing indicates the presence of voids intrusions or zones of unconsolidated concrete in the drilled shaft foundation or if the engineer determines that construction defects may have occurred the contractor shall conduct threedimensional tomograhic surveys of the anomalies at no additional cost to the department .
if testing can not be performed because of blockage of the tubes the contractor shall coredrill or otherwise determine the extent of any defects in the concrete as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall repair replace or supplement the defective work in a manner approved by the engineer which may include constructing one or more additional drilled shafts at the locations directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
concrete volumetric charts shall be completed for every drilled shaft .
after all inspection has been completed all holes and test pipes in all drilled shaft foundations shall be filled with an approved grout from the bottom up .
num reinforcing steel cage construction and placement the reinforcing steel cage for the drilled shaft consisting of longitudinal bars and spiral hooping or lateral ties shall be completely assembled and placed into the shaft as a unit .
all reinforcing steel intersections shall be tied as specified herein .
the reinforcing steel unit shall be placed in the shaft no sooner than two hours prior to the start of concreting operations and shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
if approved in writing by the engineer bundling of vertical or horizontal reinforcing steel may be allowed if necessary to maintain a minimum bar spacing equal to five times the maximum aggregate size of the concrete .
bundling of spiral reinforcing will not be allowed .
a maximum of three bars may be bundled .
bundled vertical or horizontal steel shall be spaced uniformly .
the contractor shall also make the necessary modifications in accordance with the appropriate aci specifications to the splicing and tying details for the reinforcing steel and submit these to the engineer for approval along with the contractors request for bundling of steel .
the reinforcing cage shall be adequately supported and anchored from the top to prevent movement from the required location during and for four hours after completion of concrete placement .
if temporary casing is used the reinforcing cage shall be supported prior to removing casing and for four hours following removal of the casing .
the rebar cage shall be kept plumb .
the rebar cage shall not rest directly on the bottom of the excavation .
spacers shall be at sufficient intervals along the shaft to ensure concentric location of the reinforcing cage for the entire length of shaft .
spacers shall be placed at a maximum vertical spacing of num feet with a minimum of four spacers around the circumference at each vertical elevation .
for all drilled shafts of less section num num than six feet in diameter the spacers shall provide for a minimum of three inches of concrete cover between the reinforcing steel and the excavation wall .
for all drilled shafts of six feet in diameter or greater or for drilled shafts of any diameter constructed with the wet method the spacers shall provide for a minimum of six inches of concrete cover between the reinforcing steel and the excavation wall .
only spacers approved by the engineer shall be allowed and in no case shall dobies or other rectangular blocks tied to the reinforcing steel be allowed in excavations with the wet method .
w hen dobies are used they shall be made from concrete of the same compressive strength as the concrete used in the drilled shafts .
if the shaft is lengthened and the plans indicate full depth reinforcement the engineer shall be notified to determine if extension of the reinforcement is needed .
the engineer will provide details for additional reinforcing if required .
such additional reinforcing will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall submit a written request to the engineer for approval of any variation from the splices for reinforcing steel specified in the contract documents .
all reinforcing cages shall be fabricated and supported to avoid damage during the lifting and placing .
any temporary bracing and supports shall be removed prior to final placement .
equipment used for lifting reinforcing cages shall have adequate capacity and boom length to lift the cage clear of the ground .
reinforcing cages shall not be dragged while being moved .
reinforcing cages shall be placed with splices in the lowest possible position within the excavation .
num concrete placement a general the contractor shall begin placement of concrete within num hours after the completion of the drilled shaft excavation .
all concrete shall be placed in accordance with section num and as specified herein .
if slurry excavation is used concrete shall be placed the same day the excavation is completed .
unless otherwise specified in the project documents or as directed by the engineer the slump shall be five one inches for dry uncased excavations .
for all others the concrete slump shall be eight one inches at the time placement begins .
prior to concrete placement the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements to assure the uninterrupted delivery of concrete so that all drilled shaft foundations will be constructed without cold joints .
during concrete placement from start to finish the rate of rise of the top of concrete in the drilled shaft shall be at least num feet per hour .
tremie downpipes and pump pipes shall be made of steel no aluminum shall be allowed .
the inside diameter of the tremie pipe shall be at section num num least ten inches for all drilled shafts four feet or greater in diameter .
the inside diameter of the pump pipe shall be at least five inches .
the concrete mix shall remain in placement for at least two hours before obtaining the initial set as determined in aashto t num astm c num .
b placement in dry excavations for placement in dry excavations concrete may be placed by free fall except in fragile cohesionless soils where bottom scour is likely to occur or where other caving conditions exist .
the contractor shall prevent concrete from striking either the reinforcing cage or excavation side walls during free fall .
w here free fall can not be used concrete shall be placed through a suitable clean downpipe .
concrete vibration for the full height of the shaft is not necessary to achieve proper consolidation of the concrete .
however the shafts shall be vibrated in the top num feet .
if temporary casing is used the vibration shall occur after the casing has been removed .
to be considered a dry shaft the maximum depth of water in the bottom of a drilled shaft excavation at the time of concrete placement shall be no more than three inches .
c placement under slurry or water concrete shall be placed by tremie methods or by pumping .
care shall be taken to ensure that all the fluid and suspended solids are expelled from the excavation during concrete placement .
if concrete is placed by pumping it shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection numc .
the contractors installation plan shall demonstrate the procedures used to determine when the tremie pipe is to be raised during concrete placement .
the procedure shall assure that the opening of the tremie pipe will be deeper than five feet below the surface of the concrete at all times for shaft diameters less than six feet and deeper than ten feet below the surface of the concrete for shaft diameters six feet and larger .
a rapid raising or lowering of the tremie will not be permitted .
in order to prevent contamination of concrete placed initially the lower end of the pump or tremie pipe shall be provided with either a valve sealable cap or plug pig .
the discharge end shall be placed at the bottom of the excavation prior to commencement of concrete placement .
if a plug is used it shall be inserted at the top after the pipe has been set in place .
concrete shall then be placed by pushing the plug ahead separating the concrete from the drilling fluid .
only when the tremie pipe is completely filled shall the open end be lifted off the bottom .
the concrete flow that comes to the top of the shaft shall be displaced out of the shaft excavation in a continuous flow until clean fresh concrete is expelled .
section num num slurry ejected during concrete placement may be reused provided that it is screened to remove gravel chips or other granular materials and providing the slurry meets acceptance criteria .
slurry to be discarded shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the engineer .
concrete placed under slurry or water shall not be vibrated except that the top five feet of the shaft shall be vibrated after the slurry or water and contaminated concrete have been totally expelled from the shaft .
if temporary casing is used the vibration shall occur after the casing has been removed .
num casing removal during removal of any casing a sufficient head of not less than ten feet of fluid concrete in the tremie pipe shall be maintained above the level of concrete in the shaft outside the tremie pipe except at the top of the shaft .
all contaminated concrete shall be removed from the shaft .
temporary casings shall be removed while the concrete slump is a minimum of four inches .
the contractor shall maintain a minimum fivefoot head of concrete for shaft diameters of less than six feet and a minimum tenfoot head of concrete for shaft diameters six feet or greater in the casing as it is being removed .
movement of the casing by exerting upward pressure and tapping to facilitate extraction or extraction with a vibratory hammer will be permitted .
casing extraction shall be at a slow uniform rate with the force inline with the shaft axis .
the removal method shall prevent the intrusion of water grout and soil into the excavation displacement of the reinforcing steel and lifting of the concrete .
due care shall be exercised to prevent upward movement of the shaft concrete and reinforcing steel during casing extraction .
upward movement beyond one inch excluding movement due solely to tension on the top anchoring system may indicate serious concrete separation or necking problems at the bottom of the casing .
the contractor shall be responsible for corrective action which may include leaving the casing in place and compensating for the loss of frictional capacity in the resulting cased zone .
num method of measurement drilled shafts will be measured to the nearest linear foot from the top elevation of the shaft to the top elevation of the rock socket stratum if required or to the actual bottom of the shaft as shown on the plans or as determined in the field by the engineer .
rock sockets when specified will be measured to the nearest linear foot from the top elevation of the rock socket stratum to the actual bottom of the shaft as shown on the plans or as determined in the field by the engineer .
section num num bell sections will be measured by the unit for each type of foundation constructed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of drilled shafts and rock sockets measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the diameter designated in the bidding schedule complete in place including excavation and disposal of spoils drilling slurry metal casing steel reinforcing portland cement concrete any needed forming curing and finishing exposing of concrete and the subsequent repair of foundations furnishing all materials equipment and labor for splicing of reinforcing steel conduit and equipment for sonic crosshole logging and all required tests .
no additional payment will be made for metal casing that is to remain in place .
no additional payment will be made for confirmation shafts or for providing a manufacturers representative for the drilling slurry the costs considered to be included in the cost of constructing the drilled shaft foundation .
payment for belled sections will be at the contract unit price for each type of foundation constructed including excavation and concrete beyond the diameter of the shaft .
obstructions will be defined as either material or objects of excessive dimension which were not recorded in the geotechnical and foundation report either in the text or boring logs .
drilling tools which are lost in the excavation shall not be considered obstructions .
payment for obstructions will be made in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num painting num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing paint and other materials and painting concrete structural steel or other surfaces where shown on the plans in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
the work shall include preparation of the surfaces to be painted the protection and drying of the paint coatings and the protection of pedestrian vehicular or other traffic near or under the work from paint spatter and disfigurement .
num materials paint shall conform to the requirements of section num unless otherwise specified .
num construction requirements num weather conditions section num num paint shall be applied only on thoroughly dry surfaces and only when the atmospheric temperature is in the range from num degrees f to num degrees f inclusive and when the relative humidity is at or below num percent .
paint shall only be applied to a surface which is at least num degrees f above the dew point .
the surface temperature should remain above the minimum temperature specified above until the paint is thoroughly dry .
paint shall not be applied when the air is misty or when weather conditions exist which might damage the work .
if fresh paint is damaged by the elements it shall be replaced or repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
the contractor may provide suitable enclosures to permit painting during inclement weather .
num surface cleaning a metal surfaces all surfaces of structural steel or other metals except galvanized surfaces shall be cleaned prior to painting .
all surfaces of new structural steel or other metals which are to be painted shall be blast cleaned to a nearwhite finish in accordance with sspc standard spnum unless otherwise specified or approved in writing by the engineer .
w hen repainting existing steel structures the method of cleaning will be specified in the special provisions .
areas not designated for repainting which are damaged as a result of the contractors operations shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the department and as approved by the engineer .
num blast cleaning all dirt rust old paint mill scale and other foreign material shall be removed from steel or other metal surfaces with an approved blast cleaning apparatus .
blast cleaning shall leave all surfaces with a dense uniform anchor pattern or profile of num mils to num mils as measured with an approved surface profile comparator or pressed film replica tape .
abrasives used for blast cleaning shall be clean dry sand mineral grit steel shot or steel grit and shall be graded to produce satisfactory results .
the use of other abrasives will not be permitted unless approved in writing by the engineer .
w hen blast cleaning is being performed near machinery all journals bearings motors and moving parts shall be sealed against entry of abrasive dust .
section num num blast cleaned surfaces shall be primed or treated the same day blast cleaning is done unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
if cleaned surfaces rust or are contaminated with foreign material before painting is accomplished they shall be recleaned by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num steam cleaning all dirt grease loose chalky paint or other foreign material which has accumulated on previously painted surfaces shall be removed with a steam cleaning apparatus prior to all other phases of cleaning .
it is not intended that sound paint be removed by this process .
after steam cleaning any paint which has become loose curled lifted or loses its bond to the preceding coat or coats shall be removed to sound paint or metal surface by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
a detergent shall be added to the feed water of the steam generator or applied to the surface to be cleaned .
the detergent shall be of such composition and shall be added in such quantity that the specified cleaning is accomplished .
any residue detergent or other foreign material which may accumulate on cleaned surfaces shall be removed by flushing with fresh water .
steam cleaning shall not be performed more than two weeks prior to starting painting operations or other phases of cleaning .
subsequent painting shall not be performed until the cleaned surfaces are thoroughly dry and in no case in less than num hours after cleaning .
num hand cleaning manual or powered wire brushes hand scraping tools power grinders or sandpaper shall be used to remove all dirt loose rust mill scale or paint which is not firmly bonded to the surfaces .
num water blast cleaning w ater blast cleaning shall be done in accordance with nace national association of corrosion engineers standard rpnum with normal water no additives to the water will be allowed .
all areas of oil and grease on surfaces to be coated shall be hand cleaned with clean petroleum solvents .
the solution of solvent and contaminates shall be wiped clean and the surfaces allowed to air dry prior to the water blast cleaning .
the contractor shall not use power spray equipment or similar methods to apply the solvent .
all the surfaces to be coated shall be power washed with a water pressure of not less than num psi and not greater than num psi .
the water blasting equipment shall have a minimum water usage of num gallonsminute .
section num num w ater blast cleaning shall be performed no more than two weeks prior to the start of painting operations or other phases of cleaning .
subsequent painting shall not be performed until the cleaned surfaces are thoroughly dry and in no case less than num hours after cleaning .
b concrete surfaces prior to painting concrete surfaces laitance and curing compounds shall be removed from the surface by abrasive blast cleaning in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
the cleaned surface shall have a roughened textured appearance consistent with the surrounding concrete surface .
concrete surfaces shall be thoroughly dry and free of dust at the time the paint is to be applied .
any artificial drying procedures and methods shall be subject to approval by the engineer .
c surfaces other than metal or concrete prior to painting any surfaces other than metal or concrete the surface shall be in accordance with the manufacturer recommendations and as approved by the engineer .
num application painting shall be accomplished in a neat and workmanlike manner .
for painting metal surfaces paint shall normally be applied by spraying with limited use of hand brushes or rollers except that aluminum paint as specified in subsection num shall be applied by spraying .
for painting concrete surfaces the contractor shall develop an application plan according to the manufacturers written recommendations .
the plan shall include num rate of application .
num number of necessary coats minimum of two coats .
num ambient air temperature .
num ambient surface temperature .
num application equipment .
num qualification of workers .
num safety and damage protection .
num proposed surface preparation .
for painting concrete surfaces the contractor shall apply all paint applications to a test specimen or to the concrete surface according to application plan for the subsequent approval of the engineer .
for paints not on the approved products list a test specimen will be used for testing the performance requirements indicated in section num .
section num num the contractor shall refinish the test inspection areas to match the paint finish of the surrounding concrete surfaces .
num protection against damage the contractor shall provide protective devices as necessary to prevent damage to the work and to other property or persons from all cleaning and painting operations .
paint or paint stains which result in an unsightly appearance on surfaces not designated to be painted shall be removed or obliterated as approved by the engineer .
all painted surfaces that are marred or damaged as a result of the contractors operations shall be repaired with materials and to a condition equal to that of the paint coating specified herein .
upon completion of all painting operations and of any other work the painted surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned .
num painting a metal surfaces num general all surfaces of new metals shall be painted with one shop coat primer and two field coats the intermediate coat and topcoat unless otherwise specified .
the dry film thickness of the paint will be measured in place with a calibrated magnetic film thickness gauge in accordance with sspc standard panum .
if the minimum dry film thickness is exceeded it shall be limited to that which will result in uniform drying throughout the paint film .
num primer the primer shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the dry film thickness of the primer shall not be less than num mils and be sufficient to cover the blast profile pattern .
a deep profile pattern from steel shot blasting may require additional applications of primer to obtain sufficient coating of the steel surface .
after structural steel has been fabricated blast cleaned and accepted by the engineer all surfaces except metal surfaces which are to be embedded in concrete or within three inches of a high strength bolted connection shall be painted with a primer .
section num num structural steel which is to be welded shall not be painted before welding is complete .
if it is to be welded only in the fabricating shop and subsequently erected by bolting it shall receive one coat of primer after the shop welding is completed .
areas of structural steel to be field welded shall be masked and the remainder of the steel shall be given one coat of primer .
as soon as practicable after being accepted by the engineer and prior to removal from the shop machinefinished surfaces shall be primered with a rust inhibitor which can easily be removed .
surfaces of milled or finished iron and steel castings shall be painted with one coat of primer .
erection marks for field identification of steel members and weight marks shall be painted upon surface areas previously painted with the primer .
num intermediate coat the intermediate coat shall be appropriately tinted to contrast with the primer and shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the dry film thickness of the intermediate coat shall not be less than num mils .
after erection of steel structures has been completed including all riveting welding bolting and any straightening of bent metal all adhering rust scale dirt grease and other foreign material shall be removed as specified under subsection num .
all areas where the primer is damaged or deteriorated shall be thoroughly cleaned and spot painted with the same type of paint used for the primer and to the specified dry film thickness .
w hen the spot painting coat is thoroughly dry the intermediate coat shall be applied .
in no case shall a succeeding coat be applied until the previous coat has dried throughout the full thickness of the paint film .
num topcoat the topcoat shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
all small cracks and cavities which have not become sealed in a watertight manner by the intermediate coat shall be filled before the topcoat is applied .
at the option of the contractor the intermediate coat and the topcoat may be applied in the shop .
w hen finished coats are applied in the shop the contractor shall repaint all damaged or deteriorated areas in the field as directed by the engineer .
the dry film thickness of the topcoat shall be not less than num mils .
section num num b concrete surfaces w hen painting is specified on the plans or in the special provisions acrylic emulsion paint conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be applied to the exposed concrete surfaces tabulated below except that sidewalks appurtenant curbs downdrains and bridge deck surfaces shall be excluded .
all concrete shall be finished and cured in accordance with the requirements of the specifications prior to the application of the paint .
num castinplace box girder bridges all surfaces of the superstructure including the sides and bottoms of the box girders shall be painted .
num precast igirder bridges bridge structures with vehicular traffic passing beneath at posted speeds of less than num miles per hour or with pedestrian traffic beneath shall be painted on all surfaces of the superstructure including both sides and bottoms of the precast girders and the underside of decks .
bridge structures with vehicular traffic passing beneath at posted speeds of num miles per hour or more and with no pedestrian traffic beneath shall be painted on all surfaces of the superstructure with the exception of the sides of the interior girders the interior side of exterior girders and the underside of the deck .
num precast box and slab girder bridges all surfaces of the superstructure including the sides of exterior girders and the bottom surfaces of the box or slab girder when exposed to traffic view shall be painted .
num bridge substructure and walls all surfaces of bridge piers including the pier caps and bottoms of integral pier caps piles columns parapet walls and abutments concrete retaining walls and noise barrier walls shall be shall be painted to at least one foot below finished grade .
num barriers all surfaces of bridge barriers and the sides and tops of permanent barriers not adjacent to the traveled way shall be painted .
c surfaces other than metal or concrete section num num surfaces other than metal or concrete shall be painted as recommended by the paint manufacturer and as approved by the engineer .
all miscellaneous steel items that are not elements of bridges cantilever sign supports or bridge truss sign structures may be hand cleaned and have the required field paint coats applied in the shop .
num painting damaged galvanized coating areas of galvanized coating damaged due to welding after fabrication or due to handling shall be roughened by sanding or acid and the roughened areas shall be painted with at least one full coat of zinc paint conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
num blank num basis of payment no measurement or payment will be made for painting as specified herein and on the plans or for independent laboratory tests surface preparation and supplying samples the cost being considered as included in the prices paid for the various contract items of work involving painting .
section num num section num maintenance and protection of traffic num description the work under this section shall consist of providing flagging services and pilot trucks and furnishing installing maintaining moving and removing barricades warning signs lights signals cones and other traffic control devices to provide safe and efficient passage through andor around the work and to protect workers in or adjacent to the work zone .
the work shall be done in accordance with the requirements of part vi of the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd and the associated arizona department of transportation supplement .
w hen referred to herein these documents will be referred to as mutcd and associated adot supplement .
the requirements of the mutcd and associated adot supplement shall be considered as the minimum standards for the protection of workers and the traveling public .
w hen a traffic control plan is included in the project plans this plan shall govern unless an alternate plan acceptable to the engineer is submitted by the contractor .
if no traffic control plan is provided or if the contractor desires to deviate from the provisions for maintaining traffic as described in this section it shall submit to the engineer for approval a proposed sequence of operations and a compatible method of maintaining traffic .
the proposal shall be submitted early enough to allow at least two weeks for review and approval before use of the proposed traffic control plan .
the traffic control and safety plan of the contractor along with the contractors work schedule and actual operations shall be such that no condition that is considered to be unsafe in the opinion of the engineer shall exist .
the traffic control plan shall assure that miscellaneous operations occurring throughout the work as well as during the final stages are adequately protected .
as a result of effective planning and efficient scheduling of the type and quantity of work the duration degree length amount size etc .
of any traffic restriction or lane closures shall be limited to that absolutely necessary to provide a safe condition for both traffic and construction personnel .
num materials equipment workers devices and facilities num general a conformance except as specified herein all equipment procedures used by workers devices and facilities shall conform to the requirements of the mutcd and associated adot supplement .
section num num b safety num general requirements all traffic control devices listed below as category i and category ii devices shall meet the evaluation criteria for test level iii per nchrp national cooperative highway research program report num .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit a letter certifying that all such traffic control devices to be used on the project will meet the abovereferenced criteria .
the certification shall contain the following a a list of all category i and ii traffic control devices to be used on the project .
b the project number .
c a statement verifying that these devices and their application meet the requirements of nchrp report num test level iii .
d the name title and signature of a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturer or supplier of the category i and ii devices .
the binding authority shall be in accordance with subsection numbnum .
if additional category i and ii devices are required at a later date the contractor shall provide an amended certification letter to the engineer specifying that such devices also comply with the requirements of nchrp report num test level iii .
for all category i and category ii devices used on the project the contractor shall also acquire or have access to reports which verify that such devices meet the abovereferenced criteria .
the reports shall contain the name and model of the tested traffic control devices detailed drawings or product literature of each and under what conditions the devices passed .
the traffic control devices detailed in the report shall be the complete warning devices including warning lights flags ballast and any other auxiliary attachment allowed .
reports for category ii devices are prepared by the federal highway administration fhw a .
for category i devices the supplier is responsible for testing the product and providing a report which verifies that the device meets the criteria of nchrp report num test level iii .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall provide copies of such reports within one working day .
num category i devices category i devices are lowmass traffic control devices that will not cause an appreciable change in speed of an impacting vehicle nor is it section num num likely that any part of the device will intrude into the passenger compartment .
the following traffic control devices will be considered category i devices rubber or plastic traffic cones rubber or plastic tubular markers single piece plastic drums plastic or fiberglass delineators .
no warning lights signs flags or other auxiliary devices are allowed on category i devices .
should any of these attachments be added to a category i device the category i device will be considered a category ii device .
ballast at the base such as a rubber tire is an acceptable attachment to category i devices .
the single piece plastic drum refers to the construction of the body of the drum exclusive of a separate base if any .
num category ii devices category ii devices are lowmass traffic control devices that will not cause a significant change in speed of an impacting vehicle .
the following traffic control devices will be considered category ii devices type i ii and iii barricades with or without warning lights vertical panels with or without warning lights signs and sign stand all types with or without warning lights andor flags drums other than those listed in category i with or without warning lights and any category i devices with attached warning lights .
num flashing arrow panels flashing arrow panels shall conform to the requirements of the mutcd and associated adot supplement with the following additions each arrow panel shall have its own independent power source .
the power source shall be capable of supplying adequate continuous power for the sign operation over extended periods of time .
fuel capacity shall be such as to provide for at least num hours of continuous operation without refueling .
panels may be solar powered with adequate energy source to provide for at least num hours of continuous operation without refueling or recharging .
num temporary concrete barrier temporary concrete barrier shall be precast sections conforming to the requirements of signing and marking standard drawing cnum and subsections num and num of the specifications .
the contractor shall provide at the preconstruction conference a letter certifying that any temporary concrete barrier used on the project conforms to signing and marking standard drawing cnum .
the letter shall also include the project number and the name title and signature of a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturer or supplier of the attenuation devices .
the binding authority shall be in accordance with subsection numbnum .
num temporary impact attenuation devices section num num temporary impact attenuation devices shall conform to the requirements of subsections num and num of these specifications for the type of device shown on the project plans or as approved by the engineer .
temporary impact attenuation devices shall also meet evaluation criteria for test level iii per nchrp national cooperative highway research program report num .
the contractor shall provide at the preconstruction conference a letter certifying that all temporary impact attenuation devices meet the above requirement .
the letter shall also include the project number and the name title and signature of a person having legal authority to bind the manufacturer or supplier of the attenuation devices .
the binding authority shall be in accordance with subsection numbnum .
num temporary pavement markings a temporary raised pavement markers and chip seal pavement markers temporary pavement markers may be temporary reflective markers permanent reflective markers used as temporary or nonreflective markers as required on the project plans or as approved by the engineer .
temporary pavement markers shall be in conformance with standard drawings mnum and mnum and subsections num and num of these specifications and will be included on a list of preapproved products maintained by the department .
chip seal pavement markers shall conform to standard drawing mnum .
the chip seal marker body and cover shall be manufactured from a polyurethane material conforming to the following requirements requirement astm test method specific gravity min .
num d num hardness min .
numa d num tensile strength min .
psi num ultimate elongation min .
num d num modulus num psi num stiffness num of min .
psi num of min .
psi num num d num compression set num hrs .
num oc num d num taber abrasion cs num wheel w t. loss mgnum cycles num reflective tape shall be metalized polycarbonate microprism retroreflective material with acrylic backing or equal .
the tape shall section num num have a minimum reflectance equal to or greater than num candelas per footcandle per square foot at numdegree observation and zerodegree entrance angles .
b pavement marking paint paint for temporary striping arrows symbols and legends shall be white or yellow and shall conform to the requirements for permanent striping paint as set forth in section num of these specifications and as indicated on the project plans or as approved by the engineer .
paint for temporary symbols and legends shall be white and shall meet the same requirements as temporary striping .
c preformed pavement markings preformed pavement markings shall be either type ii temporaryremovable or iii temporarynonremovable as indicated on the project plans or as approved by the engineer .
preformed pavement markings shall be in conformance with the requirements of section num of these specifications and shall be included on a list of preapproved products maintained by the department .
num temporary sign supports temporary sign supports may be wood steel or aluminum at the option of the contractor and shall be approved by the engineer prior to installation .
w ood posts shall be southern pine douglas fir or other soft wood .
w ood posts need not be treated .
embedded posts shall meet the criteria established under nchrp report num for breakaway sign supports .
angle braces will not be allowed .
num delineators delineators shall be as shown on the plans and shall be in conformance with the standard drawings and subsection num of these specifications .
num barricades type i barricades having a minimum of num square inches of retroreflective area facing traffic and otherwise conforming to the mutcd may be used in lieu of type ii barricades in freeway or other high speed applications unless specifically excepted in the project plans .
all sheeting for barricades shall be a minimum of type ii sheeting conforming to aashto m num .
num drums section num num sheeting type for drums shall conform to the requirements for work zone devices shown in section num .
num construction requirements num general the contractor shall provide for the adequate protection of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic and workers through any portion of the work where construction operations interfere with obstruct or create a hazard to the movement of traffic .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall provide the engineer with the name of the contractors employee who is responsible for implementing monitoring and altering as necessary the traffic control plan .
the engineer will then advise the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction of the names of the contractors representative and a representative of the department who will act in a similar capacity .
the contractors designee shall be available at any time to respond to calls involving damage or displacement to barricades lights signs and other devices resulting from vandalism traffic accident or other causes .
if at any time the engineer determines that sufficient traffic control is not being provided or maintained the engineer may order suspension of the work until the proper level of traffic control is achieved .
in cases of serious or willful disregard for safety of the public or workers by the contractor the engineer may proceed to place the traffic control measures in proper condition and deduct the cost thereof from monies due or becoming due the contractor .
all contractors personnel equipment machinery tools and supplies shall be kept clear of active traffic lanes except as necessary for the prosecution of the work .
the contractor shall promptly remove any material or debris that is spilled or tracked onto the traveled roadway as a result of the prosecution of the work at no additional cost to the department .
materials vehicles and parked equipment shall be kept as far from the traveled way as practical .
the contractor shall not park equipment or store materials within num feet of the edge of a traveled way unless an adequate barrier is present .
equipment may be parked and materials may be stored in the rightofway only at locations approved by the engineer .
any devices provided under this section which are lost stolen destroyed or are deemed unacceptable by the engineer while their use is required on the project shall be replaced by the contractor and except as hereinafter specified for temporary impact attenuators at no additional cost to the department .
all such devices shall be replaced by the end of the work shift unless otherwise specified .
section num num the engineer shall be sole judge as to which signs may require embedded posts portable stands or another type of support .
num maintenance and protection of traffic all traffic control devices necessary for the first stage of construction shall be properly placed and in operation before any construction is allowed to start .
w hen work of a progressive nature is involved such as resurfacing a roadway under traffic the necessary devices shall be moved concurrently with the advancing operation .
the use of temporary devices shall not be extended beyond the anticipated duration of one work shifts production .
all traffic control devices shall be kept clean and free from dirt mud and roadway grime .
scratches rips and tears in reflective sheeting or loss of fluorescence in fluorescent prismatic sheeting as determined by the engineer shall be promptly corrected by the contractor .
temporary pavement markings shall be applied in conjunction with changes in the traffic pattern .
placement of new pavement markings and removal of old markings shall be done immediately when the need for each arises .
temporary markings and devices shall be removed and new roadway marking shall be completed within num hours after any changes in traffic pattern unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
obliteration of the temporary pavement markings shall be in conformance with subsection num of these specifications .
types of barricades supports or devices not specifically described in the mutcd and associated adot supplement but which would cause a hazard to traffic if used by the contractor will not be permitted in the work area .
the methods used by a contractor to control traffic when there are no details included in the contract shall produce a safe condition for travel to the maximum extent possible at all times .
num temporary concrete barriers barriers shall be installed in accordance with the details and at the locations shown on the project plans or where directed by the engineer .
sections of temporary barrier shall be fastened together as shown on the standard drawings to form a continuous chain .
after placement each unit shall be moved longitudinally to remove slack in the joints between the units .
w here shown on the project plans or directed by the engineer the ends of the barrier run shall be flared back or fitted with an impact attenuation device .
attenuation devices shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
barrier markers shall be installed as shown on the project plans or standard drawings .
any unit which has been excessively damaged as determined by the engineer shall not be used .
any unit damaged during or after section num num installation shall be replaced with an undamaged unit by the close of that work shift at no additional cost to the department .
temporary glare screen shall be installed on barriers at locations shown on plans and on barriers used to separate opposing traffic on freeway construction contracts in urban areas .
w hen barrier is used on freeway construction to separate traffic from construction operations glare screen may be required when construction activity is continuous for at least num feet adjacent to the active traffic lanes .
temporary glare screen shall be expanded metal or plastic attached to the barrier by a method satisfactory to the engineer .
temporary glare screen shall have the following characteristics num w hen hit the device shall not penetrate the passenger compartment of the errant vehicle or present a hazard to workers and other traffic .
num the device shall perform in a predictable manner when hit .
num the device shall effectively reduce glare from oncoming vehicle head lights .
num the device shall be resistant to vandalism and vehicle damage and shall be easy to repair .
num temporary impact attenuation devices energy absorbing terminals conforming to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications shall be installed at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the manufacturers instructions .
devices that are damaged by the traveling public shall be repaired within num hours by the contractor utilizing a replacement parts package which shall be on the job site whenever this system is in use .
the replacement parts package supplied by the contractor shall be the one recommended by the manufacturer of the attenuation device in use .
upon completion of the work for which energy absorbing terminals are required all temporary terminals used during the project and the associated replacement parts packages shall be carefully removed and stockpiled by the contractor within the limits of the project at a location specified by the engineer and shall become the property of the department .
sand barrel crash cushions conforming to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
section num num crash cushions damaged by the traveling public shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
new devices shall be furnished and installed by the contractor .
the contractor shall repair any damaged installations within num hours .
sand barrel crash cushions will remain the property of the contractor upon completion of temporary use unless permanently incorporated into the project .
upon approval of the engineer undamaged attenuation devices sand barrels or metal type may be used for permanent installation in accordance with the requirements of subsections num and num of these specifications .
num temporary pavement markings application and removal a general application of temporary pavement markings shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications the mutcd and associated adot supplement and other provisions of these specifications as applicable .
placement of new markings shall be done immediately when the need for each arises in conjunction with changes in the traffic pattern .
on intermediate lifts of overlay projects pavement marking for temporary striping shall consist of fourinch wide by fourfoot long strips of reflective material either pavement marking tape or traffic paint placed at numfoot intervals .
in situations involving severe degree of curvature the engineer may direct that the length and spacing be adjusted to two feet and num feet respectively .
these requirements apply to white lane lines separating traffic moving in the same direction and to yellow centerlines for twolane twoway roadways in areas where passing is permitted .
temporary pavement marking shall be placed on each subsequent pavement course .
pavement markings may be required by the engineer in lieu of barricades for temporary delineation when the duration of use as shown in the traffic control plan may exceed five days or when lane widths are less than num feet .
b raised pavement markers the adhesive shall be applied uniformly to the cleaned pavement surface and the raised pavement marker shall be placed in the correct position on the adhesive area with the application of pressure as specified by the manufacturer .
c preformed pavement markings preformed pavement markings for temporary applications shall be types ii temporaryremovable and iii temporarynonremovable section num num and shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
preformed pavement markings type ii shall only be used on surfaces or finish pavement courses where eventual removal will be required .
preformed pavement markings type iii shall only be used where removal of markings is not required due to obliteration abandonment or overlaying the pavement surface .
temporary pavement marking paint may also be used where removal of markings is not required unless otherwise shown on the project plans or in the special provisions .
num obliteration of existing pavement markings pavement marking obliteration shall be accomplished by the contractor as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
pavement markings shall be removed to the fullest extent possible from the pavement by any method that does not materially damage the surface color or texture of the usable pavement .
abrasive blasting using air or water is an acceptable method for removing pavement markings however other methods may be approved by the engineer .
overpainting of markings with paint or asphalt will not be permitted .
sand or other material deposited on the pavement as a result of removing pavement markings shall be removed as the work progresses .
accumulations of sand or other material which might interfere with drainage or might constitute conditions adverse to traffic safety shall be removed by the contractor .
w here blast cleaning is used for the removal of pavement markings or for removal of objectionable material the residue including dust shall be removed immediately after contact between the sand and the surface being treated .
such removal shall be by a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the blast cleaning operation or by other methods approved by the engineer .
blast cleaning shall not be used within num feet of a lane occupied by public traffic unless a suitable barrier separates traffic from the area being cleaned .
obliteration or removal of raised pavement markers shall include removal of the marker and adhesive pad or adhesive pad alone if the marker is missing .
any damage to the pavement caused by pavement marking removal shall be repaired by methods acceptable to the engineer .
w hen asphalt slurry is used to repair damage to the pavement caused by pavement marking removal or the obliteration of the marks remaining after the markings have been removed the asphalt slurry shall be placed parallel to the new direction of travel and shall be at least two feet in width .
section num num if obliteration of leadbased striping is necessary it shall be accomplished by a method that is in compliance with num cfr lead exposure in construction interim final rule .
if lead exposure prevention measures are required the contractor shall ensure that all contractor personnel subcontractors and adot personnel present on the job site are notified of the activity and advised of precautions necessary to avoid contamination by lead compounds .
the contractor shall submit a lead exposure plan to the engineer for review at least num hours prior to the start of any striping obliteration activities .
payment for additional work to remove leadbased striping shall be in accordance with subsections num or num .
num truckmounted attenuator trucks and truckmounted attenuators shall be furnished by the contractor at the locations shown on the project plans andor as directed by the engineer .
trucks shall be highway maintenance service trucks weighing between num and num pounds .
trucks equipped with truckmounted impact attenuators shall be furnished with shoulder and lap restraint safety belts for both driver and passenger seats .
all truckmounted attenuators shall meet nchrp num requirements .
the attenuators shall consist of three basic components num a backup support structure for attaching the backup to the truck num a backup and num a crushable cartridge containing an energy absorbing material .
the dimensions of the attenuator shall be approximately seven feet long two feet high and eight feet wide and the total weight of the attenuator shall be approximately num pounds .
attenuators shall have rearmounted black and highintensity yellow chevron stripes and a standard trailer lighting system including brake lights turn signals iccbar lights and two yellow rotating beacons mounted on opposite rear corners of the truck approximately num feet from ground level .
w hen the attenuator is in position roadway clearance shall be between num and num inches .
the attenuator shall be designed to provide for quick and simple connection to the truck .
w hen impacted headon at num miles per hour the truckmounted attenuator shall perform as follows num for impacting vehicles weighing from num to num pounds the average overall longitudinal deceleration shall be less than num gs the twofoot flail space velocity shall be less than num feet per second and the section num num rollahead distance of the truck with wheels locked and parking brake set on clean dry pavement shall be less than num feet .
num for impacting vehicles weighing up to num pounds the average overall longitudinal deceleration shall be less num gs the twofoot flail space velocity shall be less than num feet per second and the rollahead distance of the truck with wheels locked and parking brake set on clean dry pavement shall be less than num feet .
the contractor shall keep the attenuator bright and clean for maximum visibility .
the contractor shall cease operations when a truckmounted attenuator is damaged .
the contractor shall not resume operations until the attenuator has been repaired or replaced unless authorized by the engineer .
num changeable message board changeable message boards shall be furnished and maintained by the contractor at the locations shown on the plans and as specified by the engineer .
the operations and messages programmed into the board controller shall be as directed by the engineer .
the changeable message board shall be a complete and operational portable unit which shall consist of a wheeled trailer with an adjustable changeable message board board message controller and selfcontained power supply .
the power supply for the changeable message board shall be a fully independent selfcontained trailermounted system .
the power supply shall be either an internal combustion engine generator or batteries which are recharged from a solar panel mounted above the changeable message board .
the message characters shall be delineated by either electromagnetically actuated reflective dots or optically enhanced light emitting diode pixels led operating under the control of a digital computer .
for changeable message boards using electromagnetically actuated reflective dots or for non solarpowered led changeable message boards the contractor shall submit at the preconstruction conference a certificate of compliance that the message board to be used on this project shall be as described herein .
the departments approved products list apl provides a list of approved solarpowered led changeable message boards which may be used in the performance of this work .
for other solarpowered led changeable message boards the contractor shall submit at the preconstruction conference a certificate of compliance that the section num num message board to be used shall be as described herein .
copies of the most recent version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
the character formation system and components shall conform to the following requirements num the changeable message board shall have a minimum of three separate lines with eight characters per line .
num the changeable message board matrix configuration shall be num dots or pixels per character in a five horizontal by seven vertical arrangement of the dots or pixels .
num the dot or pixel size shall be a numinch high by numinch wide rectangle minimum or equivalent area .
num each character shall be num inches in height and num inches in width minimum .
num the horizontal character separation shall be three inches or more .
num dot color shall be fluorescent yellow upon activation and flat black when not activated .
the led pixels shall emit amber light upon activation and be dark when not activated .
num the line separation shall be five to num inches .
num changeable message boards shall be protected with a clear lexantype or equivalent shield that shall not interfere with or diminish the visibility of the sign message .
num the programmable message board shall be capable of displaying moving arrow patterns as one of the operatorselected programs .
num the programmable message board shall be capable of displaying a minimum of three lines of message copy with a minimum of eight characters per line in various alphanumeric combinations .
num the message board shall also be capable of displaying a minimum of four messages in sequence with variable timing in a minimum of quartersecond increments .
section num num num the message board shall be clearly visible and legible from a distance of num feet under both day and night conditions .
the dotmatrix board shall have an internal illumination system that shall automatically activate under low light conditions to achieve the visibility requirements .
the ledpixel matrix board shall adjust light output pulse width modulation to achieve the visibility requirements .
num the power supply achieved from an internal combustion engine generator shall be capable of operating the changeable message board for num continuous hours without refueling .
num the power supply achieved from the battery and solar panel recharging system shall have sufficient capacity to operate the changeable message board for a minimum of num days without direct sunshine .
the solar panel array shall be capable of recharging the batteries such that num to num hours of direct sunshine shall provide for a minimum of one numhour period of usage .
additionally the battery recharging controller shall have an ambient temperature sensing device which will automatically adjust the voltage supplied from the solar panels to the batteries .
the sensing device shall ensure that the batteries are properly charged in hot or cold weather and shall provide the sign with sufficient power to operate the sign as specified .
w hen in operation the changeable message board trailer shall be offset a minimum of eight feet from the nearest traffic lane .
w here possible a numfoot or more offset shall be used .
w hen positioned on the highway a minimum of ten numinch reflectorized traffic cones shall be set around the sign unit at a spacing of up to num feet .
w hen not in operation the changeable message board shall be turned away from oncoming traffic .
the changeable message board trailer shall be placed on a level surface and be secured as recommended by the manufacturer and as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide any necessary incidental grading and clearing work required to provide a level surface and clear area for the sign .
num chip seal pavement marker chip seal pavement markers and covers shall be located and placed on the asphaltic concrete prior to any work being started on the chip seal coat all in a manner as approved by the engineer .
section num num immediately after application of the chip seal coat to the roadway pavement the plastic covers shall be removed exposing the reflective tape surfaces .
chip seal pavement markers that are damaged by the contractor shall be replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num sign sheetings sign sheeting for orange warning signs as defined in part num of the mutcd and for specialty signs as defined herein shall be orange fluorescent prismatic sheeting .
orange sign sheeting shall conform to the requirements of section num .
sign sheeting for other signs shall be type iiiiv and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num temporary removal or covering of signs w here existing signs are not applicable during construction they shall be removed or have the affected legends covered in place .
unless otherwise stated in the plans or if a discrepancy exists the engineer will approve the method or methods to be used .
removed signs shall be properly shipped stored and handled in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and in a manner approved by the engineer to assure that such signs will continue to be suitable upon reinstallation .
w here temporary removal of a sign or legend is not practical the sign face may be covered with an opaque porous cloth or fiber material folded over the sign edges and secured at the rear of the sign in such a manner that the sign shall not be damaged .
tape hardware ropes cables etc .
used to secure the covering material shall not touch place any pressure on or damage the sign face .
the covering shall be maintained by the contractor until the engineer directs reactivation of the sign by removal of the coverings or the contract ends .
the contractor shall restore the signs and legends to their previous conditions as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall repair any damage to the signs or shall replace the damaged signs as directed by the engineer when damage is the result of the contractors operations .
num temporary sign supports section num num temporary sign supports installed in the ground shall be removed at the completion of the project the post holes filled and compacted and the immediate area restored to match the surrounding area .
num flagging services flagging services shall consist of either civilian local enforcement officers and their vehicles or dps department of public safety officers and their vehicles .
the engineer will determine the type of flagger needed and may adjust the relative number of hours of each type of flagger specified in the traffic control plan .
if available only dps officers shall be used on interstate highways and urban freeways .
dps officers shall also be used on other construction projects except when a local agency has jurisdiction in which case a local law enforcement officer and vehicle shall be used .
the engineer will make all the necessary arrangements to procure dps flagging services .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of three working days prior to the start of any operation involving dps officers for flagging .
procurement of civilian flaggers or local enforcement officers used for flaggers will be the responsibility of the contractor .
for operations in which dps officers are to be used for flagging the contractor shall be responsible to notify the engineer a minimum of six hours in advance of any operation which is to be canceled .
should such notification not be received as specified and dps officers are dispatched to provide flagging services for the canceled operation a charge of num per dps officer will be deducted from the monies due the contractor .
in the event that local enforcement officers or dps officers are temporarily unable to provide flagging services the contractor shall ensure that traffic control is maintained and all personnel are protected either by providing civilian flaggers or through other means as approved by the engineer .
no adjustments to the contract will be allowed for any delays resulting from the unavailability of local enforcement officers or dps officers .
a local enforcement officer shall not work more than num consecutive hours unless an emergency situation exists which in the opinion of the engineer requires that the officer remain in the capacity of a flagger .
the contractor shall furnish verification to the engineer that all civilian flaggers have completed a recognized training and certification program .
flaggers certified by the american traffic safety services association a.t.s.s.a .
or by the national safety council shall be acceptable .
certification through other programs offering flagger training must be approved by the engineer .
flagger certification must section num num be current .
training and certification shall be required at least once every two years .
num method of measurement num general the department will reimburse the contractor for the work of maintaining and protecting traffic on the basis of unit bid prices for the various elements of w ork .
no additional measurement for payment to the contractor will be made for any elements of w ork other than those listed in the bidding schedule .
elements of w ork specified under this subsection which are lost stolen destroyed or are deemed unacceptable by the engineer while in use on a project shall be replaced by the contractor and except as hereinafter specified for temporary impact attenuators at no additional cost to the department .
elements of w ork will be measured for payment as follows a elements of work completeinplace the elements of w ork listed herein under subsection num will be measured for payment upon the satisfactory completion of the initial installation or obliteration .
except as hereinafter specified under basis of payment no subsequent measurements will be made .
b elements of work in use the elements of work listed herein under subsection num will be measured for payment from the time at which the element is put into active use on the project and accepted by the engineer until such time that the engineer determines that the element is no longer required .
num relocation of work elements following the initial installation of an element of w ork described above the engineer may direct the contractor to move the element of w ork from one location and reinstall it at another location .
except as specified elsewhere herein in subsection num for temporary concrete barrier installation and removal and subsection num for temporary impact attenuators installation and removal no measurement for payment will be made for relocation of w ork elements .
w hen work of a progressive nature is involved such as resurfacing a road under traffic or closing a lane or lanes for work to be accomplished during a shift no measurement for payment will be made for setting up or relocating the necessary traffic control equipment workers devices facilities signs etc .
that are moved concurrently with the advancing operation or removal at the end of a shift .
section num num num payment exceptions a deficient elements of work any deficiencies in the traffic control plan devices equipment services or other elements of work listed herein under subsection numb will be brought to the attention of the contractor by the engineer and all deficiencies shall be corrected before the close of that work shift unless otherwise specified .
the contractor shall not be paid for those deficient elements of w ork listed herein under subsection numb unless restored to full usefulness prior to the close of the work shift in which notice of the defect is given or within the time limits specified in subsection num .
measurement for payment will not resume until the beginning of the work shift following that work shift in which those elements are restored to usefulness .
b substantial deficiencies for each work day or work shift during which there are as determined by the engineer substantial deficiencies in the contractors traffic control plan devices andor services no payment will be made to the contractor for any element of w ork listed herein under subsection numb .
measurement for payment will not resume for any element of w ork until the beginning of the work day or work shift following that work day or work shift in which all corrective measures have been performed by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
in cases of serious or willful disregard for the safety of the public or its employees by the contractor the engineer may place the traffic control elements in proper condition and deduct the cost thereof from monies due or becoming due the contractor .
c nondiligent prosecution of work in the event that the engineer determines that the contractors construction operations are not resulting in the diligent prosecution of the work under contract no payment will be made to the contractor for the elements of w ork listed herein under subsection numb until such time as the engineer determines that the contractor is devoting appropriate efforts toward completion of the work .
payment will be suspended effective with the end of the work day or work shift in which written notice is issued to the contractor by the engineer notifying the contractor of its failure to prosecute the work .
payment will resume with the beginning of the work day or work shift following that work day or work shift in which the engineer determines that satisfactory efforts are being made by the contractor toward completion of the work .
in any case the contractor shall continue to be responsible for maintaining all section num num barriers attenuators signs lights and other traffic control devices in proper functioning condition at all times .
d nonworking periods measurement for payment of the elements of w ork listed herein under subsection numb will begin on the day they are installed in place for traffic control and direction .
w hen the elements are not needed for traffic control they shall be removed or covered and will not be measured unless they are required to stay on site in anticipation of future use or emergency use as determined by the engineer .
should devices be required on site for these purposes they will be measured and paid for by the unit prices .
during nonworking periods such as holidays and sundays the elements in place and in satisfactory condition will be measured for payment on the day following such downtime .
during these nonworking periods the contractor shall conduct a minimum of one check per day to verify that the elements are in place and in satisfactory condition .
no payment will be made to the contractor for the elements of w ork listed herein under subsection numb for nonworking periods resulting from a suspension of work that in the opinion of the engineer is due to the fault of the contractor .
in any case the contractor shall continue to be responsible for maintaining all barriers attenuators signs lights and other traffic control devices in proper functioning condition at all times .
e limitation of measurement elements of w ork listed herein under subsection numb that are measured on a unit per day basis will be measured for payment for each numhour day .
measurement will be based on the maximum number of units of the specific element of work that are in simultaneous use during any given period regardless of the length of time that the elements are in use and regardless of the number of times the elements are relocated .
measurement will be made after the initial installation and once weekly thereafter for items in continuous use and at any other times changes are made in the use of traffic control elements listed under subsection numb .
the contractor shall notify the engineer when any changes are made in the use or location of traffic control elements .
f expiration of contract time no reimbursement will be made to the contractor for the elements of w ork listed herein under subsection numb when they are required in association with construction work being performed after the expiration of the contract time and all approved extensions .
section num num in any case the contractor shall continue to be responsible for maintaining all barriers attenuators signs lights and other traffic control devices in proper functioning condition at all times .
num measurement of work elements measurement will be made as follows a temporary concrete barrier will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the uppermost surface upon its initial installation completeinplace .
barrier will be measured by linear foot for each numhour day for the inuse condition .
b temporary impact attenuators such as sand barrels and energy absorbing terminals will be measured by the unit for each complete sand barrel array regardless of the number of barrels or energy absorbing terminal upon its initial installation completeinplace and upon any subsequent reinstallations as defined in subsection num .
temporary impact attenuators will be measured by the day for each numhour day that a temporary sand barrel array or energy absorbing terminal impact attenuator is in place and functional for the inuse condition .
c truckmounted attenuators including driver will be measured by the day for each numhour day that a truckmounted attenuator and operator are used to protect the work site .
d flashing arrow panels will be measured by the day for each numhour day that each panel is in place and operating .
e pilot vehicles including driver will be measured by the hour for each approved hour of operation .
f civilian flagging services will be measured by the hour for each hour that a civilian flagger is provided .
flagging services by local enforcement officers will be measured for each hour that a uniformed offduty law enforcement officer with police vehicle is employed directly by the contractor as a flagger when authorized in advance by the engineer .
no measurement will be made when dps officers and their vehicles are used to provide flagging services .
civilian or local enforcement flagging services and traffic control required to permit contractors traffic to enter safely into normal traffic within the project limits will be paid under this item .
flaggers required by a written local permit agreement will be measured for payment under this item .
additional civilian or local enforcement flagging services section num num used within the project limits shall be measured for payment under this item subject to the approval of the engineer .
civilian or local enforcement flagging services and traffic control devices used outside the project limits will be measured under this item .
the department will pay num percent of the unit bid price for such flaggers and traffic control devices used as described in this paragraph subject to the approval of the engineer .
the project limits are defined as the construction work zone as shown on the approved traffic control plan for the specific section of highway under construction .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining and paying all costs for local enforcement officers and vehicles .
g temporary preformed markings for pavement types ii and iii will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
h temporary painted markings for pavement will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
i obliterate pavement marking will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
j changeable message boards will be measured by the day for each numhour day that the sign is utilized to maintain and control traffic .
k obliterate pavement markers will be measured for each unit markers and adhesive pad or adhesive pad alone where markers are missing .
l temporary delineators and temporary pavement markers will be measured as a unit for each delineator and marker furnished utilized and subsequently removed from the project site .
no measurement for payment will be made for delineators and markers that are furnished to replace damaged units as specified under subsection num .
m vertical panels barricades types ii and iii tubular markers w arning lights types a b and c traffic cones numinch highlevel flag trees drums embedded sign posts and portable sign stands springtype and rigid will be measured as a unit for each device furnished and subsequently utilized at the project site for each numhour day .
section num num temporary signs will be measured as small less than num square feet and large num square feet or more regardless of sheeting type .
temporary signs will be measured as a unit for each sign furnished and subsequently utilized at the project site for each numhour day .
quantities may be determined on a weekly basis for signs in continuous use .
utilization shall be defined as including those devices ordered to remain on site or covered in accordance with subsection numd and approved by the engineer .
n specialty signs are signs which are required on the job as determined by the engineer or shown on project plans and are not reusable as traffic control signs .
specialty signs shall contain information which is project and location specific .
the sign sheeting shall be orange fluorescent prismatic rigid sheeting unless otherwise specified and the size type and legend of the specialty signs will be determined by the engineer unless specified on the project plans .
specialty signs will be measured for payment by the square foot inclusive of borders .
any sign over num square feet in area shall be considered a specialty sign .
o obliterate pavement legends or arrows will be measured by each separate symbol arrow or legend .
num basis of payment for elements of work completeinplace num temporary concrete barrier installation and removal temporary concrete barrier measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete as specified herein and as shown on the plans including furnishing placing dismantling and removal .
the price bid shall also include any required connection devices barrier markers and glare screen .
should it be necessary to dismantle pick up and relocate a portion of the barrier installation a lateral distance of more than num feet during construction that portion of the removed and relocated barrier will be considered a new installation and measured for payment at the contract unit price .
for a lateral movement of num feet or less or any vertical movement the contractor will be paid for num percent of the length of the relocated temporary concrete barrier installation and removal provided the contractor can demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction that it is not possible to move the barrier without dismantling and lifting .
no payment will be made for portions of the barrier which the contractor can relocate without dismantling and picking up .
section num num num temporary impact attenuators installation and removal temporary impact attenuation devices shall include sand barrels and energy absorbing terminals measured as provided above and paid for at the contract unit price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified herein and as shown on the plans including furnishing the devices with replacement parts installing removing and stockpiling the devices .
should it be necessary to dismantle pick up and reinstall attenuation devices during construction for use on the project site the work of removing and reinstalling the devices will be measured for payment as a new installation .
the engineer will be the sole judge as to whether devices are to be dismantled picked up and reinstalled or are to be adjusted or realigned .
no additional payment will be made for devices which are adjusted or realigned the cost being considered as included in the bid item price paid for temporary impact attenuator inuse .
measurement and payment for furnishing materials equipment and labor and repairing attenuation devices that are damaged by the traveling public will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for furnishing replacement parts and repairing devices damaged by other than the traveling public .
num temporary preformed markings for pavement the accepted quantities of temporary preformed markings measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price for the type specified which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including necessary pavement cleaning and maintaining types ii and iii temporary markings in construction work zones .
installation for accepted quantities shall be considered satisfactory when the markings are installed in conformance with the requirements of the plans .
w hen the type of temporary preformed marking is not specified the contractor shall furnish type ii .
additional reimbursement will be made for replacement of temporary markings when the contractor is required by the engineer to install marking materials on distressed pavements or during adverse weather conditions and subsequent failure occurs .
distressed pavement conditions are defined as alligator cracking bleeding or spalling of bituminous pavements and spalling of pcc pavements .
adverse weather conditions are defined as any occurrence where application is section num num required at pavement temperatures less than num degrees f or when precipitation occurs within num hours before application .
the department will pay for the replacement where failures occur at the unit bid price for the items .
in the event a second failure occurs when markings have been reapplied on distressed pavements or under weather conditions described above the engineer shall determine if conditions require primer alternate methods of marking or reapplication of preformed markings .
preformed markers and markings will be paid for at the unit bid price .
primers or other methods of markings deemed necessary by the engineer will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
num temporary painted pavement markings the accepted quantities of temporary painted markings symbols arrows and legends measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price for the type specified which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including glass beads .
num obliterate pavement marking obliterate striping measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including furnishing all labor and equipment required and restoring the pavement surface to a condition acceptable to the engineer .
the accepted quantities of arrows symbols or legends obliterated shall be paid for at the unit bid price for each item .
num temporary pavement markers and chip seal pavement markers the accepted quantities of temporary pavement markers and chip seal pavement markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price each which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified herein and as shown on the plans .
num obliterate pavement markers obliterate pavement markers will be paid for at the unit bid price each which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including adhesive pad .
num temporary delineators the accepted quantities of temporary delineators measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price each which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including subsequent removal as specified herein and as shown on the plans .
section num num num specialty signs the accepted quantities of specialty signs measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price per square foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including manufacturing delivery to the job site erection and eventual removal .
the price paid shall also include the cost of flags ballasting mountings sign stands and embedded posts as required .
num temporary removal or covering of signs no payment will be made for temporary removal or covering of signs including maintenance of storage facilities for the signs or sign legends and the maintenance of sign coverings the cost being considered as included in the price of contract items .
num basis of payment for elements of work in use num quantity variances payment for variances in quantities shall be in accordance with subsection num except that for decreases in quantities the following items will be considered as major items num temporary concrete barrier inuse num barricades and num temporary signs .
num temporary concrete barrier in use the accepted quantities of temporary concrete barrier measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use of the barrier installations including glare screen and for furnishing all material equipment and labor and maintaining realigning and adjusting the barrier installations as specified herein and as shown on the plans .
no payment will be made for barrier not in service such as barrier in stockpiled configuration awaiting phase construction change .
there will be no payment for each day that the engineer determines the barrier traffic reflectors are not in good reflective condition or for each day that the engineer determines the barrier is out of alignment .
num channelization devices a vertical panels barricades type ii traffic cones numinch and tubular markers section num num the accepted quantities of vertical panels barricades type ii traffic cones numinch and tubular markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use and maintenance of each device inuse including labor and equipment .
type i barricades which are substituted for type ii barricades in accordance with subsection num shall be paid for at the unit bid price for type ii barricades .
the unit bid price for barricades includes the cost of ballasting as required .
b barricades type iii and highlevel flag trees the accepted quantities of barricades type iii and highlevel flag trees measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use and maintenance of each device inuse including labor and equipment .
the unit bid price for barricades includes the cost of ballasting and flags as required .
w hen signs are to be mounted on barricades type iii or highlevel flag trees the signs will be paid for as temporary signs section num .
c drums the accepted quantities of drums measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use and maintenance of each device inuse including labor and equipment .
d warning lights types a b and c the accepted quantities of w arning lights types a b and c measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use and maintenance of each device inuse including labor and equipment .
e embedded sign posts portable sign stands springtype or rigid and portable sign postsbarrier mounted the accepted quantities of embedded sign post portable sign stands springtype and rigid and portable sign postsbarrier mounted measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use and maintenance of each device inuse including labor and equipment .
section num num the unit bid price for signs includes the cost of ballasting as required .
num temporary signs the accepted quantities of temporary signs measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use and maintenance of each device inuse including labor and equipment .
the unit bid price for signs includes the cost of flags and ballasting as required .
no separate payment shall be made for speed plates distance plates or other minor sign message boards that are attached to a temporary sign or temporary sign post as shown on the plans .
if additional signs are attached to those shown on the plans or to existing temporary sign installations payments will be made as additional temporary signs .
num truckmounted attenuators the accepted quantities of truckmounted attenuators measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price per day of work site protection which rate shall be full compensation for the work complete including but not limited to furnishing all materials equipment and labor including the operator and maintaining and repairing the truck and truckmounted attenuator as specified herein and on the project plans .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to replace any damaged or destroyed parts of the attenuator at no additional cost to the department .
num flashingarrow panels and changeable message boards the accepted quantity of flashingarrow panels measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including furnishing operating maintaining and relocating the panels on the work site and providing all necessary labor and equipment .
the accepted quantities of changeable message boards measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price per day which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including incidental grading traffic cones and furnishing operating maintaining and relocating the boards on the work site and providing all necessary labor and equipment .
no payment will be made for incidental grading or traffic cones the cost being considered a part of contract items .
num pilot services and flagging services the accepted quantities of pilot vehicles measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price for pilot vehicles with driver which section num num price shall be full compensation for the work complete including but not limited to furnishing and maintaining the vehicle and furnishing the driver .
overtime hours for pilot vehicles will be paid for at the unit bid price for pilot vehicle with driver .
no additional payment will be made for overtime hours the cost being considered as included in the unit bid price .
the accepted quantities of flagging services provided by the local enforcement officers and civilian flaggers measured as provided in subsection numf will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including all overhead costs and fringe benefits .
overtime hours for local enforcement officers and civilian flaggers will be paid for at the respective unit bid prices .
no additional payment will be made for overtime hours the cost being considered as included in the unit bid price for local enforcement officers and civilian flaggers .
no payment will be made when dps officers and their vehicles are used to provide flagging services .
num temporary impact attenuators inuse the accepted quantities of temporary impact attenuators measured as provided above will be paid for at the unit bid price which price shall be full compensation for the use of the complete attenuating device and for furnishing all material equipment and labor for maintaining realigning and adjusting the attenuator installation as specified herein and as shown on the plans .
no payment will be made for attenuators not in service such as attenuator stockpiled for replacement parts or awaiting phase construction change .
section num attenuation devices num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and installing attenuation devices of the types and at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num general materials used in the construction of the vehicular impact attenuator system shall all be new except that undamaged attenuation devices used for maintenance and protection of traffic may be used for permanent installation when approved by the engineer .
section num num materials used in transitions or connections between impact attenuators and metalbeam guardrail shall conform to the requirements of section num .
materials used in transitions or connections between impact attenuators and concrete structures or barriers shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num except anchors and anchor bolts shall conform to the requirements of section num .
concrete shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
steel reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of section num .
asphaltic concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
attenuation devices approved for use are shown on the departments approved products list apl .
the most current version is available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
attenuation devices other than those listed on the apl shall be approved by the department prior to use .
num energyabsorbing terminal energyabsorbing terminals shall be multiple bin units of collapsible cartridges positioned between diaphragms that are enclosed by a framework of the beam guardrail fender panels conforming to the details shown on the project plans .
num sand barrel crash cushion sand barrel crash cushions shall be frangible plastic modules formulated or processed to resist deterioration from ambient ultraviolet rays .
the color of the outer module or stabilizer and lids shall be the standard gray or yellow color as furnished by the vendor .
the modules shall exhibit good workmanship free from structural flaws and objectionable surface defects .
the engineer may measure the thickness of the inner module and stabilizer walls as shown on the plans by any means the engineer considers appropriate .
w hen filled with the specified weight of sand the module walls shall not distort either as an indentation or a protrusion more than num inch from the original module wall configuration .
modules shall be filled to the designated height with sand fine aggregate meeting the requirements of subsection num b .
the sand when placed in the module shall have a dry unit weight of from num to num pounds per cubic foot and a moisture content of less than two percent by weight .
sand barrel crash cushion installations at elevations above num feet shall have five percent rock salt by weight mixed with the sand .
section num num num construction requirements attenuation devices shall be placed at the locations shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer and shall conform to the details shown on the plans and the requirements of the manufacturer .
unless otherwise specified on the project plans when the plans require the attenuation device to be placed on a paved pad the pavement shall be four inches thick and shall be made either of utility concrete or asphaltic concrete at the option of the contractor .
the soil under the pad or under the impact attenuator when no pad is required shall be compacted to not less than num percent of the maximum density found in accordance with the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
w hen installation of the attenuation device is complete all trash shall be removed from its area and the soil surface around it shall be smoothed to the elevation indicated on the project plans .
any welding required shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the american w elding society structural w elding code aw s d num .
num method of measurement attenuation devices will be measured as a unit for each device installed except that devices which were previously used for maintenance and protection of traffic and are being reused as a permanent installation will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of attenuation devices measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the type designated in the bidding schedule complete in place .
no extra measurement or payment will be made for any concrete reinforcing steel hardware fasteners structural steel pavement pad materials any connection or transition section needed to connect the impact attenuator to guardrail or concrete barriers grading in the area of the impact attenuator and required only to smooth vehicle approach paths to it excavation and backfill required immediately adjacent to the barrier and sand to fill crash cushion modules as the cost thereof will be considered as included in the contract unit price for the impact attenuator complete in place .
labor and equipment used to remove and reinstall attenuation devices used for maintenance and protection of traffic and being reused as a permanent installation will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num num section num delineators and markers num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing delineators reference markers object markers snow markers and milepost markers in conformance with the details shown on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
the types of delineators and markers to be installed and the locations will be shown on the project plans .
num materials num general certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num metal posts posts for delineators and for all markers including mileposts or reference markers installed on freeways shall conform to the details shown in the project plans .
num concrete concrete for the milepost or reference marker foundations shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
num metal plates metal plates for the various types of object markers shall conform to the details shown on the plans and shall be fabricated in one piece from numinch thick aluminumalloy sheet numh num numh num or numt num all conforming to the requirements of astm b num .
num paint paint for use on the metal plates shall conform to the requirements of section num for the type and color of paint specified on the plans .
num retroreflective sheeting retroreflective sheeting for delineators and markers shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the type of retroreflective sheeting to be applied shall be as specified on the plans .
num prismatic reflectors section num num prismatic reflectors for delineators and markers shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the type of prismatic reflectors to be used shall be as specified on the plans .
num hardware steel bolts and nuts of the types shown on the plans shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num or shall be cadmium plated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
num construction requirements metal posts shall be cut and perforated to the sizes and shape shown on the plans .
the finished posts shall be straight with a permissible tolerance in straightness of num inch per three num feet of post length .
posts on which galvanizing has been damaged in transporting handling or erecting shall be repaired by the contractor at its expense in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
metal plates shall be cut to size and shape and the holes punched for mounting all in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
the surfaces and edges of the plates shall be free of buckles warps dents cockles burrs and defects resulting from fabrication .
posts shall be set vertically to line at the locations designated on the plans .
posts except mileposts or reference marker posts requiring concrete foundations shall be set firmly in the ground by a method that will not bend the post or deface the top of the post .
if ground conditions are such that the posts can not be driven without damaging the posts pilot holes shall be required .
metal plates shall be installed after the posts have been set in place .
posts shall be placed in the ground to the depth shown on the plans .
foundations for the milepost or reference marker posts installed on freeways shall be constructed to the details and dimensions shown on the project plans .
excavation shall conform to the requirements of subsection numa .
existing markers and delineators that are to remain in place and which have been damaged by the contractor shall be replaced with new ones at its expense .
num method of measurement delineators and markers will be measured by the unit for each type of delineator and marker furnished and installed .
section num num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of delineators and markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price each for the type of delineator or marker designated in the bidding schedule which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place .
section num thermoplastic pavement markings num description the work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing pavement surfaces and furnishing and applying either white or yellow thermoplastic reflectorized pavement markings using extrusion ribbon or spray dispensing devices of the required shape and thickness to the prepared pavement surface at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans the manufacturers specifications and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num general requirements the thermoplastic reflectorized material shall consist of a solid mixture of heatstable resins white or yellow pigment intermixed glass beads filler and other materials in granular or block form specifically compounded for reflectorized pavement markings to be applied to the pavement in a molten state .
the characteristics of the liquefied material shall be such that complete and even coverage of specified areas to the required thicknesses is provided by the required application method and rate .
upon cooling to normal pavement temperature this material shall produce an adherent reflectorized marking capable of resisting deformation and wear in the roadway .
only thermoplastic materials currently shown on the departments approved products list apl shall be used .
copies of the most recent version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num composition the thermoplastic composition shall conform to the following requirements section num num percent by weight white yellow binder hydrocarbon or alkyd num num num num titanium dioxide num num basic lead chromate num num reflective glass intermix beads num num num num calcium carbonate or equivalent filler num num num num the ingredients of the thermoplastic composition shall be thoroughly mixed and in a solid or sectionalized block or freeflowing granular form .
w hen heated in a melting apparatus the material shall readily liquefy into a uniform solution .
this solution shall be free from all skins dirt foreign objects or any other ingredient which would cause bleeding staining blotting or discoloration when applied to the bituminous or concrete pavement surfaces .
the thermoplastic shall be one of the following two types based on the binder composition hydrocarbon shall consist mainly of synthetic petroleum hydrocarbon resins with appropriate fillers and pigments .
alkyd shall consist of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one of which is solid at room temperature and of highboilingpoint plasticizers .
at least one third of the binder composition and no less than eight percent by weight of the entire material formulation shall be solid maleicmodified glycerol ester resin .
the alkyd binder shall not contain any petroleumbased hydrocarbon resins .
an alkyd thermoplastic formulation shall be used for all symbols legends and transverse lines including stop bars and crosswalks .
either an alkyd or hydrocarbon thermoplastic formulation may be used for longitudinal lines including lane lines and edge lines unless otherwise shown on the project plans or specified herein .
extrusion or spray formulations shall be used in accordance with requirements of the application equipment used to install the markings .
a reflective glass beads in addition to incorporating glass beads in the thermoplastic mix glass beads shall be evenly applied to the surface of the molten material immediately after application at a minimum rate of num pounds of glass beads per num square feet of line num linear feet of fourinch stripe .
b filler section num num the filler shall be a white calcium carbonate or equivalent filler with a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch .
c titanium dioxide titanium dioxide shall conform to the requirements of astm d num for type ii num percent .
d lead chromate pigment the lead chromate pigment shall be silica double encapsulated heat resistant lead chromate pigment .
num physical characteristics of the composition a general requirements the thermoplastic material shall not exude fumes which are toxic injurious or require specialized breathing apparatus when heated to the temperature range specified by the manufacturer for application .
the material shall remain stable when held for four hours at this temperature or when subjected to four reheatings not exceeding a total of four hours after cooling to ambient temperature .
the temperature viscosity characteristics of the plastic material shall remain constant throughout the reheatings and shall show like characteristics from batch to batch .
there shall be no obvious change in color of the thermoplastic material as a result of reheating and the color of the material shall not vary from batch to batch .
b color the thermoplastic material after heating for four hours five minutes at num three degrees f and cooled to num three degrees f shall meet the following w hite daylight reflectance at num degrees num degrees shall be num percent minimum .
color shall match federal test standard number num color chip no .
num .
yellow daylight reflectance at num degrees num degrees shall be num percent minimum .
color shall match federal test standard number num color chip no .
num .
c retroreflectance section num num the white and yellow thermoplastic materials shall have the following minimum retroreflectance values at num degrees illumination angle and num degrees observation angle as measured by a mirolux num portable retroreflectometer or similar approved device within num days after application to the roadway surface product retroreflectance millicandelas w hite num yellow num d softening point after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours five minutes at num three degrees f and testing in accordance with astm d num the thermoplastic materials shall have a softening point of num num degrees f. e water absorption and specific gravity the thermoplastic material shall not exceed num percent by weight of retained water when tested in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
the specific gravity of the material as determined by section num of aashto t num shall be between num and num .
f impact resistance after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours five minutes at num three degrees f and forming test specimens the impact resistance shall be not less than num inchpounds when tested in accordance with section num of aashto t num .
g bond strength after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours five minutes at num three degrees f the bond strength to portland cement concrete shall be not less than num pounds per square inch .
the bond strength shall be determined in accordance with the procedures specified in section num of aashto t num .
h abrasion resistance the abrasion resistance of the thermoplastic material shall be determined by forming a representative lot of the material at a thickness of num inches on a fourinch square monel panel thickness num num inches on which a suitable primer has been previously applied and subjecting it to num revolutions on a taber abraser at num oc using hnum calibrated wheels weighted to num grams .
the wearing surface shall be kept wet with distilled water throughout the test .
section num num the maximum loss of thermoplastic material shall be num grams .
i cracking resistance at low temperature after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours five minutes at num three degrees f applying to concrete blocks and cooling to num three degrees the material shall show no cracks when observed from a distance exceeding num inches .
testing for low temperature crack resistance shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in section num of aashto t num .
j flowability after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours five minutes at num three degrees f and testing for flowability in accordance with section num of aashto t num the white thermoplastic shall have a maximum percent residue of num and the yellow thermoplastic shall have maximum percent residue of num .
k yellowness index the white thermoplastic material shall not exceed a yellowness index of num when tested in accordance with section num of aashto t num .
l flowability extended heating after heating the thermoplastic material for eight num hours at num three degrees with stirring the last six hours and testing for flowability in accordance with section num of aashto t num the thermoplastic shall have a maximum percent residue of num .
m flash point the thermoplastic material shall have a flash point not less than num degrees f when tested in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
n storage life the materials shall meet the requirements of this specification for a period of one year from the date of manufacture .
the month and year of manufacture shall be clearly marked on all packages of thermoplastic material .
the thermoplastic material must also melt uniformly with no evidence of skins or unmelted particles for this one year period .
any material which does not meet the above requirements or which is no longer within this one year period at the time of application shall not be used .
the contractor shall replace any outdated material with material meeting the above performance and time requirements at no additional cost to the department .
section num num o primersealer primersealers shall be used on portland cement concrete or existing hot mix asphaltic concrete surfaces prior to application of the thermoplastic material and shall be applied as recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
the primersealer shall be compounded specifically for use with the specified thermoplastic material .
application of primersealer will not be required on newly placed hotmix asphaltic concrete surfaces prior to application of the thermoplastic material .
num physical requirements for glass beads intermix and dropon reflective glass beads shall conform to the requirements of subsection num except as noted herein .
the intermix beads shall conform to aashto m num num type i and may be coated or uncoated as recommended by the manufacturer .
if uncoated beads are used the thermoplastic formulation shall be configured to minimize settling of the intermix beads when the material is heated and applied .
if recommended by the manufacturer the dropon beads shall have an adherence coating .
num construction requirements num equipment the equipment used to install hot applied thermoplastic material shall be constructed to provide continuous uniform heating to temperatures exceeding num degrees f while mixing and agitating the material .
the heating mechanism of the kettle shall be equipped with a heat transfer medium consisting of oil or air .
the burner flame shall not directly contact the material vessel surface .
the mixing and agitating mechanism shall be capable of thoroughly mixing the material at a rate which ensures constant uniform temperature distribution .
the kettle shall be equipped with two temperature gauges one to indicate the temperature of the oil or air heat transfer medium and the other to indicate the temperature of the thermoplastic material .
the kettle shall also be equipped with an automatic thermostatic control device that allows for positive temperature control to prevent overheating or underheating of the material .
the conveying portion of the equipment between the kettle and the line dispensing device shall be configured to prevent accumulation and clogging and shall maintain the material at the specified application temperature .
the dispensing device shall be capable of applying the required shapes and thicknesses .
all parts of the equipment which will section num num come in contact with the material shall be constructed for easy accessibility for cleaning and maintenance .
all melting and application equipment shall have functioning and calibrated temperature sensing devices to verify that temperature requirements are being met .
the contractor shall provide proof that the temperature sensing devices and verification thermometers are fully functional .
the application equipment to be used on roadway long line installations shall consist of either truckmounted units or motorized rideon equipment .
the truckmounted or motorized rideon units used for center lines lane lines gore lines and edge lines shall consist of a mobile selfcontained unit carrying its own material capable of operating at a minimum speed of five miles per hour while applying striping and shall be sufficiently maneuverable to install curved and straight lines both longitudinally and transversely .
the truck shall be equipped with high pressure air spray jets in front of the pavement marking material applicators to remove loose matter from the pavement surface where the marking material is to be applied .
hand applicator equipment to be used for all other roadway installations shall be either selfcontained melter application units or reservoir application units that are filled from a separate melter unit .
both types of units shall be equipped to maintain and measure the required application temperatures .
the hand applicator equipment shall be sufficiently maneuverable to install symbols and legends and curved and straight lines both longitudinally and transversely .
the application equipment shall be so constructed as to assure continuous uniformity in the dimensions of the pavement marking .
the applicator shall provide a means for cleanly cutting off square pavement markings edges and provide a method of applying skip and solid lane lines .
the equipment shall be constructed to provide varying widths and thicknesses of pavement markings .
the application equipment shall be mobile and maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
the equipment operator shall be located in such a position as to enable full visibility of the striping apparatus .
a glass bead top dressing shall be applied to the completed thermoplastic stripe by an automatic glass bead dispenser attached to the striping machine in such a manner that the beads are applied to the molten thermoplastic material immediately after it has been applied to the pavement .
the bead dispenser shall use pressuretype spray guns for truckmounted or motorized rideon units and a dropon bead dispenser for hand applicators .
the bead dispenser shall be capable of evenly distributing glass beads at the required application rate immediately after the application of the thermoplastic .
the bead dispenser shall dispense the beads in such a matter that they shall be embedded in the surface of the molten thermoplastic to an anchoring section num num depth of from num to num percent of the bead diameter .
the bead dispenser shall be equipped with an automatic cutoff which is synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material .
the heating kettle and application equipment shall meet the requirements of the national fire underwriters the national fire protection association and other applicable federal state and local authorities .
thermoplastic melting units trucks or trailers shall be equipped with foamtype fire extinguishers suitable for application to thermoplastic material that is at the flash point .
num application a placement locations pavement markings shall be positioned as defined on the plans and in the specifications .
w hen it becomes necessary for proper installation the engineer may revise individual marking locations as necessary to accommodate the following requirements marking lines shall not be placed on parallel construction or expansion joints .
longitudinal lines shall be offset to provide two to four inches of clearance from parallel construction and expansion joints unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
placement of symbols and legends on construction joints expansion joints or uneven pavement surfaces shall be avoided .
w here the location of construction joints expansion joints or otherwise unsuitable surfaces conflicts with specified locations for symbols or legends the engineer will designate the symbol or legend location .
the contractor shall identify such location conflicts for the engineers determination .
b materials selection and compatibility all thermoplastic material dropon glass beads and primersealer will be inspected and approved by the engineer prior to their application .
the contractor shall also provide samples of said materials if requested by the engineer .
all materials shall be properly packaged and stored .
each container to be used on the project shall be clearly labeled to indicate the following information nature type and formulation of the material including whether it is an alkyd or hydrocarbon manufacturer batch number and date of manufacture application requirements and constraints and compatibility requirements and constraints particularly those pertaining to equipment storage and other materials to be used .
section num num preparation and application equipment shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications and shall conform to the recommendations of the materials manufacturer .
incompatible materials shall not be used together .
the contractor shall not combine alkyd and hydrocarbon materials in preparation or application equipment .
the contractor shall completely clean preparation and application equipment when materials are changed .
the contractor shall dispose of excess materials cleaning fluids and all empty material containers at a site approved by the engineer .
c equipment inspections and deficiencies the contractor shall make daily maintenance and operation inspections of all application equipment to ensure that it is operable within the requirements of the specifications .
the contractor shall inform the engineer of any equipment breakdowns intermittent malfunctions or other conditions that may impact the proper application of specified markings .
any equipment judged to be unsuitable by the engineer shall be repaired or replaced .
d pavement surface the contractor shall remove all dirt dust grease oil loose surfacing materials poorly adhered existing markings or other detrimental material from the road surface prior to application of the thermoplastic material .
the method of cleaning the surface is subject to approval by the engineer and shall include sweeping and the use of highpressure air spray .
the method of surface preparation shall also be in accordance with the recommendations of the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
loose material including all grindings and obliterated markings shall be removed from the pavement surface and disposed of properly .
w hen thermoplastic markings are to be applied to new portland cement concrete pavement any curing compound present shall be removed by means of a highpressure water jet or sandblasting followed by sweeping and highpressure air spray .
the curing compound shall be removed at least two inches beyond the entire perimeter of each marking to be installed .
at the time of application of primersealer and thermoplastics the road surface shall be absolutely dry with no detectable or measurable surface or nearsurface dampness .
if precipitation or other surface wetting is imminent all marking operations shall be stopped .
if any surface dampness is detected during marking activities marking operations shall be stopped until the pavement dries .
if the hotapplied thermoplastic marking blisters upon application marking operations shall be stopped until the cause potentially including subsurface moisture is determined and corrected .
section num num e primer application on both old and new portland cement concrete pavement a primersealer shall be used if recommended by the thermoplastic manufacturer .
the primersealer shall be applied at the manufacturers recommended application rates prior to placing the thermoplastic material .
the primersealer shall be allowed to set up for the manufacturers specified cure or evaporation time and shall be free of solvent and water when the thermoplastic is applied .
the thermoplastic material shall be applied to primed pavement surfaces within the working time specified by the primersealer and thermoplastic materials manufacturers .
if the primed surfaces are not marked within these time limits the contractor shall reprime the surfaces as required by the manufacturer at no additional cost to the department .
if an epoxy primer is used the thermoplastic application shall be completed before the epoxy has cured .
improper primersealer application may result in bond failure between the thermoplastic and the pavement surface and may cause the thermoplastic surface to pinhole or blister .
should these conditions occur all application operations shall stop until the cause is determined and corrected .
all such defective markings shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
f pavement temperatures ribbongun application procedures shall not be used if the wind chill factor is below num degrees f. for other application procedures the road surface temperature at the time of application shall be a minimum of num degrees f and rising .
if at any time during marking operations the air or pavement temperature falls below these requirements all marking operations shall stop .
the contractor shall measure pavement surface temperatures one half hour prior to the start of the striping installation activities and as deemed necessary by the engineer until the end of the application period .
for elevation changes greater than num feet temperature readings at the highest elevation shall govern unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the lowest temperature so measured shall govern unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the temperature measurements shall be recorded in a log book and provided to the engineer when required .
the pavement surface temperature shall be measured with a standard surface temperature thermometer or a noncontact infrared thermometer .
g thermoplastic application section num num the thermoplastic pavement marking material shall be extruded or sprayed on to the pavement surface at a material temperature between num and num degrees depending on manufacturers recommendations ambient air and pavement temperatures and the nature of the pavement surface .
the contractor shall verify temperature requirements with a noncontact infrared thermometer as directed by the engineer .
the alkyd and hydrocarbon thermoplastic material temperatures shall not exceed num degrees f. material temperatures exceeding num degrees f shall be allowed for short periods of time however in no case shall the material be held for more than four hours at temperatures above num degrees f. total heating time for any batch of material shall not exceed six hours .
the contractor shall note in the temperature log the time when each batch of thermoplastic material is first heated .
the start of heating time shall also be marked on the side of the kettle to which it applies .
specified temperature requirements shall be maintained at all times during application .
the contractor shall monitor material temperature at thirty minute intervals unless otherwise directed by the engineer and maintain a log of temperature readings taken .
readings shall be taken at the melting kettle or the application outlet point as determined by the engineer .
the contractor shall minimize the thermoplastic material remaining in the kettle at the end of the work day and shall blend a minimum of num percent fresh material the start of each day .
during project delays the contractor may transfer heated thermoplastic material into approved containers for later reuse subject to specified limits on total acceptable heating time for each batch .
dropon glass beads shall be mechanically deposited at the specified rate into the thermoplastic material immediately after the thermoplastic marking is applied .
the bead dispenser shall evenly distribute the beads such that they embed in the surface of the thermoplastic to a depth of between num and num percent of the bead diameter .
if the glass beads do not adhere to the thermoplastic marking operations shall be stopped until the problem has been corrected .
all markings which do not meet the requirements of subsection numc as determined by the engineer shall be removed by the contractor and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
unless otherwise specified thermoplastic pavement markings for legends and symbols and for crosswalks stop bars and other transverse elements shall be extruded and shall be num num inches thick .
longitudinal markings such as edge lines lane lines gore lines and other markings parallel to traffic shall be sprayed thermoplastic and shall be num num inches thick .
longitudinal markings of approximately num feet or less may be extruded and shall be a minimum of num num inches thick .
the thermoplastic section num num thickness shall be uniform and consistent throughout the total length of the marking project .
the contractor shall perform periodic spot checks of thermoplastic material to verify that the required thickness has been attained .
random spot checks of the thermoplastic thickness will be made by the engineer to ensure conformance with the required criteria .
suggested spot check procedures include the following w et thickness can be field tested immediately after the thermoplastic marking is applied by inserting a thin graduated machinist rule or similar instrument into the molten thermoplastic to the depth of the pavement surface .
the thickness is then determined visually by noting on the scale the depth of the penetration or coating of the instrument .
dried thickness can be field tested by placing a small flat sheet of metal with a known thickness immediately ahead of the striping apparatus .
after striping remove the sample and use a suitable measuring device such as a caliper or micrometer to determine the thickness of the dried marking .
the finished thermoplastic line shall have well defined edges and be free from waviness .
lateral deviation of the thermoplastic line shall not exceed one inch in num .
the longitudinal deviation of a painted segment and gap shall not vary more than six inches in a numfoot cycle .
the actual width of line shall be within the limits specified in the following table according to the width of line called for on the plans plan width actual width num inches num to num inches num inches num to num inches over num inches num inch after application and sufficient drying time the thermoplastic marking shall show no appreciable deformation or discoloration under local traffic conditions with air and road temperatures ranging from num to num degrees f. the drying time shall be defined as the minimum elapsed time after application when the thermoplastic pavement markings shall have and retain the characteristics required herein and after which normal traffic will leave no impression or imprint on the newly applied marking .
w hen applied within a temperature range of num num degrees f and thickness range of num to num inches the material shall set to bear traffic in not more than two minutes when the air and pavement surface temperatures are approximately num three degrees f and not more than num minutes when the air and road surface temperatures are approximately num three degrees .
the engineer may conduct field tests in accordance with astm d num to verify actual drying times .
section num num num method of measurement thermoplastic pavement longitudinal and transverse markings such as edge lines lane lines gore lines crosswalks and stop bars will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the pavement marking line and will be based on a fourinchwide line .
measurement for striping with a plan width greater or less than the basic four inches as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer will be made by the same method and then adjusted by the following factor plan w idth of striping inches x linear feet num inches no measurement will be made of the number of linear feet of gaps in dashed lines .
double marking lines consisting of two fourinchwide stripes will be measured as two individual marking lines .
crosswalk lines stop bars stop lines gore lines cross hatch lines chevron lines and railroad marking transverse lines will be measured for centerline length and adjusted for widths other than four inches as defined above .
thermoplastic pavement marking symbols such as diamonds or single double or triple arrows will be measured by each unit applied .
each pavement symbol as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
thermoplastic pavement marking legends defined as a complete letter grouping such as school xing stop rr or only .
will be measured by each unit applied .
each pavement legend as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
no separate measurement or payment will be made for cleaning and preparing the pavement surface including abrasive sweeping and highpressure air spray and for disposal of excess materials cleaning fluids and empty material containers the cost being considered as included in contract items .
removal of curing compound from new portland cement concrete pavement and the application of primersealer which is to be applied to both old and new portland cement concrete pavement prior to application of thermoplastic marking shall be measured by the linear foot for striping lines regardless of width or unit each for symbols and legends and in accordance with the items of work established in the bid schedule .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of thermoplastic pavement markings of the type specified in the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be section num num paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including pavement surface preparation and glass beads .
the accepted quantities for removal of curing compound from new portland cement concrete pavement and the application of primersealer measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices under the items of work established in the bid schedule .
section num preformed plastic pavement marking num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials preparing the pavement surface and applying preformed reflectorized pavement marking tape arrows and legends to the pavement in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
preformed pavement marking tape arrows and legends shall be limited to the following applications unless otherwise specified in the contract documents a preformed pavement markings type i permanent type i shall be a general purpose high durability retroreflective pliant polymer film for preformed striping and markings to be used for finished permanent markings .
type i shall be capable of performing as specified herein when subjected to high traffic volumes and severe wear conditions such as repeated shear action from crossover or encroachment on edge and channelization lines starting stopping and turning movements .
b preformed pavement markings type ii temporary removable type ii shall be a removable preformed retroreflective pavement marking capable of performing for the duration of a normal construction season .
it shall be a nonmetallic mixture of high quality materials and shall be capable of being removed intact or in large pieces either manually or with a recommended roll up device .
type ii shall be used on finished pavement surfaces where traffic control or channelization through the construction zone is temporary requiring removal prior to final pavement markings .
c preformed pavement markings type iii temporary nonremovable type iii shall be a nonremovable preformed retroreflective film on a conformable metallic backing capable of performing for the duration of section num num a normal construction season .
type iii shall be used in construction zones where removal is unnecessary due to placement of future paving courses or where pavement will be removed obliterated or abandoned at the completion of the project .
num materials num preformed pavement markings type i permanent a general certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
type i preformed plastic pavement marking material shall consist of a homogeneous extruded prefabricated white or yellow thermoplastic film of specified thickness and width that shall be capable of being affixed to nonbleeding bituminous or portland cement concrete .
it shall contain reflective glass beads uniformly distributed throughout the entire cross section and bonded to the top surface of the material .
the preformed plastic film shall be weather resistant and through normal traffic wear shall show no appreciable fading lifting or shrinkage or significant tearing roll back or other signs of poor adhesion throughout the useful life of the marking .
w hen extruded the plastic film without adhesive shall be a minimum of num inch thick .
the plastic film as supplied shall be of good appearance free of cracks and discolorations and the edges shall be cleancut and well defined .
the plastic film may be supplied complete with a precoated factoryapplied pressure sensitive adhesive backing with a protective release paper or it may be furnished with separate adhesive as recommended by the manufacturer .
w hether the adhesive is precoated or supplied separately the adhesive shall be such as to allow the plastic film to be repositioned on the pavement surface to which it is applied before permanently fixing it in its final position with a downward pressure .
a list of approved manufacturers and distributors for type i permanent preformed pavement marking material are shown on the departments approved products list apl .
copies of the most recent version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
b composition requirements the preformed plastic pavement marking material shall consist of the following components section num num minimum percent by weight resins and plasticizers num pigments num reflective glass beads num c physical requirements num color the pigments shall be selected and blended to provide a white or yellow marking film which conforms to standard highway colors throughout the expected life of the film .
num bend test the plastic film shall be sufficiently flexible so that at a temperature of num to num degrees f an unmounted piece of material without adhesive and paper backing three by six inches in size may be bent over a oneinch mandrel until the end faces are parallel and one inch apart without showing any fracture lines in the uppermost surface .
num tensile strength the plastic film without adhesive or paper backing shall have a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch when a specimen six inches long by one inch wide is tested in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
the rate of pull of the test shall be num of an inch per minute .
the test shall be conducted at a temperature between num and num degrees f. the elongation shall be no greater than num percent .
num plastic pull test a sixinch long by oneinch wide section of the plastic film without adhesive and paper backing shall support a dead load weight of four pounds for not less than five minutes at a temperature between num and num degrees f. num abrasion resistance the plastic film shall have a maximum loss in weight of num grams in num revolutions when abraded according to federal test method standard no .
num method num using hnum calibrase wheels with a numgram load on each wheel .
num preformed pavement markings type ii temporary removable section num num certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
type ii preformed pavement markings shall be a nonmetallic mixture of conformable materials and pigments intended for marking applications where removability is required .
the marking material shall be white or yellow retroreflective film conforming to standard highway colors with glass beads in a reflective layer bonded to the top surface .
the glass beads shall meet the durability and reflectance criteria specified in subsection num .
the markings shall be precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of adhering to roadway surfaces under climatic and traffic conditions normally encountered in the construction work zone when applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesives .
newly applied markings shall be capable of being immediately exposed to traffic without pickup or distortion by vehicles .
the markings shall be weather resistant and through normal traffic wear shall show no appreciable fading lifting shrinkage tearing roll back or other signs of poor adhesion throughout the useful life of the marking .
temporary pavement markings shall be removable from asphalt and concrete pavement intact or in large sections by following the manufacturers instructions .
it shall be removable either manually or with a rollup device at pavement temperatures above num degrees f without the use of heat solvents grinding or sand blasting .
visible adhesive residue remaining after removal of temporary pavement markings shall be easily removable without damaging or scarring the pavement surface and without the use of solvents or grinding .
w hen extruded pavement marking material without adhesive shall be a minimum of num inches thick .
w hen supplied the material shall be of good appearance free from cracks and edges shall be true straight and unbroken .
num preformed pavement markings type iii temporary nonremovable certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
type iii preformed pavement markings shall be a retroreflective film on a conformable metallic backing intended for marking applications where removal is not a requirement .
the marking material shall be white or yellow conforming to standard highway colors and shall contain glass beads meeting the durability and reflectance criteria specified in subsection num .
the markings shall be precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive capable of adhering to roadway surfaces under climatic and traffic conditions normally encountered in the construction work zone when section num num applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesives .
newly applied markings shall be capable of being immediately exposed to traffic without pickup or distortion by vehicles .
the markings shall be weather resistant and through normal traffic wear shall show no appreciable fading lifting shrinkage tearing roll back or other signs of poor adhesion throughout the useful life of the marking .
num reflective glass beads a general requirements the beads shall be manufactured from glass of a composition designed to be highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering .
during manufacture of the preformed plastic pavement marking material reflective glass beads shall be mixed into the material in the amounts indicated .
a layer of reflective glass beads shall be bonded to the top surface of all types of preformed pavement marking materials .
b physical requirements num roundness the roundness of the glass beads shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
a minimum of num percent of the beads shall be waterwhite true spheres free from imperfections of all types including air inclusions film scratches clusters and surface scoring .
num index of reflection the glass beads used with the preformed pavement marking material shall have a reflective index of not less than num when tested by the liquid immersion method at num oc .
num gradation the size of the glass beads shall be such that performance requirements for the preformed pavement marking material shall be met .
num chemical resistance the glass beads shall withstand immersion in water and acids without undergoing noticeable corrosion or etching and shall not be darkened nor otherwise noticeably decomposed by sulfides .
the test for chemical resistance shall consist of placing three to fivegram portions of the sample in each of three pyrex glass beakers or porcelain dishes one sample shall be covered with distilled water one with a numn solution of sulfuric acid and the other with a num percent solution of sodium section num num sulfide .
after one hour of immersion the glass beads of each sample shall be examined microscopically for evidence of darkening and frosting .
num construction requirements the contractor shall install preformed pavement markings at the locations shown on the project plans as specified in the special provisions or as directed by the engineer .
preformed marking tape shall be applied manually or with the tape applicators approved by the tape manufacturer .
all markings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as specified herein .
preformed pavement markings shall not be applied over other markings or old paint unless specified in the project plans or directed by the engineer .
preformed pavement markings shall be applied to surfaces that are free of moisture and thoroughly cleaned of loose foreign or other material that may adversely affect bonding .
the contractor shall remove all dirt dust grease oil or other detrimental material from the road surface .
the method of cleaning the surface is subject to approval by the engineer and shall include sweeping and the use of highpressure air spray .
newly placed surfaces need not be cleaned unless in the opinion of the engineer the surface has become contaminated to the extent that cleaning is necessary to provide proper bonding .
preformed pavement markings shall be applied immediately after the surface has been prepared or as soon as possible after placement and completion of new pavement .
at the time of application the road surface temperature shall not be less than num degrees f and the pavement surface shall be absolutely dry .
for temporary markings the weather conditions noted above may be waived at the engineers discretion to obtain a traffic stripe prior to allowing traffic to traverse the roadway .
despite the required minimum surface temperature and surface condition the engineer at any time may require that work cease or that the work day be reduced in the event of weather conditions either existing or expected which would have an adverse affect upon the working conditions .
the contractor shall use butt splices only and shall not overlap the marking material .
all markings shall be thoroughly tamped with approved mechanical tampers .
the contractor shall immediately correct all misalignments when so ordered by the engineer .
the misaligned portions shall be removed and reinstalled in accordance with these specifications .
all areas marked with preformed marking tape shall be ready for traffic immediately after application .
temporary pavement markings shall be maintained and replaced when necessary by the contractor until they are covered with the next overlay course or are removed because they are no longer applicable .
the temporary pavement markings shall be removed immediately when no section num num longer needed for traffic control or when the temporary pavement markings will be in conflict with the succeeding traffic pattern .
this removal includes the removal of pronounced markings caused by the adhesive across lanes transitions or tapers .
removable temporary marking material shall not be burned or ground off .
preformed pavement markings shall be removed by methods recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
residual adhesive ghosting shadows or pavement scarring which might cause confusion during darkness or adverse weather conditions shall be removed immediately by the contractor when so ordered by the engineer .
the application of preformed pavement markings shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the material and these specifications however minor changes will be allowed if such are shown to produce an equal or better application and is approved by the engineer .
failure to satisfactorily adhere to the pavement or to be satisfactorily removable shall be reason for disallowing the use of any particular type of marking material .
approval for use of any type of marking material is subject to satisfactory performance under traffic .
any failure during the time frame the material is scheduled to perform shall be repaired immediately by the contractor .
continued failure of a material to perform shall be cause for disallowing further use of that particular manufacturers material .
failure of materials inadequate marking characteristics or any other confusing or unsafe condition in a construction work zone will not be tolerated .
any condition where the safety of workmen or the traveling public might be endangered shall be remedied immediately by the contractor if so ordered by the engineer .
num method of measurement measurement of preformed pavement marking arrows and legends will be made for each arrow or legend as shown on the plans furnished and applied in accordance with the requirements specified herein and on the plans .
measurement of preformed pavement marking lines will be made by the linear foot along the center line of the pavement line and will be based on a fourinch wide stripe .
measurement for pavement lines with a plan width greater or less than the basic four inches will be made by the following method plan w idth of striping inches x linear feet num inches w hen type ii or iii temporary preformed pavement markings are required for maintaining traffic through a construction work zone and are approved for use by the engineer but are not listed as pay items in the bidding schedule they will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of preformed pavement markings measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the type specified in the bidding schedule which price shall be full compensation for the item complete in place including necessary pavement cleaning removal of type ii temporary markings and maintaining types ii and iii temporary markings in construction work zones .
w hen type ii or iii temporary preformed pavement markings are required for maintaining traffic through a construction work zone but are not listed as pay items in the bidding schedule they will be considered as included in the lump sum paid for maintenance and protection of traffic in accordance with subsection num .
additional payment will be made for replacement of temporary markings when the contractor is required by the engineer to install marking materials on distressed pavements or during adverse weather conditions and subsequent failure occurs .
distressed pavement conditions are defined as alligator cracking bleeding or spalling of bituminous pavements and spalling of pcc pavements .
adverse weather conditions are defined as any occurrence where application is required at pavement temperatures less than num degrees f or when precipitation occurs within num hours before or after application .
the department will pay for the replacement where failures occur at the contract unit price for the initial occurrence .
in the event a second failure occurs when markings have been reapplied on distressed pavements or under weather conditions described above the engineer shall determine if conditions require primer alternate methods of marking or reapplication of preformed markings .
preformed markings will be paid for at the contract unit price .
primers or other methods of markings deemed necessary by the engineer will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num raised pavement markers num description the work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing the pavement surface furnishing all materials equipment tools and labor and placing raised pavement markers of the type specified at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num general section num num certificates of compliance for raised pavement markers and adhesive conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer at least num days prior to use .
a minimum of one sample per lot per type of marker shall be taken by the engineer .
the pavement marker samples shall be tested to determine conformance to the applicable standard drawings and these specifications .
the base of the pavement markers shall be free from glass glaze or from substances which may reduce its bond to the adhesive .
the base shall be flat and its deviation from a flat surface shall not exceed num inches .
num reflective pavement markers reflective pavement markers shall be of the following type type c clear red type d yellow twoway type e clear yellow type g clear oneway type h yellow oneway reflective pavement markers shall be of the prismatic reflector type consisting of a molded methyl methacrylate or suitably compounded acrylonitrile butadiene styrene abs shell filled with a mixture of an inert thermosetting compound and filler material .
the exterior surface of the shell shall be smooth and shall contain one or two prismatic reflector faces of the color specified .
w hen illuminated by an automobile headlight the color of the reflectors shall be an approved clear yellow or red as designated .
reflectors not meeting the required color may be rejected .
permanent reflective pavement markers will be tested for compressive strength abrasion resistance and specific intensity .
permanent reflective pavement markers shall have thin untempered glass or other abrasion resistant material bonded to the prismatic reflector face to provide an extremely hard and durable abrasive resistant reflector surface .
the glass or other abrasion resistant surface is not required on the red faces of twoway clearred permanent reflective markers .
the area covered by the glass or other abrasion resistant surface shall not be less than three square inches .
temporary reflective pavement markers will be tested for compressive strength and specific intensity .
temporary reflective pavement markers or permanent reflective pavement markers used as temporary will not be tested for abrasion resistance .
section num num the strength by compressive loading shall be at least num pounds for both permanent and temporary reflective pavement markers .
the original specific intensity of each reflecting surface for both temporary and permanent reflective markers shall not be less than the following reflectance specific intensity candelasfootcandle degrees incidence clear yellow red num num num num num num num num permanent reflective pavement markers shall be subject to an abrasion resistance test as follows steel w ool abrasion procedure form a oneinch diameter flat pad using no .
num coarse steel wool per federal specification ffw num .
place the steel wool pad on the reflector lens face .
apply a force of num pounds and rub the entire lens surface num times .
after the lens surface has been abraded the specific intensity of each clear and yellow reflective surface shall be not less than that required above for the original specific intensity .
num nonreflective pavement markers and reflectorized dagmars nonreflective pavement markers shall be of the following types type color a white ay yellow reflectorized dagmars shall be of the following types type j white type jy yellow nonreflective pavement markers and reflectorized dagmars shall consist of a heatfired vitreous ceramic base and a heatfired opaque glazed surface which will produce the required properties .
markers shall be produced from any suitable combination of intimately mixed clays shales flints feldspars or other inorganic material which will meet the properties herein required .
markers shall be thoroughly and evenly matured and free from defects which will affect appearance or serviceability .
the top surface of the marker shall be in reasonably close conformity with the configuration shown on the plans .
markers shall be convex and the radius of curvature shall be between num and six inches except that the radius of the num inch nearest the edge may be less .
all section num num edges shall be rounded and any change in curvature shall be gradual .
the top and sides shall be smooth and free of mold marks pits indentations air bubbles or other objectionable marks or discolorations .
nonreflective pavement markers and dagmars shall meet the following requirements glaze thickness inches num minimum moh hardness num minimum directional reflectance w hite only glazed surface body of marker num minimum num minimum yellowness index w hite only glazed surface body of marker num maximum num maximum color yellow only purity percent range dominant w ave length mu range total luminous reflectance y valve num num num num num minimum compressive strength pounds num minimum w ater absorption percent num maximum autoclave glaze shall not spall craze or peel reflectorized dagmars shall have encapsulated lens reflectors conforming to standard manufacturing practices .
num jiggle bars a general types k and ky jiggle bars shall be concrete or ceramic at the option of the contractor and shall be shaped to conform to the details shown on the plans .
the same type of jiggle bar shall be used throughout any one project .
jiggle bars shall be painted either white or yellow and shall be reflectorized as shown on the plans .
the color shall be uniform .
the bottom surface of the jiggle bars shall be of a roughness comparable to at least that of fine grade sandpaper .
the bottom surface shall not be grooved such that air will be trapped in the grooves when it is pressed into the adhesive .
b concrete concrete jiggle bars shall be made of class b concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
section num num c ceramic ceramic jiggle bars shall be made of a heatfired vitreous base .
the glazed surface shall not craze spall or peel when tested in accordance with the requirements of astm c num for one cycle at num pounds per square inch .
the jiggle bar tiles shall have a compressive strength as follows when tested in accordance with the requirements of astm c num minimum average of five units num psi individual minimum one unit num psi num bituminous adhesive the bituminous adhesive for pavement markers shall be a hotmelt adhesive manufactured by an approved manufacturer .
a list of approved manufacturers of bituminous adhesive is shown on the departments approved products list apl .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
num construction requirements the portion of the highway to which the markers are to be attached shall be free of dirt existing painted lines curing compound grease oil moisture loose or unsound layers and any other material which could adversely affect the bond of the adhesive .
the method of cleaning the pavement surface and removal of detrimental material is subject to approval by the engineer and shall include sweeping and the use of highpressure air spray .
on portland cement concrete pavement and old asphaltic concrete pavements cleaning shall be accomplished by sandblasting followed by sweeping andor air blowing .
newly placed asphaltic concrete pavement need not be sandblasted unless in the opinion of the engineer the surface is contaminated with materials that would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive .
the adhesive shall be placed uniformly on the cleaned pavement surface in an amount sufficient to result in complete coverage of the area of contact of the markers with no voids present and with a slight excess after the markers have been placed .
the markers shall be placed in position and pressure applied until firm contact is made with the pavement .
the markers shall be protected against impact until the adhesive has set to the degree acceptable to the engineer .
excess adhesive on the pavement and on the exposed surfaces of the markers shall be immediately removed .
thinners or solvents which may be detrimental to either the markers or the bond provided by the adhesive shall not be used in removing excess adhesive .
section num num markers shall not be installed when the temperature of the pavement surface or the atmosphere is less than num degrees f when the relative humidity is num percent or higher or when the pavement surface is not dry .
all markers shall be installed to the line approved by the engineer and in such manner that the reflective face of the markers is perpendicular to a line parallel to the roadway centerline .
no pavement markers shall be installed over longitudinal or transverse joints of the pavement surface .
num method of measurement pavement markers will be measured as a unit for each marker furnished and placed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of pavement markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the type designated in the bidding schedule complete in place including adhesive and surface preparation .
section num tubular marker flexible num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing flexible tubular markers in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the work shall also include the removal and salvage of the markers when ordered by the engineer .
num materials the post shall be of a flexible material which is resistant to impact ultra violet light ozone hydrocarbons and stiffening with age .
the base shall prevent post removal by impact or vandals .
the post and base shall exhibit good workmanship and shall be free of burns discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects which affect appearance or serviceability .
the post shall be designed to resist overturning twisting and displacement from wind and impact forces .
a nummile per hour wind load shall not deflect the post more than two inches from the atrest position .
measurement shall be made at the point of maximum deflection and normal to the movement .
the post shall have minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square .
the tensile stress shall be determined in accordance with the section num num standard method of test for tensile properties of plastic astm d num test specimen type num .
the rate of jaw separation shall be num inches per minute .
the post shall be conditioned for a minimum of two hours in an oven at num three degrees f. the conditioned post shall be capable of straightening itself within num seconds when bent num degrees at the midpoint for each of four bends .
the stress test on each post shall be completed within two minutes of removal from oven .
the post shall be sufficiently rigid to resist wilting after conditioning a minimum of two hours at num three degrees f. the post shall be conditioned a minimum of two hours at num three degrees f in an environmentally controlled test chamber .
testing shall be performed in the environmental chamber .
the post shall be sufficiently flexible to permit four numdegree bends at the midpoint without cracking each time straightening itself within num seconds .
the post shall be manufactured from an impact resistant material so that an installed post is capable of selferecting and withstanding num vehicle impacts at num miles per hour at temperatures of num degrees f or above without breakage or loss of serviceability .
little or no damage shall be caused to the impacting vehicle .
the vehicle shall be a typical sedan with a weight of num num pounds .
the post shall also be capable of sustaining a wheel hit during testing at num miles per hour without loss of serviceability .
the reflective sheeting shall be a high reflectivity flexible sheeting conforming to the requirements of section num .
the sheeting must retain num percent of its reflectivity after num vehicle impacts at num miles per hour .
color shall be silverwhite yellow or green in accordance with the appropriate federal highway administration color tolerance chart .
the base shall prevent post removal by impact or vandals .
the base shall not protrude more than four inches above the pavement surface .
num construction the base shall be installed with an epoxy adhesive or acceptable alternate in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
w hen used in a construction work zone it shall be the contractors responsibility to keep the tubular markers bright and clean for maximum target value .
w hen replacement repair or resetting of markers is necessary during traffic control in a construction work zone such work shall be done immediately by the contractor .
section num num num method of measurement tubular markers will be measured by the unit for each marker furnished and installed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of tubular markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified herein and as shown on the plans .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to reset those markers that become detached from the pavement at no additional cost to the department .
w here the engineer determines markers are in need of repair such repairs shall be made by the contractor and will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
w here the engineer determines markers need to be replaced such replacement shall be made by the contractor and additional payment will be made at the contract unit price .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for removing hauling and stockpiling salvaged markers the cost being considered as included in the cost of the contract item .
section num permanent pavement markings num description the work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing the pavement surface furnishing all materials and applying white or yellow waterborne leadfree rapiddry traffic paint and reflective glass beads at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans mutcd and associated adot supplement the requirements of these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
num materials num pavement marking paint a general all material used in the formulation of the pavement marking paint shall meet the requirements herein specified .
any materials not specifically covered shall meet the approval of the engineer .
section num num certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for each lot or batch of paint prior to its use .
b composition requirements the pavement marking paint shall be a readymixed one component waterborne leadfree traffic line paint of the correct color to be applied to either asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement .
the composition of the paint shall be determined by the manufacturer .
it will be the manufacturers responsibility to produce a pigmented waterborne paint containing all the necessary cosolvents dispersant wetting agents preservatives and all other additives so that the paint shall retain its viscosity stability and all of the properties as specified herein .
the manufacturer shall certify that the product does not contain mercury lead hexavalent chromium toluene chlorinated solvents hydrolyzable chlorine derivatives ethylenebased glycol ethers and their acetates and not any carcinogen as defined in num cfr num .
lead content shall not exceed num percent of weight of the dry film and the test for chromium content shall be negative .
no glass beads will be allowed in the pavement marking paint .
glass beads will be applied after the paint has been applied .
c manufacturing formulations the manufacturer shall formulate the pavement marking paint in a consistent manner and notify the engineer of any change of formulation .
the formulation of the paint shall be determined by the manufacturer .
it will be the manufacturers responsibility to formulate paint which will meet the quantitative and qualitative requirements of this specification .
any change in the formulation of the paint must be approved by the engineer .
d quantitative requirements of mixed paints white yellow pigment percent by weight astm d num allowable variation from qualifying sample num num nonvolatile content percent by weight astm d num allowable variation from qualifying sample num num viscosity krebs units at num num of astm d num num num num num w eight per gallon pounds per gallon num num of astm d nump allowable variation from qualifying sample num num vehicle composition section num num white yellow vehicle infrared spectra astm d num allowable variation from qualifying sample none none ph astm e num allowable variation from qualifying sample num num fineness of dispersion hegman minimum astm d num num num volatile organic compounds pounds per gallon of paint maximum astm d num according to num .
num num flash point degrees f. minimum astm d num method a num num dry time to no pick up with no beads minutes maximum astm d num num num dry through time minutes astm d num except no thumb pressure is used when thumb is rotated num o on paint film num num flexibility ttpnumd pass pass e qualitative requirements num color of yellow paint the color of the yellow paint shall closely match federal standard numb color no .
num .
the color shall be checked visually and will be checked against tristimulus values for the color according to federal test method standard no .
num .
num dry opacity dry opacity for the paint will be determined using a blackwhite leneta chart form numc opacity and a photovolt num reflectance meter or equal .
using a nummil gap doctor blade a film of paint is drawn down covering both black and white portions of the chart .
the film shall be allowed to dry num hours .
after calibrating the reflectance meter according to the manufacturers instructions measure the reflectance over the white and black portions with the green tristimulus filter .
dry opacity is calculated as follows dry opacity flec ce over black flec ce over white re tan re tan section num num dry opacity for both white and yellow paint shall be a minimum num .
num yellowness index yellowness index for white paint will be determined as described for dry opacity only use a nummil gap doctor blade to draw down the paint .
after num hours for drying measure the reflectance of the paint film using the green blue and amber tristimulus filters .
calculate the yellowness index as follows yellowness index am ber blue g reen x num yellowness index for the white paint shall be a maximum of num .
num reflectance reflectance for both white and yellow paint will be determined using the same nummil drawdown film as for the yellowness index .
for white paint the same sample may be utilized for both the yellowness index and reflectance .
measure the reflectance of the paint film using the green tristimulus filter .
reflectance for the white paint shall be a minimum of num .
reflectance for the yellow paint may range from num to num inclusive .
num uv color durability uv color durability shall be determined using a quv w eatherometer with ultra violet light and condensate exposure according to astm g num for num hours total .
the repeating cycle shall be four hours uv exposure at num oc followed by four hours condensate exposure at num oc .
after num hours of exposure the yellowness index for white paint shall not exceed num and yellow paint must still match federal standard numb color no .
num .
num static heat stability to determine static heat stability for the paint place one pint of paint in a sealed can and heat in an air circulation oven at num one degrees f for a period of one week .
remove the paint from the oven and check the viscosity in krebs units at num one degrees f according to astm d num .
the viscosity measured must be in the range from num to num inclusive .
also check for any signs of instability .
num heatshear stability to determine heatshear stability for the paint one pint of the paint is sheared in a w aring blender at high speed to num degrees f. the blender should have a tight fitting lid taped onto it to minimize volatile loss .
w hen the paint reaches num degrees f stop the blender immediately pour the paint into a sample can and apply a cover to seal section num num the can .
let the paint cool overnight and examine for jelling or other signs of instability .
measure viscosity in krebs units at num one degrees f according to astm d num .
the viscosity measured must be in the range from num to num inclusive .
if not within the upper limit run total solids on the sheared paint and adjust solids if necessary by adding water to reach the original solids content .
if the solids content required adjustment again check the viscosity of the paint .
the viscosity must be in the range from num to num inclusive .
num scrub resistance scrub resistance will be determined according to astm d num .
use an appropriate doctor blade to provide a dry film thickness of three to four mils .
allow the paint to cure for num hours .
perform the scrub resistance test at num one degrees f and num five percent humidity .
record the number of cycles to remove the paint film .
the number of cycles recorded must be a minimum of num .
num spraying properties the paint shall be applied at a num mils wet film thickness in the field .
the paint shall show the following properties at ambient temperatures of num to num degrees f with a paint spray temperature of num degrees f maximum and six to eight pounds of postapplied glass beads per gallon of paint .
beads shall conform to subsection num of these specifications .
a dry to a notrack condition in five minutes or less when the line is crossed over in a passing maneuver with a standardsized automobile .
b produce a cleancut smooth line with no overspray or puddling .
c paint immediately after application shall accept glass beads so that the spheres shall be embedded into the paint film to a depth of num percent of their diameter .
d paint when heated to the temperature necessary to obtain the specified dry time shall show no evidence of instability such as viscosity increase jelling or poor spray application .
num freezethaw properties the paint viscosity or consistency shall not change significantly when the paint is tested for resistance to five cycles of freezethaw according to astm d num .
num road service rating section num num test stripes of the paint shall be applied transversely across the road four inches in width and approximately num feet long at a location approved by the engineer .
w et film thickness of the test stripes shall be approximately num mils as determined according to astm d num and astm d num prior to test stripe application .
to aid in obtaining the correct film thickness a length of roofing paper placed by the side of the road can be used .
place a rigid metal test panel on the roofing paper in the path of a test line .
immediately after the test line is applied by the striper measure the wet film thickness .
if not satisfactory adjust the spray pressure and repeat until the target wet film thickness is attained .
it is important that no glass beads be present that would give a false wet film thickness .
w hen the wet film thickness is correct apply a test line across a tared metal test panel .
after this apply another test line across a different tared metal test panel this time also adding the beads .
these samples are necessary to determine the initial bead retention .
glass beads conforming to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications moisture proof type will be applied after the paint has been applied but during the same striping operation at a rate such that the initial bead retention on the test line is a minimum of six pounds of beads per gallon of wet paint .
the initial bead retention will be determined analytically by the adot materials group concurrently with the determination of the dry paint thickness utilizing tared metal test panels .
the paint shall accept the glass beads so that the spheres are embedded into the paint film to a depth of num percent of their diameter .
test stripes will be observed for a period of num days from date of application .
paints will be evaluated for wear according to astm d num .
after num days of service on a visual rating scale of num to num percent paints must have a rating of num percent or better to be acceptable .
all ratings will be taken in the wheel track area .
glass beads shall show no more than a num percent loss after num days of test .
this will be determined by taking closeup photographs of the paint film and by count determining the average bead loss .
the road service test may be waived at the option of the engineer or evaluated for a period of time less than num days .
num workmanship paint shall be free from foreign materials such as dirt sand fibers from bags or other material capable of clogging screens valves pumps and other equipment used in a paint striping apparatus .
the paint pigment shall be well ground and properly dispersed in the vehicle .
the pigment shall not cake or thicken in the container and shall not become granular or curdled .
any settlement of pigment in the section num num paint shall result in a thoroughly wetted soft mass permitting the complete and easy vertical penetration of a paddle .
settled pigment shall be easily redispersed with minimum resistance to the sidewise manual motion of a paddle across the bottom of the container to form a smooth uniform product of the proper consistency .
if the paint can not be easily redispersed due to excessive pigment settlement as described above or due to any other cause the paint shall be considered unfit for use .
the paint shall retain all specified properties under normal storage conditions for num months after acceptance and delivery .
the contractor shall be responsible for all costs and transportation charges incurred in replacing paint that is unfit for use .
the properties of any replacement paint as specified herein shall remain satisfactory for eight months from the date of acceptance and delivery .
f manufacturing requirements num inspection the manufacturer of the paint shall advise the engineer when paint is to be manufactured shall furnish the engineer free access to all parts of the plant involved in the paint manufacture and shall furnish every reasonable facility for sampling both the paint and the raw materials during the process of manufacturing .
all materials used in formulation shall meet the requirements herein specified .
any materials not specifically covered shall meet the approval of the engineer .
all manufactured paint shall be prepared at the factory ready for application .
w hen paint is shipped to a distributor or paint applicator who will store the paint prior to its use the distributor or paint applicator shall furnish the engineer free access to all parts of the facility where paint is stored and shall furnish every reasonable facility for sampling the paint .
paint shall normally be sampled at the place of storage either at a warehouse or on the site prior to application of the paint .
application of the paint will not be permitted until the paint has been approved by the engineer .
it is the contractors responsibility to notify the engineer a minimum of num working days prior to any traffic painting operation and to allow access at that time for paint sampling at the storage location .
a minimum of one paint sample shall be obtained from each lot of paint .
checksamples of finished paint while being applied will be taken at intervals as determined by the engineer .
num testing section num num all tests will be conducted in accordance with the latest test methods of the american society for testing and materials federal test method standard no .
num and methods in use by the materials group highways division and the arizona department of transportation as specified herein .
evidence of adulteration or improper formulation shall be cause for rejection .
num packaging all shipping containers for paint must comply with the department of transportation code of federal regulations hazardous materials and regulation board reference num cfr .
the container and lids must be lined with a suitable coating so as to prevent attack by the paint or by agents in the air space above the paint .
the lining must not come off the container or lid as skins .
containers shall be colored white including lids and containers shall have an identifying band of the appropriate color around and within the top one third of the container .
all containers shall be properly sealed with suitable gaskets shall show no evidence of leakage and shall remain in satisfactory condition for a period of num months after delivery to a distributor or paint applicator .
the contractor shall be responsible for all costs and transportation charges incurred in replacing paint and containers .
num marking all containers of paint shall be labeled showing the manufacturers name date of manufacture paint color product code manufacturers batch number and quantity or weight of paint on both the side of the container and also the lid .
containers shall be clearly marked or labeled rapid or fast dry leadfree w aterborne traffic paints .
all containers of paint shall be labeled to indicate that the contents fully comply with all rules and regulations concerning air pollution control in the state of arizona maricopa county .
the manufacturer of the paint shall be responsible for proper shipping labels with reference to whether the contents are toxic corrosive flammable etc .
as outlined in the u.s. department of transportation hazardous materials regulations reference num cfr .
num unused paint disposal of unused quantities of traffic paint shall be the responsibility of the contractor and must meet all applicable federal regulations for waste disposal .
paint which is saved to be used later shall be section num num packaged as specified previously and shipped to a storage location .
unused paint must be identified on the container .
unused paint may be utilized on a future project provided the paint still conforms to all specifications contained herein .
num reflective glass beads spheres a general the term glass bead shall be synonymous with the term glass sphere as used herein .
the beads shall be manufactured from glass of a composition designated to be highly resistant to traffic wear and to the effects of weathering .
the glass beads shall be moistureproof contain less than num percent moisture by weight and be free of trash dirt or other deleterious materials .
beads shall be essentially free of sharp angular particles showing milkiness or surface scoring or scratching .
beads shall be water white in color .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
b physical requirements num gradation w hen tested by the method provided in astm d num the grade sizes of the beads shall be as follows size of sieve percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num roundness w hen tested by the method provided in astm d num procedure b beads retained on any screen specified in the gradation requirements shall contain a minimum of num percent true spheres .
num index of refraction w hen tested by a liquid immersion method at a temperature of num oc the beads shall have an index of refraction of num to num .
section num num num specific gravity the specific gravity of the beads shall be in the range num when tested in accordance with the following procedures place num grams in an oven at num oc for one hour .
remove beads and place in a desiccator until the sample is cool .
remove approximately num grams of beads from the desiccator and weigh the sample accurately .
pour the beads slowly into a clean nummilliliter graduated cylinder containing num milliliters of isopropyl alcohol .
make certain that air is not entrapped among the beads .
the total volume minus num will give the volume of the beads .
calculate the specific gravity as follows s p e cific g ra vity w e ig h t o f th e sa m p le v o lu m e o f th e sa m p le num chemical stability beads which show any tendency toward decomposition including surface etching when exposed to atmospheric conditions moisture dilute acids or alkalis or paint film constituents may be required to demonstrate satisfactory reflectance behavior prior to acceptance under such tests as may be prescribed .
c moisture proofing all glass beads shall have a moistureproof overlay consisting of water repellent material applied during the process of bead manufacture .
the beads so treated shall not absorb moisture in storage and shall remain free of clusters and lumps and shall flow freely from dispensing and testing equipment .
the beads shall pass the test for water repellency and free flow using the following equipment num test bag the bag used is approximately num by num inches after sewing .
the material used in the construction of the bag is unbleached cotton sheeting with a thread count of num by num .
the material before sewing is approximately num by num inches .
the cloth is folded in half lengthwise and stitched in the shape of an l with the short side left open at the section num num top .
the material can be obtained from selected manufacturers of cloth and paper packaging .
the finished bag may also be obtained from the manufacturer of the glass beads .
newly fabricated bags must be thoroughly washed with hot water and detergent and rinsed before use to remove the sizing which may be present in the cloth .
subsequent to the initial washing the bags need only be rinsed clean of beads from previous tests and dried thoroughly before use .
num funnel the funnel used is a standard laboratory funnel with a top opening diameter of num millimeters and a nummillimeter stem length .
the inside diameter of the stem is between nine and num millimeters .
this funnel is available from most laboratory glassware supply houses corning no .
num or equal .
num ring stand and clamp .
num balance accurate to num grams .
num distilled water .
moisture testing procedure glass beads shall be tested for compliance with specification requirements .
testing shall be conducted at standard conditions of temperature num one degrees celsius and humidity num five percent relative humidity and shall consist of the following procedure or an approved alternate w eigh num grams of glass beads into a clean dry flatbottomed pan .
dry beads at num oc for two hours .
cool beads to room temperature num one degrees celsius in a desiccator .
using the clean prewashed bag described under apparatus section turn the bag insideout so that the sewn seam and seamallowance are on the outside .
quantitatively transfer the beads into the inverted cotton bag .
grasp the gathered top of the bag with one hand and lower the bag into a container of distilled water until the beads are approximately one inch below the water level .
the container shall be of such dimensions that the bag does not contact the bottom or sides during immersion .
each bag shall be immersed section num num individually .
do not allow one bag to contact another if multiple tests are run .
remove the bag after num seconds of immersion time .
cradle the bottom of the bag uniformly in the palm of one hand and twist the top neck of the bag until the twisted bag is compressed firmly against the beads .
twist until excess water no longer drips from the bag .
after the excess water has been squeezed from the bag allow the bag to unwind .
gather the top of the bag and clamp .
suspend the bag on a ring stand or other support such that the bottom or sides of bag do not contact the support .
after a standing time of two hours at room temperature num one degrees celsius remove bag from support .
mix sample thoroughly by holding the bottom seam allowance in one hand and gathered neck of the bag in the other invert bag and shake up and down five times .
transfer the sample into a clean dry funnel of the type described under apparatus .
if consecutive tests are run be sure the funnel is clean dry and free of beads from prior tests .
the entire sample shall flow through the funnel without stoppage .
at the start of the test only it is permissible to lightly tap the stem of the funnel to initiate flow .
small quantities of beads which have adhered to the side of the funnel or stem shall not be cause for failure .
num construction requirements num equipment the traffic paint and beads shall be placed on the pavement by a spraytype selfpropelled pavement marking machine except that temporary striping during construction may be placed with other equipment designed for application of paint and beads .
the application equipment to be used on roadway installation shall have as a minimum the following characteristic andor apparatus the machine shall be capable of applying clearcut lines of the width specified on the project plans .
section num num the machines shall be equipped with a mechanical device capable of placing a broken reflectorized line with a numfoot painted segment and a numfoot gap .
the machine shall be equipped with an airoperated glass bead dropin dispenser controlled by the spray gun mechanism .
a glass bead dispenser which is capable of placing the glass beads into the paint line as the paint is applied to the pavement shall be utilized .
this dispenser shall provide satisfactory marking and delineation .
num application pavement markings shall be applied when the pavement surface is dry and the weather is not foggy rainy or otherwise adverse to the application of markings .
the surface shall be free from excess asphalt or other deleterious substances before traffic paint beads or primer are applied .
the contractor shall remove dirt debris grease oil rocks or chips from the pavement surface before applying markings .
the method of cleaning the pavement surface and removal of detrimental material is subject to approval by the engineer and shall include sweeping and the use of highpressure air spray .
the placing of traffic markings shall be done only by personnel who are experienced in this work .
painting shall not be performed when the atmospheric temperature is below num degrees f when using waterborne paint nor when it can be anticipated that the atmospheric temperature will drop below said num degrees f temperature during the drying period .
w aterborne paints shall not be applied if rain is expected within one hour of its application unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
w aterborne paint shall not be heated to a temperature greater than num degrees f to accelerate drying .
the volume of paint in place shall be determined by measuring the paint tank with a calibrated rod .
at the option of the engineer if the striping machine is equipped with airatomized spray units not airless and paint gauges the volume of paint may be determined by utilizing said gauges .
the quantity of glass reflectorizing beads in place shall be determined by measuring the glass reflectorizing bead tank with a calibrated rod .
the contractor shall provide the necessary personnel and equipment to divert traffic from the installation area where the work is in progress and during drying time when in the opinion of the engineer such diversion of traffic is necessary .
tolerances for placing paint beads and primer the length of painted segment and gap shall not vary more than six inches in a numfoot cycle .
section num num the finished line shall be smooth aesthetically acceptable and free from undue waviness .
painted lines shall be four eight or num inches wide as shown on the plans with a tolerance of num inch and shall be placed at a minimum rate of num gallons per mile for a solid fourinch line and four gallons per mile for a broken fourinch line based on a numfoot stripe and a numfoot gap numfoot cycle aggregate .
glass reflectorizing beads shall be applied on the wet paint at a minimum rate of six pounds per gallon of paint .
w et thickness shall not be less than num mils .
num method of measurement pavement marking paint will be measured by the linear foot along the centerline of the pavement stripe .
skips in dashed lines will not be included in the measurement .
length of pavement markings will be based on fourinch wide stripe .
measurement for striping with a plan width greater or less than the basic four inches as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer will be made by the following method plan w idth of striping inches x linear feet num inches symbols and legends will be measured by each unit applied .
each legend regardless of the number of letters will be considered as a single unit .
num basis of payment pavement striping of the type specified measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot for the total length of painted line applied to the nearest foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including glass beads as described and specified herein and on the project plans .
pavement symbols and legends measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price for each painted symbol or legend which price shall be full compensation for the work complete including glass beads as described and specified herein and on the project plans .
section num dual component pavement markings num description the work under this section shall consist of cleaning and preparing pavement surfaces and furnishing and applying either white or yellow section num num reflectorized dual component pavement markings to the prepared pavement at the locations and in accordance with the manufacturers specifications the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the type of dual component marking system marking configuration and thickness shall be in accordance with the project plans and these specifications .
num materials num general requirements the dual component pavement marking material shall be a liquid or num percent solids epoxy or other dual component uvstabilized system formulated and designed to provide a simple volumetric mixing ratio of the two components resin and catalyst .
the characteristics of the material shall be such that complete and even coverage of specified areas to the required thickness is provided by the required application method and rate .
upon drying the dual component material shall produce an adherent durable reflectorized marking capable of resisting deformation and wear in the roadway .
the material shall be suitable for application to old and new asphaltic concrete and portland cement concrete pavement surfaces .
a list of approved manufacturers of dual component pavement marking material is shown on the departments approved products list apl .
the most current version is available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
num epoxy composition requirements epoxy pavement marking material shall conform to the following requirements a composition the epoxy resin material shall be within the following compositional requirements percent by weight component white yellow w hite pigment titanium dioxide num min .
yellow pigment num num epoxy resin num num num num b epoxide number the epoxide number of the epoxy shall be determined in accordance with astm d num for both white and yellow resin material on a pigment free basis .
the epoxide number shall be within num of the published manufacturers standard for the approved product .
section num num c amine number the amine number of the curing agent shall be determined in accordance with astm d num .
the amine number shall be within num of the published manufacturers standard for the approved product .
d toxicity upon heating to application temperature the material shall not exude fumes which are toxic or injurious to persons or property .
e adhesion to concrete the epoxy marking materials when tested according to aci method num shall have a higher degree of adhesion to the specified concrete num pounds per square inch minimum surface such that there shall be a num percent concrete failure in the performance of this test .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num degrees f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
f hardness the epoxy paint pavement markings material when tested according to astm d num shall have a shore d hardness of between num to num .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num degrees f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
g abrasion resistance the abrasion resistance shall be evaluated on a taber abrader with a num gram load and csnum wheels .
the duration of the test shall be num cycles .
the wear index shall be calculated based on astm c num and the wear index for the dual component material shall not be more than num milligrams .
the test shall be performed on cured samples of material which have been applied without glass beads at a film thickness of num num inches to code snum stainless steel plates .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num degrees f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
h tensile strength w hen tested in accordance with astm d num the epoxy marking materials shall have an average tensile strength of not less than num pounds per square inch .
the type iv specimens shall be cast in a suitable mold and pulled at a rate of num inch per minute by a suitable dynamic testing machine .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num degrees f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
section num num i compressive strength w hen tested according to astm d num the epoxy pavement marking materials shall have an average compressive strength of not less than num pounds per square inch .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num degrees f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
j retroreflectance w hite and yellow dual component marking materials shall have the following minimum retroreflectance values at num degrees illumination angle and num degrees observation angle as measured by a mirolux num portable retroreflectometer .
the readings shall be taken from sample plates of markings applied in the field on the project to the specified thickness and bead application rate .
the contractor and engineer shall coordinate on procedures for sampling and handling of samples .
product retroreflectance millicandelas w hite num yellow num additionally all white and yellow markings placed in the field shall also exhibit the same minimum retroreflectance values num days after application to the roadway surface .
markings not complying shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
k color the colors of the applied markings shall conform to the following requirements the white color shall match federal test standard number numb color chip no .
num .
the yellow color shall match federal test standard number numb color chip no .
num .
l yellowness index the white material shall not exceed a yellowness index of num when tested in accordance with astm d num .
the index shall be based on a sample which has been cured for num hours at room temperature num num degrees f and exposed in the quv chamber for num hours .
m viscosity the formulations of each component part shall be such that the viscosity of both parts when measured in accordance with astm d section num num num method a shall be within num percent of each other at the recommended spray temperature .
n curing and notrack time notrack time shall be defined as the time necessary for the epoxy marking to cure to a notrack condition .
the epoxy marking when properly applied with the required gradations and bead application rates per gallon shall cure to a notrack condition when tested in accordance with astm d num within num minutes at num degrees f and no more than num minutes at temperatures of num degrees f or more .
the applied epoxy material shall be capable of fully curing at a minimum pavement surface temperature of num degrees f. at room temperature num num degrees f a sample shall be capable of curing to full strength in num hours .
o storage life the materials shall meet the requirements of this specification for a period of at least one year from the date of manufacture .
the month and year of manufacture shall be clearly marked on all containers .
product msds information shall be attached to material containers at all times .
any material which does not meet the above requirements or which is no longer within this oneyear period at the time of application shall not be used unless approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall replace any outdated material with material meeting the above performance and time requirements at no additional cost to the department .
p testing and certificates w hen requested by the engineer the contractor shall provide liquid samples of the catalyst and resins in appropriate containers for testing .
certificates of analysis conforming to subsection num shall be submitted for all materials and shall include the material safety data sheets msds .
num glass beads the glass beads shall be colorless transparent free from milkiness or excessive air bubbles and essentially clean from surface scarring or scratching .
they shall be spherical in shape and at least num percent are to be true spheres when tested in accordance with astm d num procedure a .
the refractive index of the spheres shall be a minimum of num as determined by the liquid immersion method a num dc .
the silica content of the glass beads shall not be less than num percent .
the beads shall have the following gradation when tested in accordance with astm d num section num num type a glass beads large bead sieve no .
retained num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pan num num type b glass beads small bead sieve no .
retained num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pan num num the type a and b glass beads shall have a moistureproof coating and shall be dualcoated with a silanetype adherence coating .
the glass beads shall display no tendency to absorb moisture in storage and shall remain free of clusters and lumps .
the beads shall flow freely from dispensing equipment at the time of application .
the moisture resistance of the glass beads shall be determined in accordance with subsection num c. certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for the glass beads to be used on the dual component pavement marking systems .
the certificate shall also include a material safety data sheet msds .
num construction requirements num equipment the pavement marking equipment for longitudinal lines shall have a system capable of spraying both yellow and white dual component pavement markings .
the marking vehicle shall be of sufficient size and stability with an adequate power supply to produce lines of uniform dimension with square edges and proper mix of the two component parts to ensure proper application .
the equipment shall be capable of placing markings and applying glass beads at both the left and right sides of the truck and placing two lines simultaneously with either line in a solid or intermittent pattern in either yellow or white .
all sprayers shall be in full view of the operators at all times .
the equipment shall be provided with a metering device to register the accumulated installed pavement marking for each sprayer each day .
the contractor shall provide a certificate from the american traffic safety services association a.t.s.s.a .
or equivalent documentation to the engineer section num num to verify that the driver and operator of the application truck are fully trained and experienced in the application of the dual component marking system being applied .
the equipment shall include pressure gauges for each proportioning pump which are visible to the operator at all times so that any fluctuations can be detected immediately during the marking operations .
the longitudinal line application vehicle shall be equipped with high pressure air spray jets in front of the striping material and glass bead applicators to remove loose matter on the pavement surface where the marking material is to be applied .
the vehicle shall be equipped with two separate glass bead supply tanks and two glass bead dispensers per each marking material sprayer .
the contractor shall provide documentation to the engineer that bead dispensers are specifically manufactured for the glass bead application rates contained herein .
w hen type a gradations of glass beads are applied the vehicle shall be equipped with highcapacity coneshaped pressure or gravity dispensers .
all bead dispenser outlets shall have enclosed wind shrouds or equivalent devices to direct the glass beads as they are applied .
the shroud may include an opening which faces the operator so that the flow rate of the glass beads can be monitored .
the bottom of the shroud shall be mounted within three to four inches of the pavement surface and be configured to allow for even distribution of glass beads on the applied markings .
equipment for the application of transverse lines longitudinal lines less than num feet in length legends and symbols shall be either a hand wand attachment to a longitudinal line application vehicle or a separate motorized trailer application system .
application equipment for short or transverse lines legends and symbols can be suitable for only one color .
num application a placement locations dual component pavement markings shall be as shown on the plans except that marking lines shall not be placed on parallel construction or expansion joints .
longitudinal lines shall be offset to provide a minimum of one inch of clearance from parallel construction and expansion joints unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
b material inspection all dual component pavement marking materials and glass beads will be inspected and approved by the engineer prior to their application .
the contractor shall also provide samples of said materials if requested by the engineer .
section num num all materials shall be properly packaged and stored .
each container to be used on the project shall be clearly labeled to indicate the following information as applicable nature type color and formulation of the material manufacturer batch number and date of manufacture application requirements and constraints and msds information .
storage preparation and application equipment shall be in accordance with the plans specifications and the recommendations of the materials manufacturer .
the contractor shall dispose of excess materials spilled materials cleaning fluids and all empty material containers at a site approved by the engineer .
c equipment inspections and deficiencies the contractor shall make daily maintenance and operation inspections of all application equipment to ensure that it is operable with the requirements of the specifications .
the contractor shall inform the engineer of any equipment breakdowns intermittent malfunctions or other conditions that may impact the proper application of specified markings .
any equipment judged to be unsuitable by the engineer shall be repaired or replaced .
d pavement surface the contractor shall remove all dirt dust grease oil or other detrimental material from the road surface prior to application of the dual component material .
existing temporary or permanent traffic markings shall be removed by abrasive blasting or grinding until a minimum of num percent of the underlying pavement is visible unless otherwise recommended by the materials manufacturer .
the method of abrasive blasting and grinding is subject to approval by the engineer .
the contractor shall clean the surface by sweeping and with highpressure air spray unless otherwise recommended by the materials manufacturer .
the contractor shall minimize any interference between temporary pavement markings and the permanent dual component pavement markings .
w hen dual component markings are to be applied to new portland cement concrete pavement any curing compound present shall be removed by means of a highpressure water jet or sandblasting followed by sweeping and highpressure air spray .
the curing compound shall be removed at least one inch beyond the width of the marking to be installed .
e pavement temperature and condition section num num dual component pavement markings shall not be applied to new asphaltic concrete pavements for a minimum of num days after the pavement has been placed .
the roadway surface temperature at the time of application shall be a minimum of num degrees f and shall be rising .
the air temperature and wind chill factor shall not be below num degrees f. additionally the road surface shall be dry with no standing water or significant surface dampness or dew .
the pavement surface temperatures shall be measured one half hour prior to the start of the striping installation activities and every one to two hours after that until the end of the day if the temperature is judged by the engineer to be critical .
for elevation changes greater than num feet temperature readings at the highest elevation shall govern unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the pavement surface temperature shall be measured with a standard surface temperature or an infrared noncontact thermometer .
the engineer may require temperature readings to be taken at shorter time intervals .
f application calibration requirements prior to the start of all marking application operations the film thickness width and bead application rates shall be calibrated as specified below in the presence of the engineer .
if at any time a condition changes or the required application rates are not being achieved the contractor shall repeat the calibration process if so directed by the engineer .
num film thickness and width calibration for longitudinal lines the required application speed for the pavement marking vehicle shall be determined prior to the start of each days marking operations .
the equipment needed to calibrate paint wet film thickness and width are a stopwatch metal sample plates num by num inches minimum wet film thickness gauge measuring tape and a roll of tar paper .
the paint film application thickness width and speed shall be calibrated using the following procedure step num a numfoot length of four foot wide tar paper shall be rolled out and attached to the pavement in an area where the striping vehicle can achieve and maintain a speed of up to ten miles per hour without impacting traffic .
the tar paper shall be secured to the pavement surface with duct tape so that it is laying flat .
three metal sample plates shall be placed three to four feet apart and ducttaped down near the end of the numfoot test distance .
section num num step num the striping vehicle shall install a stripe without glass beads on the tar paper for the marked numfoot distance and over the sample plates .
the time that it takes the striping vehicle to apply the num feet of test stripe shall be measured and then equated to a mile per hour application speed .
additionally the velocity of the striping vehicle shall be noted by the driver .
the contractor shall remove any test stripes which extend beyond the tar paper .
step num immediately after the test stripe has been installed the wet film thickness on all three metal plates shall be measured as specified in astm d num using a wet film thickness gauge .
the device shall be inserted into the wet paint to the depth of the metal in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the thickness visually noted .
if a wet thickness gauge is used the manufacturers directions shall be followed .
the stripe distribution on the sample plates will be inspected for width edge definition and overall visual appearance .
step num steps num and num shall be repeated until the optimum paint application speed material flow settings and sprayer heights are determined and the atomizing pressures are established such that an even clearlydefined stripe of the required width and thickness is produced .
additionally spot checks of the applied wet film thickness shall be made by the contractor throughout the day .
random spot checks of the paint thickness will also be made by the engineer to ensure conformance with the required criteria .
the contractor shall inspect the wet film thickness immediately after the marking paint is applied by inserting a wet film thickness gauge with graduations of num inch into the wet paint to the depth of the pavement surface in accordance with astm d num .
the thickness determined through spot checking shall be within num inches of the required thickness .
if the applied thickness is not within the tolerance specified above or the width of the line is less than required all striping operations shall stop and adjustments shall be made such that the required thickness or width is achieved .
if after three consecutive adjustments the required width or thickness are still not being achieved all striping operations shall be halted and the contractor shall repeat the calibration procedures herein specified before striping operations can start again .
num glass bead flow calibration for longitudinal lines the glass bead application rates shall be calibrated at the beginning of each days marking operation after the marking paint application speed has been determined .
section num num the equipment needed to calibrate the bead flow is a stopwatch num milliliter beaker graduated at nummilliliter intervals a bead calibration chart available from glass bead manufacturers and two numgallon buckets .
the bead calibration charts shall equate the volume of beads measured through the calibration process to the required glass bead application rate in pounds per gallon of dual component marking paint applied .
the chart shall also include the required application speed in miles per hour to achieve the specified glass bead application rate .
the glass bead application rate shall be calibrated using the following procedure step num w ith the striping vehicle stopped and the paint sprayer off place a bucket under the bead dispenser .
step num turn the bead dispenser on for five seconds .
step num pour the beads into the beaker and measure the volume .
step num using the bead calibration chart for the required thickness of paint find the required bead application rate the measured volume of beads in the beaker and the resulting application speed .
step num if the beaker volume is less than the chart value increase the bead flow .
if the beaker volume is more than the chart value decrease the bead flow .
step num repeat steps num through num until the required speed for the specified bead application rate matches the required paint application speed as determined in numfnum .
once all application speed and settings have been calibrated the contractor shall lay a test strip of the dual component paint marking at the specified width thickness and glass bead density .
the test strip shall be placed on a numfoot length of numfoot wide tar paper with two num by numinch sample plates spaced ten feet apart .
the contractor shall provide the two sample plates from the test strip to the engineer .
the plates shall indicate the date project number project name thickness bead application rate and contractor name on the back .
the engineer may have these plates tested per the requirements of subsection num numj .
all calibration activities shall be done in the presence of the engineer .
num thickness and glass bead calibration for transverse markings symbols and legends calibration of thickness for transverse markings symbols and legends prior to construction will not be required .
the contractor shall inspect the wet film thickness immediately after the marking paint is applied by inserting a wet film thickness gauge with graduations of num inch into the wet paint to the depth of the pavement surface in accordance with astm d num .
the thickness determined through spot checking section num num shall be within num inches of the required thickness .
random spot checks of the marking thickness will also be made by the engineer to ensure conformance with the required criteria .
bead application rates shall be determined by preweighing in a clearly marked container the amount of beads required for each transverse marking symbol or legend .
the contractor shall determine the amount of beads required for each individual application and provide documentation to the engineer for approval prior to application .
g marking application the standard application thickness and bead gradations types and rates for dual component markings shall be as follows num longitudinal lines a standard for asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations under num feet dual component markings shall be num num inches thick with a bead application rate of num pounds of type a glass beads per gallon of paint followed immediately with num pounds of type b glass beads per gallon of paint .
for asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations equal to or above num feet the thickness shall be the same however the bead application rate shall be num pounds of type b glass beads per gallon of paint .
for pccp pavements placed at elevations under num feet dual component markings shall be num num inches thick with a bead application rate of num pounds of type a glass beads per gallon of paint followed immediately with num pounds of type b glass beads per gallon of paint .
for pccp pavements placed at elevations equal to or above num feet the thickness shall be the same however the bead application rate shall be num pounds of type b glass beads per gallon of paint .
b special when shown on the bidding schedule for asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations under num feet dual component markings shall be num num inches thick with a bead application rate of num pounds of type a glass beads per gallon of paint followed immediately with num pounds of type b glass beads per gallon of paint .
for asphaltic concrete pavements placed at elevations equal to or above num feet the thickness shall be the same however the bead application rate shall be num pounds of type a glass beads per gallon of paint .
no reductions in thickness will be allowed for pccp pavements .
num transverse lines symbols and legends section num num the thickness of dual component pavement markings for transverse lines symbols and legends shall be num num inches with a bead application rate of num pounds of type a beads per gallon of paint for all surfaces and at any elevation .
an epoxy application thickness of num num inches may be allowed on bridge decks if the majority of the project is ac pavement and if approved by the engineer .
no additional payment will be made for the increased thickness if so allowed .
for longitudinal lines the dropon glass beads shall be mechanically deposited at the specified rates into the dual component marking material immediately after it is applied .
the bead dispenser device shall evenly distribute the beads such that the top layer of beads are embedded in the surface of the marking to a depth of num to num percent of the bead diameter .
should the glass beads not adhere or the top layer sink into the marking beyond the required embedment depth operations shall be stopped until the problem has been corrected .
all markings which do not meet the requirements of subsection numj shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
transverse lines longitudinal lines less than num feet in length legends and symbols shall be applied with a hand wand attachment to a longitudinal line application vehicle or with a separate motorized trailer application system .
precut templates shall be used for all short or transverse lines legends and symbols and shall provide neat and square marking edges .
beads shall be handapplied and shall be evenly distributed over the markings using premeasured buckets .
the finished dual component marking line shall have welldefined edges and be free from waviness .
lateral deviation of the marking line shall not exceed one inch in num feet .
the longitudinal deviation of a marking line and gap shall not vary more than six inches in a num foot cycle .
the actual width of marking line shall be within the limits specified in the following table according to the width of line called for on the plans plan width actual width num inches num to num inches num inches num to num inches over num inches num inch after application and sufficient drying time the dual component marking shall show no appreciable deformation or discoloration under local traffic conditions in an air or road temperature ranging from num to num degrees f. the drying time shall be defined as the minimum elapsed time after application when the dual component pavement markings shall have and retain the characteristics required herein and after which normal traffic will leave no impression or imprint on the section num num newly applied marking .
drying time for epoxy materials shall be defined as the notrack time as specified in subsection numn .
the contractor shall protect the newly applied dual component pavement markings from traffic during the required drying time .
h material applied the contractor shall provide a full accounting of all marking material and glass beads applied .
prior to the start of striping operations and after the calibration procedures the contractor shall provide the engineer with a detailed quantity summary which specifies the gallons of marking material and pounds of glass beads needed to achieve the specified marking configuration .
the contractor shall record these quantities each day in a log book .
the engineer and contractor will monitor the quantity of beads and paint applied each day and compare the values to the anticipated quantity .
the quantities of paint and beads actually applied shall be within five percent of the anticipated calculated values for each days striping operation .
the contractor shall determine the cause of any larger variations and make necessary corrections before the next striping application shift .
the log book quantities shall be agreed on after each day and signed and dated by both the contractor and the engineer .
num method of measurement dual component white and yellow longitudinal pavement markings and transverse markings such as crosswalks and stop bars will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the pavement stripe and will be based on a fourinch wide stripe .
skips in dashed lines will not be included in the measurement .
measurement for striping with a plan width greater or less than the basic four inches as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer will be made by the following method plan w idth of striping inches x linear feet num inches double marking lines consisting of two fourinch wide stripes will be measured as two individual marking lines .
crosswalk lines stop bars stop lines gore lines cross hatch lines chevron lines and railroad marking transverse lines will be measured for centerline length and adjusted for widths other than four inches as defined above .
dual component pavement marking symbols such as a diamond or single double or triple arrow will be measured by the unit applied .
each pavement symbol as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
dual component pavement marking legends defined as a complete letter grouping such as school xing stop rr or only section num num will be measured by each unit applied .
each pavement legend as shown on the plans will be considered a unit .
no separate measurement or payment will be made for cleaning the surface including sweeping and highpressure air spray or for calibration of the bead and paint application rates or for disposal of excess materials cleaning fluids and empty material containers the costs being considered as included in the contract items .
removal of curing compound from new portland cement concrete pavement shall be measured by the linear foot for striping lines regardless of width or unit each for symbols and legends in accordance with the items of work established in the bid schedule .
the cost for abrasiveblasting and grinding existing markings not including temporary paint or tape lines shall be paid for under separate items .
no separate payment will be made for removing temporary paint or tape lines the cost being considered as included in contract items .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of dual component pavement markings of the type specified in the bidding schedule measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including pavement surface preparation and glass beads .
the accepted quantities for removal of curing compound from new portland cement concrete pavement measured as provided above will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices under the items of work established in the bid schedule .
section num blank section num general requirements for traffic signal and highway lighting systems num description it is the purpose of this section to provide general information necessary for completion of the work on traffic signal and highway lighting systems in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and requirements of these specifications .
all electrical systems and appurtenances shall be complete functional and in operating condition at the time of acceptance .
num definitions section num num the words defined in the following subsection shall for the purpose of these specifications have the meanings ascribed to them pertaining to signals and lighting .
num actuation the operation of any type of controller initiated by a detector .
num back plate a thin metal strip extending outward parallel to the signal face on all sides of a signal housing to provide suitable background for the signal indications .
num controller that part of the controller assembly which performs the basic timing and logic functions for the operation of the traffic signal .
num controller assembly the complete assembly for controlling the operation of a traffic signal consisting of a controller unit and all auxiliary and external equipment housed in a weatherproof cabinet .
num cycle a complete sequence of signal indications .
num detector a device for indicating the passage or presence of vehicles or pedestrians .
a inductive loop detector a detector capable of sensing the passage or presence of a vehicle by a change in the inductance characteristics of the wire loop .
b magnetometer vehicle detector a detector capable of being actuated by the magnetic disturbance caused by the passage or presence of a vehicle .
c pedestrian detector a detector for pedestrians usually of the button type .
num flasher a device used to open and close signal circuits at a repetitive rate .
section num num num flashing feature this feature when operated discontinues normal signal operation and causes a predetermined combination of flashing signal lights .
num interval the part or parts of the signal cycle during which signal indications do not change .
num luminaire the assembly which houses the light source and controls the light emitted from the light source .
luminaires consist of a housing lamp socket reflector and glass globe or refractor when specified .
num manual operation the operation of a signal controller unit by means of a handoperated switch .
num mounting assembly the framework and hardware required to mount the signal faces and pedestrian signals to the pole .
num pedestrian signal a traffic control signal for the exclusive purpose of directing pedestrian traffic at signalized locations .
num pretimed controller assembly a controller assembly for operating traffic signals in accordance with a predetermined fixedtime cycle .
num red clearance interval a clearance interval which follows the yellow change interval during which both the terminating phase and the next rightofway phase display red .
num signal face an assembly controlling traffic in a single direction and consisting of one or more signal sections .
circular and arrow indications may be included in a signal assembly .
the signal face assembly shall include the backplate and visors .
num signal indication section num num the illumination of a signal section or other device or of a combination of sections or other devices at the same time .
num signal section a complete unit for providing a signal indication consisting of a housing lens reflector lamp receptacle and lamp .
num traffic phase a part of the time cycle allotted to any traffic movement or combination of movements receiving the rightofway during one or more intervals .
num trafficactuated controller assembly a controller assembly for operating traffic signals in accordance with the varying demands of traffic as registered with the controller unit by detectors .
num vehicle any motor vehicle normally licensed for highway use .
num yellow change interval the first interval following the green rightofway interval in which the signal indication for the phase is yellow .
num regulations and codes all electrical equipment shall conform to the current standards of national electrical manufacturers association nema national electric safety code nesc underwriters laboratory inc. ul or the electronic industries association eia when applicable .
all materials and workmanship shall conform to the requirements of the national electric code nec illumination engineers society ies the american society for testing and materials astm american association of state highway and transportation officials aashto requirements of the plans these specifications and the special provisions and to any other codes standards or ordinances which may apply .
w henever reference is made to any of the standards mentioned the reference shall be construed to mean the code ordinance or standard that is in effect at the time of the bid advertisement .
num equipment list and drawings the contractor shall note that approval by the engineer is required before ordering or installing any material that is to be used on the project .
section num num the contractor shall submit six copies of a complete project material submittal for approval at the preconstruction conference which shall conform to these specifications .
the project material submittal shall state all relevant information regarding materials and equipment to allow the department to procure exact replacements of any or all items on the project .
to be acceptable the material submittal shall be complete and contain all items supplied on the project by the contractor .
the department reserves the right to reject an incomplete or unclear material submittal .
the materials on the submittal shall be identified by the contract project number bid item numbers catalog part numbers catalog cuts shop drawings for signal and lighting equipment trade names schedules for other pertinent information .
the materials from any catalog cuts shall be clearly indicated by the contractor .
any material designations used in the contract documents shall be so noted on the materials list .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit manufacturer shop drawings for review and approval and shall furnish certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
there shall be no substitutions for any of the materials on the list without prior written approval by the engineer .
changes to the approved materials list shall be submitted in writing to the engineer .
if requested by the engineer the contractor shall submit samples of the proposed materials for inspections testing and approval by the department .
the department will not be liable for any electrical materials procured or any labor performed prior to approval .
w hen the plans include lighting the contractor shall submit six copies of photometric data sheets indicating the ies distribution classification for each type of luminaire submitted for approval .
in addition the contractor shall submit data from the manufacturer detailing lamp socket positions in relation to lamps and optical systems furnished for each ies distribution type specified .
if required by the special provisions the contractor shall provide computer printout grids of both luminance and illuminance values for the spacing height roadway width and type of luminaire submitted .
the contractor shall provide complete wiring diagrams for controller assemblies and auxiliary controller cabinets at the time of delivery for testing .
a mylar original and four sets of prints shall be provided with each controller assembly .
the wiring diagram shall illustrate all circuits and components in detail .
all components shall be identified by name or number so as to be clearly noted in the drawings .
num warranties guaranties manufacturers warranties and guaranties furnished for materials and equipment used in the work shall be delivered to the engineer prior to acceptance of the project .
w arranties and guaranties shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
section num num num locations of utilities the locations of utilities shown on the project plans are approximate .
all involved utilities may not be shown on the plans .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num the contractors attention is directed to the requirements of a.r.s .
num through .num requiring all parties excavating in public streets alleys or utility easements to first secure the locations of all underground facilities in the vicinity of the excavation .
the contractor shall contact the blue stake center at least two working days prior to commencing excavation for information relative to the location of buried utilities within the project limits .
section num structural supports and foundations for traffic signal and highway lighting num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing new supports and foundations for traffic signal and highway lighting systems or modifying poles and mast arms of existing systems at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
pole foundations shall include all conduit elbows anchor bolts grounding wire and reinforcing steel .
cabinet foundations shall include conduit elbows anchor bolts and clearance pad .
num materials excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
concrete shall conform to the requirements of num and num .
reinforcing steel and wire mesh shall conform to the requirements of num and num .
concrete for all foundations shall be class s and shall have a required numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
num blank num standard steel poles a general standard steel poles for traffic signals and highway lighting shall include pole shafts and pole bases .
section num num material standards for traffic signal and lighting supports shall be in conformance with the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
all pole supports shall be designed to withstand nummile per hour winds except for the type k and r poles .
the type k r poles shall be designed to withstand nummile per hour winds .
metal parts of standard steel poles and hardware shall conform to the details shown on the plans and the following specifications .
w elding shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
b pole shafts tapered pole shafts shall be fabricated from sheet steel of weldable grade which shall meet or exceed the minimum strength requirements of astm a num for all poles except the type k and r poles .
the type k and r poles shall be constructed from sheet steel that has a minimum yield stress after fabrication of num pounds per square inch .
a taper rate of num inches in diameter per linear foot shall be required unless otherwise specified .
pole shafts shall be fabricated according to the thickness requirements shown on the plans .
standard pipe pole shafts shall be fabricated from standard weight structural steel which conforms to the minimum strength requirements of astm a num grade b and a nominal diameter indicated on the standard drawings .
each section shall be fabricated from not more than two pieces of sheet steel .
w hen two pieces are used the longitudinal welded seams shall be directly opposite one another .
w hen the sections are buttwelded seams shall be directly opposite one another .
w hen the sections are buttwelded together the longitudinal welded seams on adjacent sections shall be placed to form continuous straight seams from base to top of pole .
pole shafts shall be straight with a permissive variation not to exceed one inch measured at the midpoint .
pole shafts shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the visual appearance of the galvanized finish shall be uniform .
discoloration of the galvanized finish such as dark areas dark streaks dark rings or transportation handling marks which are considered excessive by the engineer shall not be allowed .
pole shafts that have a finish unacceptable to the engineer shall either be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
hand holes in the base of the poles shall conform to the details shown on the standard drawings .
all welds shall be continuous and any exposed welds except fillet welds shall be ground flush with the base metal .
a metal tag shall be permanently attached to the pole above the hand hole stating the manufacturers name pole type per the departments plans pole drawing number shaft length and gage number .
section num num c steel pole extensions and twin luminaire brackets pole extensions and twin luminaire brackets shall be fabricated from new pipe conforming to the requirements of astm a num .
all welding shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
pole extensions and twin luminaire brackets shall be fully galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
fabrication of the pole extensions and twin luminaire brackets shall be in accordance with the dimensions as specified in the plans .
d standard bases poles shall have standard bases unless breakaway or slipaway bases are specified .
standard bases shall be fabricated from structural steel plates conforming to the minimum strength requirements of astm a num .
exposed surfaces shall be finished smooth and all exposed edges shall be neatly rounded to a numinch radius .
standard bases shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
e slipaway bases slipaway bases shall be fabricated from structural steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num .
exposed surfaces shall be finished smooth and all exposed edges shall be neatly rounded to a numinch radius .
slipaway bases shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num and shall have all the necessary hardware to make a complete and functioning unit .
high strength flat washers bolts and nuts used to connect slipaway base plates shall conform to the requirements of astm a num and shall be electrogalvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
slipaway bases shall be used on roadway lighting poles where specified on the plans .
f breakaway bases breakaway bases shall be fabricated from num tnum or sg numatnum aluminum alloy .
the base shall be heattreated in accordance with the requirements of astm b num temper designation tnum before shipment .
the breakaway base shall have all the necessary hardware to make a complete and functional unit .
bolts washers and nuts shall meet or exceed astm a num minimum strength requirements and shall be fully galvanized in accordance with astm a num .
breakaway bases shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet or exceed the change in momentum requirements of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals and to be acceptable for use on federal aid projects .
the manufacturer shall also certify that the breakaway base has been tested and approved by the federal highway administration and that the castings have the same chemistry mechanical properties and geometry as the castings used in the tests .
section num num breakaway bases shall be used where specified on the project plans .
g anchor bolts all anchor bolts shall be threaded at the top and shall conform to the plans .
standard anchor bolts washers and nuts shall be fabricated from steel conforming to the strength requirements of astm a num .
the anchor bolts washers and nuts shall be fully galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
high strength anchor bolts washers and nuts shall be fabricated from steel which meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of astm a num and shall be electrogalvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
w elding shall not be performed on any portion of the body of these anchor bolts .
certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for high strength anchor bolts washers and nuts .
num wood poles a general w ood poles shall consist of full length pressure treated material .
unless specified herein material treatment and preservatives shall be in accordance with the latest revisions of the aw pa book of standards .
no deviations from these specifications will be allowed without the written approval of the engineer .
w ood poles shall be used for service or temporary traffic signal or roadway lighting installations when specified .
the lengths of the poles shall be num feet for service poles and num feet for other poles and shall be class num unless otherwise specified .
b definitions num awpa american w ood preservers association .
num supplier the person partnership association or corporation furnishing the material covered by these specifications .
num check section num num a separation of the wood along the grain the greater part of which occurs across the annual growth rings .
a through check extends from surface to surface of the pole usually through the pith center .
num compression wood abnormal wood that often forms on the lower side of branches and inclined trunks of coniferous trees .
characteristics include a relatively wide annual ring usually eccentric b relatively high proportion of summerwood frequently more than num percent of the width of the annual ring in which it occurs c exhibits very little contrast in color between springwood and summerwood and d shrinks excessively lengthwise as compared with normal wood .
num crossbreak crack a separation of the wood cells across the grain .
such breaks may be due to internal strains resulting from unequal longitudinal shrinkage or to external force .
num dead knot a knot left by a branch that dies before the tree is cut .
an encased knot is a dead knot in which the growth layers are not intergrown with those of the surrounding wood .
dead knots may contain soft fibers decay that usually do not extend deeper than one to two inches from the pole surface .
they are distinct from rotten or decayed knots in which the loose or soft fibers decay may extend the full length of the knot into the pole and which are frequently associated with heart rot .
num dead streak any portion of sapwood in which the life processes had ended prior to the cutting of the tree .
a dead streak starts from the butt and differs from a wound such as a catface or scar where the growth of new wood shows that life processes are still acting to repair the injured part .
num decay decay or rot advanced decay is the disintegration of wood substance due to the action of wood destroying fungi .
num face of pole section num num the concave side or the side of greatest curvature in poles having reverse or double sweep between the ground line and top of pole .
num ground line section that portion of a pole between one foot above and two feet below the ground line as defined in the pole dimension tables .
num hollow heart a hollow in the heartwood of a living tree caused by insects or fungi .
num hollow pith center a small hole at the pith center of the trunk or of a knot caused by disintegration of the pith small soft core occurring in the structural center of a tree or branch .
num insect damage the result of boring in the pole by insects or insect larvae .
scoring or channeling of the pole surface is not classed as insect damage .
num knot diameter the diameter of a knot on the surface of the pole measured in a direction at right angles to the lengthwise axis of the pole .
num red heart a fungus caused by fomes pini occurs in the living tree and is characterized in the early stages of infection by a reddish or brownish color in the heartwood .
this is known as firm red heart .
later the wood in the case of the living tree disintegrates decays in small usually distinct areas that develop into whiteline pockets .
num sap satin a discoloration of the sapwood caused by the action of certain molds and fungi that is not accompanied by softening or other disintegration of the wood .
refer to subsection numdnuma for blue stain .
num scar catface a depression in the surface of the pole resulting from a wound where healing has not reestablished the normal cross section of the pole .
num shake a separation along the grain the greater part of which occurs between the rings of annual growth .
section num num num short crook any localized deviation from straightness in a fivefoot section or less shall be classified as a short crook .
num spiral grain twist grain a type of growth in which the fibers take a spiral course around the bole of a tree instead of the normal vertical course .
the spiral may extend righthanded or lefthanded around the tree trunk .
the amount of spiral grain in a pole is measured as the distance in feet along the axis of the pole in which one complete twist of the spiral occurs and is expressed as a ratio for example num in num one twist in num feet .
num split a lengthwise separation of the wood due to the tearing apart of the wood cells extending from surface to surface of the pole .
num sweep the deviation of a pole from straightness .
c acceptance species num douglas fir pseudotsuga menziesii mirb .
franco num southern pines num western pine a loblolly pinus taeda b longleaf pinus palustris c pond pinus rigida serotina d shortleaf pinus echinata e slash pinus caribaea f ponderosa pinus ponderosa laws d defects num prohibited defects pole exhibiting any of the following defects will not be accepted section num num bird holes breaks catface scars compound through checks decay double sweep poles having sweep in two planes hollow butts or tops improper framing nails or other metal not authorized by the engineer plugged holes other than increment borer small butt small top spike knots or any knot with bark inclusion split top w orm or insect holes num limited defects the following defects are acceptable subject to the limitations stated a blue stain the core used to check penetration of preservative will be checked for blue stain .
any core with num percent or more blue stain in sapwood will be rejected .
additional cores may be taken to determine extent of the stain .
b check any check more than num inch wide and extending down from the top of the pole more than num inches and within num angular degrees from the axis of the face of the pole directly above the brand will be unacceptable .
through checks or splits in the butt surface are permitted provided their height from the butt along the side surface does not exceed two feet .
a check is considered to be continuous if it is not separated by at least num inch of wood .
maximum acceptable dimensions of checks are as follows length of pole maximum width maximum length num feet and shorter num inch num feet num and num feet num inch num feet num feet and longer num inch num feet c compression wood compression wood in the outer num inch of pole .
section num num d insect damage insect damage consisting of surface scoring or channeling are permitted all other forms of insect damage are prohibited .
e insufficient sapwood sapwood thickness less than the following douglas fir num inch pine num inches f knot the following criteria applies all knots shall be measured at right angles to lengthwise surface including the sapwood as well as the heartwood portions .
all end grained completely concentric annual rings surrounding the prominent heartwood portion of the knot shall be included in the measurement .
the diameter of any single knot or the sum of the diameters of all knots in any onefoot section shall not exceed the limits set up in the following table .
knots num inch or less in diameter shall be ignored in applying the limitations for the sum of diameters .
lengthclass of pole diameter of any single knot sum of diameters of knots in any onefoot section num feet and shorter num inches num inches num feet and longer num inches num inches maximum single knot in any sworl shall be two inches in diameter .
maximum sum of knots in any sworl shall not exceed num percent of the pole circumference at the point of the sworl or more than the amount shown in the table above under the column heading sum of diameters of knots in any onefoot section .
g mechanical damage poles are not acceptable if they have abrasions or damage caused by forklifts dragging along the ground indentation of chains cables cant hooks peaveys pole tongs or other mechanical damage penetrating the pole more than num inch .
h pilodyn the pilodyn can be used to check hardness of poles .
the test will normally be taken at the ground line and any measurement num section num num millimeters and over on ponderosa pine will result in that pole being rejected .
additional tests may be taken at any point on the pole to determine extent of softness .
i ring count the average annual ring count shall be not less than six rings per inch average measured in the outer three inches on the butt face .
j sapstain stain that is not accompanied by softening or other disintegration decay of the wood is permitted .
k shake shakes in the butt surface extending through an arc of not more than num degrees are permitted provided they are at least two inches from the outside diameter of butt .
l short crook any localized deviation from straightness in a fivefoot section or less shall be classified as a short crook and the deviation from straightness shall not exceed num inches .
m spiral grain spiral grain is permitted provided it does not exceed num turn in num feet or one complete turn in any num feet of the pole .
n sweep w here sweep is in one plane and one direction only a straight line connecting the surface of the pole at a point located six feet from the butt and the edge of the pole at the top shall not be separated from the surface of the pole at any point by more than one inch for each num feet of length between these points .
w here sweep is in one plane and two directions reverse sweep a straight line connecting the midpoint at a point located six feet from the butt with the midpoint of the top shall not deviate from the center line of the pole more than num the diameter of the pole at the point of widest deviation .
e dimensions num length poles less than num feet in length shall be not more than three inches shorter or six inches longer than nominal length .
section num num poles num feet or more in length shall be not more than six inches shorter or num inches longer than nominal length .
the minimum lengths for the wood species shown are as follows wood species minimum length of pole douglas fir num feet w estern pine num feet southern pine num feet num classification the pole circumference at the top and at a point six feet from the butt shall not be less than the dimensions shown below .
pole dimensions class num minimum circumference at top is num inches minimum circumference at num feet from butt inches length of pole feet groundline distance from butt feet w estern pine douglas fir and southern pine all types num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num f manufacturing requirements num bark removal poles shall be smoothly trimmed by machine the depth of the cut shall be kept to a minimum consistent with proper removal of the bark .
beveling the top or butt excessive trimming around knots which results in separation in wood structure knot popup prominent spiral ridges on pole surfaces rough or feathery surfaces exposed heartwood except at knot areas patches of inner bark more than num inch wide and six inches long and abrupt changes in contour due to shaving are evidences of improper removal of bark .
individual poles with such defects shall be rejected .
num marking section num num the following marks shall be burnbranded legibly on the butt and on the face of the pole per aw pa standard mnum at a point num feet two inches tolerance the suppliers code or trademark .
the plant location and the year of treatment .
code letters denoting pole species and preservative used .
the circumference class numeral and numerals showing the length of the pole .
num treating charge number code numerals indicating the treating charge number must be placed on the butt either by stamping or on metal tags .
g preservatives num preservative requirements the type of preservative to be used shall be pentavolatile petroleum solvent cellon or dow process .
num pentavolatile petroleum solvent the pentachlorophenol shall conform to aw pa standard pnum .
the carriers shall be hydrocarbon solvents type b or d conforming to aw pa standard pnum .
h treatment num poles poles shall be treated in accordance to aw pa standards cnum and cnum .
num moisture content prior to treatment poles shall be sufficiently airseasoned boultonized or kilndried to minimize checking after treatment and to permit maximum penetration and retention of preservative .
moisture content of the sapwood shall be below num percent .
the moisture content may be determined by electrical resistance type moisture meters and shall have insulated needles driven two inches in fir or num inches in pine .
num retention douglas fir the treating process must produce not less than one inch penetration at any point on the pole .
if the sapwood thickness exceeds section num num one inch between the butt and standard ground line num percent of the sapwood shall be treated .
the assay zone shall be num to one inch .
cellon or dow process retention shall be not less than num pounds per cubic foot in the assay zone .
w estern and southern pines the treating process must produce complete sapwood penetration .
the assay zone shall be num to num inches .
cellon or dow process retention shall be not less than num pounds per cubic foot in the assay zone .
num penetration not less than one increment core shall be taken in the ground line area .
all increment borer holes shall be plugged with tight fitting cylindrical wood plugs treated with the same preservative used to treat the pole .
penetration shall be determined by the following methods .
cellon or dow process penta check or w etzel stain .
num cleanliness after treatment cellon or dow process poles shall be washed or brushed so they are clean and free of surface crystals .
num retreatment all poles which fail to meet the treating requirements of this specification may be treated one time after initial inspection .
temperature and pressure must conform to aw pa standard cnum for retreatment .
stored poles all poles showing brands or marks indicating treatment within any calendar year three years or more previous to the year of shipment shall be retreated one time conforming to aw pa standard cnum .
cut back poles all poles that are shortened or trimmed shall be retreated within seven days conforming to aw pa standard cnum .
i inspection inspection shall be made upon delivery .
the contractor shall provide the necessary assistance and facilities to enable safe and efficient inspection of the work .
a certificate of compliance shall be furnished to the engineer upon delivery to the job site or other approved locations .
num mast arms and tie rods section num num mast arms for standard steel poles that are not tapered shall be fabricated from steel pipe as specified in astm a num .
the arms shall conform to the dimensions shown on the standard drawings .
the pipe shall be one piece and free from burrs .
tapered mast arms shall be fabricated from sheet steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num except for the types k and r pole mast arms .
the mast arms for the types k and r poles shall be constructed of sheet steel with a minimum yield stress of num pounds per square inch after fabrication .
mast arms shall be fabricated according to the thickness requirements shown on the plans .
a taper rate of num inches change in diameter per linear foot shall be required unless otherwise specified .
all bolts washers and nuts for mast arms shall be fabricated from steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num and shall be electrogalvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm b num .
mast arms shall be bent to the dimensions and curvature shown on the plans .
tie rods shall be fabricated from weldable structural steel pipe and steel rod and shall have no kinks or bends .
all dimensions of the tie rods shall be as specified in the plans except that the mast arms and tie rods for wood pole installations shall conform to the details shown on the project plans .
mast arms and tie rods shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the visual appearance of the galvanized finish shall be uniform .
discoloration of the galvanized finish such as dark areas dark streaks dark rings or transportation handling marks which are considered excessive by the engineer shall not be allowed .
mast arms and tie rods that have a finish unacceptable to the engineer shall either be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
a metal tag shall be permanently attached on the side of the mast arm near the base stating the manufacturers name pole type as required on the plans mast arm or pole drawing number length and gage number .
num construction requirements num foundations the excavations required for the installation of foundations and other items shall be performed in such a manner as to avoid any unnecessary damage to streets sidewalks landscaping and other improvements .
the trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper construction of the foundations and other equipment .
excavation shall not be performed until immediately before construction of foundations .
the material from the excavation shall be placed in a section num num position that will minimize obstructions to traffic and interference with surface drainage .
all surplus excavated material shall be removed and properly disposed of within num hours by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
after each excavation is completed the contractor shall notify the engineer for inspection and under no circumstances shall any underground materials or equipment be covered with fill without the approval of the engineer .
excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
at the end of each working period all excavations shall be barricaded or covered or both to provide safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic .
excavations in the street or highway shall be performed in such a manner that not more than one traffic lane is restricted at any time unless otherwise provided in the special provisions .
sidewalk and pavement excavations shall be kept well covered and protected to provide safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until permanent repairs are made .
signal and lighting pole foundations shall be set flush with the existing or new curb and sidewalk or flush with the finished grade where there is no curb or sidewalk except in sloped areas they shall be as shown on the project plans .
the dimensions and locations of foundations shall be as specified on the project plans however the engineer may direct that changes be made in locations due to obstructions or other existing conditions .
the contractor shall verify top of foundation elevations with the engineer prior to foundation construction .
concrete shall be placed in holes which have been augered against undisturbed earth .
if the material in the bottom of the hole is not firm and stable it shall be compacted or treated as directed by the engineer .
the walls and the bottoms of the holes shall be thoroughly moistened prior to placing the concrete .
if the soil is not stable and a hole can not be augered forms shall be used .
they shall be of the proper size and dimensions and shall be rigid and securely braced .
the forms and the bottoms of the holes shall be thoroughly moistened prior to placing the concrete .
if the engineer requires foundations to be larger or deeper than on the plans because of soil conditions the additional work will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
anchor bolts and conduit stubs shall be placed and held in proper alignment position and height during the placing and vibrating of concrete .
all pole foundations shall set for three days prior to pole installation except for types j k q and r pole foundations which shall set for seven days .
section num num before the concrete for cabinet foundations has set depressions shall be made around the anchor bolts for adjustment of the cabinet leveling nuts .
num base plates and poles high strength bolts nuts and washers for slipaway bases shall be assembled as specified in the standard drawings and shall be torqued as required by the standard drawings .
anchor bolts washers and nuts required for relocating existing poles shall be furnished by the contractor .
poles shall be drilled and tapped for mounting hardware as shown on the standard drawings .
use of through bolts will not be permitted .
poles will be rejected if holes are not properly positioned for the required mounts .
all steel poles shall be plumbed to the vertical with all mast arms signal heads and luminaires installed .
sidewalks curbs gutters pavement base material lawns plants and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced or reconstructed with materials in accordance with these specifications .
the replaced or reconstructed improvements shall be left in a serviceable condition satisfactory to the engineer and shall conform to these specifications where applicable .
w here existing pole installations are to be modified materials and equipment shall be used salvaged or disposed of as specified in the special provisions and as directed by the engineer .
w ood poles shall be placed in the ground to a depth of at least six feet .
after each wood pole is set in the ground the pole shall be backfilled with selected backfill .
backfill shall be free of large rocks and debris and placed in layers of no more than six inches before compaction .
each layer shall be moistened and thoroughly compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
existing poles shall be either relocated or used in place as specified in the project plans .
the contractor shall inspect the poles and provide the materials and work necessary to recondition the poles so they can be reused .
holes left in the shafts of existing poles due to removal of items such as signal mounting assemblies shall be repaired and painted with a zinc galvanized paint .
if any poles are damaged by the contractors operations such repairs or replacements shall be at no additional cost to the department .
if the engineer orders additional work to be done following the contractors inspection of the poles such work will be paid for as provided in subsection num .
section num num new poles that are damaged by improper drilling of holes will be rejected .
num removing and replacing improvements w herever a part of a section or slab of existing concrete or sidewalk or curb is damaged by the contractor the entire section between expansion joints shall be removed and the concrete reconstructed as directed by the engineer .
all areas of concrete sidewalks and driveways and all areas of portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavements to be removed shall be outlined and cut to a minimum depth of num inches with an abrasive type saw prior to removing the material .
the cut for the remainder of the required depth may be made by any method satisfactory to the engineer .
saw cuts shall be neat and true with no shattering or chipping of concrete adjacent to the outside of the removal area .
num method of measurement the structural supports and foundations for traffic signals and highway lighting will be measured as a unit for each type of support and foundation furnished and installed .
modification of existing poles and mast arms will be measured as a unit for each pole or mast arm modified .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of supports and foundations for signals and lighting measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the type of support or foundation designated in the bidding schedule complete in place which price shall be full compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans including all hardware wire excavation backfill and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the accepted quantities of modify pole and modify mast arm measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the type of pole or mast arm designated in the bidding schedule to be modified which price shall be full compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans including all parts hardware and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for anchor bolts the cost being considered as included in the unit price paid for foundations .
section num num section num electrical underground material num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing electrical conduit conductors and pull boxes for traffic signals and highway lighting including jacking drilling excavating backfilling and compacting at the locations designated on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num electrical conductors electrical conductors shall be stranded or single conductor thermoplastic insulated electrical wire or cable .
conductors shall conform to the specifications of the nec ul and other applicable industry standards .
w ire and cable for traffic signal highway lighting and other electrical systems shall be ul listed and rated for numvolt operation .
the ul label shall be present on each reel coil or container of wire or cable .
w hen requested the contractor shall submit to the engineer the manufacturers written certification that the product conforms to the requirements of these specifications .
all single conductors except detector leadin cables shall have plain distinctive and permanent markings on the outer surface throughout the entire length showing the manufacturers name or trademark insulation type letter designation conductor size voltage rating and the number of conductors in the cable .
the wire shall be annealed copper and shall be uncoated unless otherwise specified .
the wire shall be solid for number num aw g and smaller conforming to the requirements of astm b num for annealed bare copper wire .
conductors for sizes number num aw g and larger shall be stranded and shall conform to astm b num for class b stranding .
unless otherwise specified the conductors shall be insulated with thw grade thermoplastic compound and shall meet the requirements of ul num .
insulation colors shall be permanent and an integral part of the insulation and shall not be applied as a surface treatment of coating .
the insulation thickness shall conform to the requirements of the nec .
conductor insulation shall be a solid color as specified in the conductor table unless otherwise specified .
the color shall be continuous over the entire length of the conductor .
a traffic signal and highway lighting conductors conductors used for traffic signal and highway lighting systems shall conform to the requirements of the following table .
the minimum section num num conductor sizes shall be as shown in the following table unless otherwise specified .
conductor table insulation conductor circuit signal phase or function color type minimum thick .
mils minimum gauge aw g type vehicle signals red interval yellow interval green interval red yellow green thw thw thw num num num num num num pedestrian signals intl .
symbol handman red green thw thw num num num num pedestrian push button pedestrian detection orange thw num num series lighting series loop black thw num kv num num s highway lighting multiple lighting black thw num num lighting in pole pull box to luminaire black xhhw num num s sign lighting multiple lighting black thw num num common common lead w hite thw num num spares unused leads brown or black thw num num detection detector roadway loops black orange thw n in pvc tubing num num num s detection loop detector lead in cable clear black pe foil shield vinyl num num stp detection magnetometer lead in cable red black green w hite pe in pvc jacket num num num num num num num num snumc service service common bond black w hite green or bare thw thw as as as as as num legend as as specified pe polyethylene s stranded stp stranded twisted pair snumc stranded num conductor num roadway loop detector wire roadway loop detector wire shall be a factory assembled combination of pvc tubing and wire .
loop detector wire shall be stranded number num aw g copper rated at num volts with thw n insulation .
the wire section num num shall be enclosed in a factory extruded pvc flexible tubing by the wire manufacturer .
contractor assembly of the wire in the flexible tubing will not be acceptable .
the pvc tubing shall be ul frnum rated at num oc and have a moisture absorption of less than one percent .
the wall thickness shall be num num mils with a nominal inner diameter of num inches .
the tubing shall be orange in color be highly resistant to chemicals and oils and have a dielectric strength of num volts per centimeter .
num wire marking tags w ire marking tags shall be made of flame retardant reinforced epoxy tape num mils in thickness and num inch minimum width .
the tape shall be flexible resistant to oil and water and have a pressure sensitive acrylic adhesive backing .
the adhesive shall be a high tack adhesive with good adhesion to clean neoprene hypalon nylon and pvc insulation materials .
the film material shall conform to the flame retardant requirements of ul num and be rated at num oc .
appropriate numbers and letters shall be printed on wire tags for conductor identification .
b cable num shielded cable shielded cable used for loop detector leadin cable and telephone coordination interconnect circuits shall be twoconductor stranded twisted pair aluminumpolyester foil shield with num percent coverage tinned copper with polyethylene insulation vinyl jacketed rated at num volts and num oc and shall be in conformance with ul and the following table table for shielded cable aw g size number num num stranding num x num num x num insulation thickness inches num num jacket thickness inches num num outside diameter inches num num ground w ire aw g number num num nominal capacitance pfft num num nominal capacitance pfft num num capacitance between conductors .
capacitance between one conductor and another conductor connected to the shield .
num instrumentation cable instrumentation cable normally used for magnetometer detectors shall be a number num aw g fourconductor lowcapacitance cable suitable for both conduit and direct burial .
section num num the cable shall be round and be less than num inches in overall diameter .
the jacket shall be a weatherproof high density heavy duty abrasion resistant polyethylene material with a minimum thickness of num inches .
the cable shall have an interior moisture penetration barrier to prevent capillary absorption of water and be suitable for a temperature range of num oc to num oc .
each conductor shall have thermoplastic insulation with a minimum thickness of num inches .
the conductor to conductor capacitance shall not be greater than num picofarads per foot for adjacent pairs and num picofarads per foot for diagonal pairs with all other conductors disconnected .
num imsa cable imsa cable shall be used only when specified on the plans .
imsa signal cables shall be polyethylene insulated copper conductors polyvinyl chloride jacketed rated at num volts for use in underground conduit or as aerial cable conforming to international municipal signal association specification no .
num .
the imsanum cable shall be provided with the number and size of conductors as specified on the plans .
the cable shall use the standard imsa colors for conductor insulation .
the colors and tracers shall be permanent and an integral part of the insulation and shall not be painted surface coated or adhered to surface .
num electrical conduit and warning tape all conduit and fittings shall be listed by ul and conform to nec standards .
except as specified below all conduit to be installed underground or in concrete structures shall be rigid polyvinyl chloride pvc nonmetallic type conforming to the requirements of ul num for rigid nonmetallic conduit .
pvc conduit and fittings shall be schedule num heavy wall manufactured from high impact material and shall be rated for use at num oc .
all exposed conduit and fittings to be installed above ground shall be the rigid metal type manufactured of galvanized steel conforming to requirements of ul num for rigid metallic conduit .
nonthreaded couplings shall not be used .
rigid metal galvanized steel conduit bends shall be used for entering pull boxes that are spaced more than num feet apart .
intermediate metal conduit may be used in place of rigid metal conduit except for service risers .
galvanized intermediate metal conduit shall conform to the requirements of ul num .
intermediate metal conduit and fittings shall be manufactured from steel and work hardened to provide high strength .
the exterior wall shall be hotdip galvanized .
section num num threads shall be fully cut and galvanized after cutting .
all threaded fittings shall be the same as fittings approved for metal conduit .
flexible conduit shall be a liquidtight flexible metal type and shall be used as specified .
the conduit shall be a flexible galvanized steel core over which is extruded a pvc cover .
approved liquidtight fittings shall be furnished and installed with the conduit .
sampling and testing procedures shall conform to ul standards .
samples for testing when requested by the engineer shall be furnished at no additional cost to the department .
samples of conduit shall be tested by ul standards and be approved for use by the engineer prior to installation on the project .
conduit warning tape shall be a fourmil inert plastic film specially formulated for prolonged use underground .
all tape shall be highly resistant to alkalis acids and other destructive agents found in the soil .
tape shall have a continuous printed message warning of the location of underground conduits .
the message shall be in permanent ink specifically formulated for prolonged underground use and shall bear the words caution electric line buried below in black letters on a red background .
num pull boxes precast reinforced concrete pull boxes covers and extensions shall be installed and located as shown on the project plans and shall be the size specified .
chipped or cracked pull boxes covers and extensions will not be accepted .
portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for class b concrete .
w hen requested by the engineer pull boxes covers and extensions shall be furnished for testing at no additional cost to the department .
covers shall be marked as follows a.d.o.t .
electrical high voltage markings shall be clearly defined and uniform in depth and shall be placed parallel to the long side of the cover .
letters shall be one inch high .
num metal junction boxes metal junction boxes and covers for installation in concrete structures shall be fabricated from a minimum of num gage type num stainless steel .
section num num all seams shall be continuously welded and shall conform to the dimensions and details shown on the project plans .
a neoprene gasket with a thickness of num inch shall fit between the box and the cover .
the cover shall be made to fit securely and shall be held in place with a minimum of four stainless steel machine screws .
tabs for ease of installation may be attached to the junction box at the option of the contractor .
num construction requirements num installation of electrical conduit and pull boxes conduit runs shown on the project plans shall be changed to avoid underground obstructions as directed by the engineer .
the contractor may at its option and at no additional cost to the department use a larger size conduit than specified provided the larger size is continuous for the entire length of the run from outlet to outlet .
reducing couplings will not be permitted .
changes in the location and size shown on the project plans shall be documented by the contractor and submitted to the engineer .
the pvc conduit shall be cut square and trimmed to remove all rough edges .
conduit connections shall be of the solvent weld type .
purple primer conforming to the requirements of astm f num shall be applied to the joined surfaces prior to use of cement .
the joint cement shall be the gray pvc cement conforming to the requirements of astm d num .
w here a connection is made to steel conduit the coupling used shall be a pvc female adapter .
expansion fittings shall not be installed in pvc conduit runs between two pull boxes unless otherwise specified .
expansion fittings shall be installed in conduit runs in which both ends of the conduit are fixed in place such as between two foundations .
expansion fittings shall be installed in conduit runs which cross any expansion joint in a concrete structure .
approved expansion fittings shall allow for a linear thermal expansion of up to six inches .
if a trench has to be left open overnight a minimum of six inches of backfill material shall be used as a protective cover to eliminate contraction of the conduit system .
the backfill material shall be removed if final inspection by the engineer has not been made .
backfill containing large rock paving materials cinders large or sharply angular substance or corrosive material shall not be placed in an excavation where materials may damage raceways cable or other substructures or prevent adequate compaction of fill or contribute to corrosion of raceways cables or other substructures .
w here necessary to prevent physical damage to the raceway or cable protection shall be provided in the form of granular or selected section num num material suitable running boards suitable sleeves or other approved means .
excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
all pvc conduit shall be stored and handled in an approved manner to minimize ultraviolet deterioration due to exposure to sunlight .
conduits in protected areas such as behind curbs in sidewalks etc .
that are not subject to any vehicular traffic shall be at a minimum depth of num inches .
conduits installed under roadways driveways or any open areas where it is possible for vehicles to drive and conduits with conductors that have voltages over num volts shall be at a minimum depth of num inches .
w hen conduit in protected and open areas can not be installed at the minimum depths it shall be encased in concrete .
w here specified due to shallow trenching depths the conduit shall be encased in a minimum of three inches of concrete .
the conduit shall be supported with masonry block or brick on numfoot centers during encasement so that the conduit will be completely encased .
installation of conduit for underground primary service shall conform to the utility company requirements local codes and the special provisions .
conduit installed in railroad rightofway shall be to the depth specified by the railroad company .
except for factory bends conduit bends shall have a radius of not less than that specified in the nec .
conduit shall be bent without crimping or flattening using the longest radius practicable .
existing underground conduit to be incorporated into a new system shall be cleaned and blown out with compressed air .
conduit for future use shall have a number num aw g bare bond wire installed with at least two feet of pull wire doubled back into the conduit and capped .
a threeinch y shall be cut into the face of the curb directly over conduit located under curbs .
the contractor shall place warning tape in all trenches in which new conduit is placed .
all warning tape shall be buried at a depth of six to eight inches below the finished grade .
conduit entering pull boxes shall terminate a minimum of three inches inside the box wall .
the conduit shall be between two and four inches above the bottom of the pull box and shall be sloped to facilitate pulling of conductors .
conduit entering through the bottom of a pull box shall be located near the sides and ends in order to leave the major interior section num num portion clear .
at all outlets conduits shall enter from the direction of the run and allow for expansion and contraction .
rigid metal conduit bends shall be used for entering pull boxes that are spaced more than num feet apart .
the bends shall be num degrees and be of the same diameter as the connecting conduit .
the bends shall be wrapped with an approved pvc tape .
conduit ends shall be capped with conduit end cap fittings until wiring is started .
w hen end caps are removed pvc ends shall be provided with an approved conduit end bell .
end bells shall be installed prior to the installation of the conductors .
approved insulated grounding bushings shall be used on steel conduit ends .
conduit embedded in concrete structures shall be securely attached to the reinforcing steel at intervals of approximately num inches .
expansion fittings shall be installed where conduit crosses expansion joints in the structure .
w here bonding is not continuous expansion fittings shall be provided with a bonding jumper of number num aw g flexible wire .
w here it is not possible to use expansion fittings sleeves of sufficient size shall be installed to provide a minimum numinch clearance between the conduit and the inside wall of the sleeve .
the sleeve shall be discontinuous at the expansion joints .
all existing conduits and conduit embedded in concrete structures shall be cleaned out with a mandrel and blown out with compressed air .
conduit shall be installed under existing pavement by jacking or drilling methods approved by the engineer .
open trench excavation across an existing roadway shall not be permitted without the written permission of the engineer .
jacking and drilling pits shall be kept two feet clear of the edge of the pavement .
pull boxes shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the standard drawings .
pull boxes shall be installed flush with the finished grade and when in concrete shall have a numinch felt expansion joint installed around all sides of the pull box .
junction boxes placed in concrete structures shall be flush with the finished concrete surface .
num wiring procedures a general w iring shall conform to the regulations and codes listed in subsection num and of the nec and shall be ul listed and bear the ul labels and the following requirements the conductors shall be pulled into runs in a smooth continuous manner avoiding contact with sharp objects that might damage the insulation .
approved lubricants shall be used for inserting conductors in conduit .
before installation conductor ends shall be taped for moisture protection until connections are made .
section num num conductors shall have a minimum of num inches of slack from the conduit end bell in the pull box .
all ungrounded ballast primary leads shall be protected with fused inline connectors .
unfused inline connectors shall be installed on all ballast secondary leads .
inline connectors shall be fused with fastacting highinterrupting capacity fuses with a fault current rating of num kiloamperes at num volts ac .
the inline connectors shall be watertight nonlocking and rated at num volts ac .
b splices in circuits where the voltage does not exceed num volts ac splices shall be made utilizing approved springtype wire connectors .
soldered connections will not be permitted unless so specified .
the insulation for the splice shall consist of two layers of electrical rubber tape four layers of plastic electrical tape and two layers of friction tape .
the tapes shall be securely applied over the bare wire splice area and back onto the original insulation a minimum of one inch .
a minimum of three coats of approved liquid waterproof splicing compound shall then be applied to the splice .
the finished splices shall be such that their electrical and mechanical characteristics and insulation quality are equal to those of the original cable .
conductors shall be spliced only in pull boxes terminal compartments pedestals or cabinets .
splices for highvoltage series lighting conductors shall be made from an approved splice kit .
the splices shall consist of either molded rubber plugin connectors or epoxy resin mold type splice insulating kits and shall be rated at five kilovolts .
the finished splice shall make a sealed waterproof connection which shall be equal to the original cable conductors and insulation .
cable used for detector leadin and telephone interconnect circuits shall be run continuous and unspliced to the controller cabinet .
unless otherwise shown on the plans one leadin cable shall be installed per loop detector except for six foot by six foot loop detectors .
signal circuit conductors for each mast arm mounted signal assembly shall be continuous without splicing from the pull box adjacent to the pole to the terminal blocks in the mast arm assembly .
c tagging all conductors shall be tagged to identify their circuit number or function with wire marking tags .
the tag identification shall correlate with the conductor schedule shown on the project plans .
the tags shall be furnished and installed by the contractor .
each tag shall be wrapped entirely around the conductor twice .
each signal wire shall be tagged as to phase color indication and function such as vehicle indication pedestrian indication or pedestrian push button phase num red yellow green etc .
each phase group shall also be tied together and tagged .
each lighting circuit wire shall be tagged to identify the section num num circuit number and other types of circuits .
black wires used as spares shall be tagged as spares .
d testing num signal circuits prior to control cabinet installation the contractor shall apply num volts to signal circuits and verify equipment is operational .
the department will connect field wiring inside the control cabinet .
num roadway lighting circuits the contractor shall connect field wiring to the load center terminals .
lighting circuits shall be energized for num hours as directed by the engineer prior to final acceptance .
failures occurring during this test period shall be corrected .
w ires shall be tagged in control cabinets load center cabinets pull boxes terminal compartments of signal mounting assemblies or wherever splicing occurs .
num bonding and grounding all metallic enclosures such as cabinets pedestals poles conduit and cable sheaths shall be bonded to form a continuous grounded system .
nonmetallic portions of the system such as pvc conduit shall have a bare copper bond wire or a green insulated copper bond wire installed with suitable connections to form a continuous grounded system .
in all traffic signal conduits the copper bond wire shall have green insulation .
the insulation shall be removed from the bond wire in pull boxes from the point at which the wire leaves the bell end of the conduit .
at each service disconnect cabinet foundation or where otherwise specified an approved copperplated ground rod shall be installed .
each ground rod shall be a onepiece solid rod of the copper weld type or approved equal and shall be a minimum of num inch in diameter and num feet in length .
the rod shall be driven vertically into the ground to a minimum of nine feet below the surface .
the ground rod may be located in a pull box .
the service equipment neutral and the system grounding bond shall be connected to the ground rod with a copperplated bolt or a brass bolt on the ground clamp .
pole foundations shall have num feet of number num aw g bare copper conductor coiled and placed at the bottom of the excavation before concrete is poured .
the conductor shall be connected to the pole grounding screw in the hand hole with an approved lug connector .
section num num a ground resistance test shall be performed for each installed ground rod prior to final connection of the utility service .
pole foundation coil grounds shall be tested as determined by the engineer in the field .
the ground resistance shall be measured with a threeterminal fall of potential direct reading batterypowered earth tester with a num to numohm scale or digital readout .
the numohm reading shall be approximately at mid scale .
the test shall be performed according to the manufacturers instructions and osha requirements .
two auxiliary copper clad ground rods shall be driven into the ground a minimum of three feet .
the lateral spacing for each test rod shall be given in writing on the test report form and the spacing shall be approved by the engineer .
all tests shall be performed in the presence of the engineer and test results shall be written down dated and given to the engineer for approval .
each ground rod or foundation ground shall be isolated with the bond wires disconnected when the test is being performed .
the resistance to ground shall be num ohms or less .
if it is not additional ground rods shall be installed as required at least num feet from the original ground and shall be bonded to it .
the test shall then be repeated for multiple grounds as necessary to achieve proper grounding below num ohms .
as many additional ground rods shall be installed as is necessary to achieve proper grounding of num ohms or less .
the test shall be performed when the soil is dry .
the contractor shall not add any chemical or salt solutions to any portion of the grounding system .
all grounding rods and foundation grounds to be tested shall be installed a minimum of num days prior to testing unless otherwise determined by the engineer in the field .
num service service system components and their installation shall conform to regulations and codes listed in subsection num nec ul local applicable codes and the requirements of the utility company providing service .
service risers shall be pvcmold or galvanized steel as specified .
fastening of the service risers shall be done through the use of suitable straps and wood screws a minimum of num inches in length .
tape nails or other means of attachment shall not be used .
plywood backing boards when required shall be numinch medium density paper faced and of an appropriate size to mount all the necessary components .
an approved primer and two finish coats of light gray paint conforming to section num and acceptable to the engineer shall be applied to the plywood before the components are section num num mounted .
special care shall be taken to insure that the edges are well sealed .
all safety switch and multibreaker enclosures shall be provided with a padlock to prevent unauthorized persons from operating equipment of disconnects .
padlocks will be furnished by the department .
meter sockets when required shall be approved by the serving utility company .
they shall be furnished and installed by the contractor .
the meter socket shall be located as shown on the project plans .
meter service inspection shall be approved by the engineer prior to service connection by the utility company .
if work is required on existing high voltage and series lighting circuits the contractor shall obtain daily safety circuit clearance from the department and the serving utility company prior to any work being done .
signs painted dangerhigh voltage and arizona department of transportation shall be installed permanently by the contractor on all department electrical service structures .
these signs will be furnished by the department .
fused cutouts on the voltage side of a series lighting service structure shall be pulled out and safety signs shall be furnished by the contractor and posted on the cutouts before any work is done .
the signs shall be painted dangerhigh voltage and shall give the name of the company doing the work .
num method of measurement conductors for lighting will be measured by the linear foot for each gage size as follows num from center to center of pull boxes .
num from edge of foundation to center of pull box .
num from edge to edge of foundation .
num from end of conduit to center of pull box .
num from end to end of conduit when no pull boxes are used .
conductors for signals and lighting will be measured as a complete unit of work .
this method of measurement shall be used for signal and lighting conductors shown in the signal conductor schedule on the project plans .
section num num no measurement or direct payment will be made for conductors in poles and pull boxes the cost being considered as included in the contract price for the pole and pull box items .
conduit will be measured by the linear foot for each diameter size as follows num from center to center of pull boxes .
num from edge of foundation to center of pull box .
num from edge to edge of foundation .
num from end of conduit to center of pull box or foundation .
num from end to end of conduit when no pull boxes are used .
pull boxes will be measured as a unit for each pull box .
num basis of payment num conductors for lighting the accepted quantities of conductors for lighting measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the item complete in place .
num conductors for signals and lighting conductors for signals and lighting measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place .
num conduit the accepted quantities of conduit measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including excavation backfill and any incidentals necessary to complete the work .
no direct payment will be made for rigid metal conduit bends or rigid nonmetallic conduit bends at pull boxes expansion fittings and coupling fittings the cost being considered as included in the contract price for the conduit items .
num pull boxes the accepted quantities for pull boxes measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each which price shall be full section num num compensation for the work complete in place including any excavating and backfilling necessary to complete the work .
section num signal indications and mounting assemblies num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing or modifying traffic signal indication assemblies pedestrian signal indications flashing beacons and mounting assemblies at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num signal indications all new signals except the programmed visibility and the pedestrian types installed at any one intersection shall be of the same manufacturer and of the same material .
all traffic signal indication housings pedestrian indication housing backplates visors louvers mounting assemblies and push button stations shall receive a minimum of two coats of dull black enamel .
painting shall be done by the manufacturer .
a standard signal faces each vehicle signal face shall be of the adjustable vertical type with the number and type of sections specified on the plans .
adjustment shall permit rotation of num degrees about a vertical axis .
each vehicle signal face shall provide an indication in one direction only .
unless otherwise shown on the plans all vehicle signal faces shall contain three sections arranged vertically redtop yellowcenter greenbottom .
signal faces shall be standard eightinch or numinch lens size .
num optical equipment each optical unit shall consist of a lens a reflector or reflector assembly a lamp holder and a clear traffic signal lamp of the appropriate size and type as specified herein or in the special provisions .
the optical units shall conform to ite standards and ansi standard d num. a lenses section num num all traffic signal face lenses shall be glass unless otherwise specified on the plans .
lenses shall be of the color indicated circular in shape with a nominal visible diameter as indicated on the project plans and of such design as to give an outward and downward distribution of light with a minimum above the horizontal .
each lens shall be true to color of the best quality glass free from imperfections and provide high illumination transmission .
lenses shall conform to ite standards .
b reflectors each reflector shall be a single piece of silvered glass or specular aluminum with an anodic coating .
reflectors shall conform to ite standards .
an opening in the back of the reflector for the lamp holder shall be constructed so that there will be no dark spots cast on the lens .
c lamp holders the lamp holder shall have a heatresistant molded phenolic housing and be designed to accommodate up to a numwatt standard anum traffic signal lamp in the proper focal position .
d lamps lamps to be used in vehicular traffic signal faces shall conform to the standards set forth in the ite publication standard for traffic signal lamps and the following table unless otherwise specified traffic signal lamp table nominal size bulb type lens color initial lumens user hours rated w attage light center length num inch anum green yellow num num num num inch num inch anum red num num num num inch num inch a num green yellow red num num num num inch pedestrian indication a num w hite orange num num num num inch all lamps shall be rated at num volts ac .
lamps shall be clear and have an aluminum reflector disc .
projection type filaments shall be used and supported at seven points .
name of manufacturer wattage voltage and userhours shall be etched on lamps .
amount of krypton gas shall be not less than num percent of the total fill gas of the lamp .
if requested by the engineer the lamp section num num manufacturer shall provide a report by an independent testing laboratory certifying the beam candle power and composition of the fill gas .
num hardware hardware for a standard signal section shall include a onepiece hinged door a simple locking device housing for lenses and other optical components watertight gaskets terminal block and wiring .
the sections shall be interchangeable and so constructed that sections can be added or removed .
all exterior hardware such as hinge pins bolts screws and locking devices shall be of num or num stainless steel .
all interior screws and fittings shall be stainless steel or approved nonferrous corrosion resistant material .
a housing the housing for each signal section shall be a onepiece corrosion resistant die cast or permanent mold cast aluminum conforming to ite standards .
the housing of each section shall be designed to permit access to the section for relamping without use of tools .
fittings and locking devices shall conform to the details of the standard drawings .
the reflector reflector ring lamp holder and spring wire bail shall be designed so they may be removed or replaced without the use of tools .
b door the door shall be suitably hinged and securely held to the housing by hinge pins and locking devices .
c gasketing lamp holder gaskets shall be of material not affected by heat .
all other gaskets including door lens and reflector gaskets shall be of weatherresistant neoprene .
d terminal blocks and wiring the terminal block for a standard threesection signal shall be a fourposition eightterminal barriertype strip mounted in the back of the middle unit .
to the left of each terminal strip shall be attached the white red yellow and green signal section leads and the opposite terminals shall be for field wires .
the wires from the terminal block to the lamp socket shall be minimum size number num aw g type tff nummil insulation thickness and rated at num oc .
num visors section num num each signal section shall have an numinch to numinch long tunneltype visor which shall be fabricated from number num hnum aluminum alloy .
visor shall conform to ite standards and details of the plans .
num backplates louvered backplates shall be furnished and installed on all vehicular signal sections .
anodized aluminum sheet num gage shall be used .
all num inch signal faces shall have five inch backplates installed .
all eight inch signal faces shall have eight inch backplates installed .
num directional louvers w here shown on the plans directional louvers shall be furnished and installed in signal visors .
directional louvers shall be so constructed as to have a snug fit in the signal visors .
the cylinder and vanes shall be fabricated from numhnum aluminum alloy .
dimensions of louvers and vane configuration shall be as shown on the plans .
the outer cylinder and the vanes shall be num inches minimum thickness and the vanes shall be num inches minimum thickness .
b programmed visibility signal faces num general each programmed visibility signal face shall conform to the provisions in subsection numa except the provisions for optical equipment shall not apply .
the programmed visibility signal section shall provide a nominal numinch diameter circular or arrow indication .
each section shall be provided with a sun visor and an adjustable connection that permits incremental tilting from num to num degrees above or below the horizontal axis .
the visibility of each programmed visibility signal face shall be adjustable within the signal for the lanes in which traffic is to be controlled .
w hen unprogrammed the indication shall be visible from anywhere within num degrees of the optical axis .
num optical requirements the components of the programmed visibility signal face optical assembly shall be a circlet reflector optical limiterdiffuser and objective lens conforming to ite standards .
a circlet reflector with a specular inner surface shall join the lamp to the diffusion element .
the optical limiterdiffuser shall provide an image focused for objects at a distance of num to num feet limited by a veiling system .
the objective lens shall be a high resolution planar incremental lens hermetically sealed with a flat laminate of weather resistant acrylic .
the lens shall be symmetrical and able to be rotated to any numdegree orientation about the optical axis .
section num num each signal section with a yellow indication priority programming shall provide a minimum luminous intensity of num candelas on the optical axis and a maximum intensity of num candelas at num degrees horizontally from the axis .
each section shall be capable of having visibility programmed for a minimum num candelas at two to num degrees horizontal from the axis .
under the same conditions the intensities of the red indication and the green indication shall be at least num and num percent respectively of the yellow indication .
num lamps and dimming devices the lamp for each signal section shall be a nominal numwatt sealed beam numvolt numhour minimum rated life lamp as specified .
during daylight the signal indications shall be visible only in the lanes designated .
for nighttime operation dimming devices shall be provided to reduce the intensity by num percent .
num terminal blocks terminal blocks shall conform to the provisions in subsection numanumd .
c fiber optic turn arrow signal num general each fiber optic signal unit shall conform to the provisions in subsection numa except the provisions for optical equipment .
the signal unit shall display alternate legends consisting of either a green or yellow directional arrow .
the signal unit shall be clearly legible under any lighting conditions within a numdegree cone of vision centered about the optical axis .
visors or hoods shall have a weatherproof housing and door and shall not be required for legibility .
the signal unit shall consist of a fiber optic module with individual output lenses color filters for specified legend colors required light sources and transformers .
a separate lamp shall be used for each display and lamps shall be rated between num and num volts .
the rated lamp life shall not be less than num hours .
nineteen individual lenses num inch in diameter shall be fitted over the end of each fiber optic bundle to form the arrow legend .
the same lenses shall be used for both displays .
fiber optics shall be glass fiber bundles assembled on a flat black matrix panel .
individual fiber optic bundles shall not be jacketed or encased .
the signal shall supply section num num approximately num percent more light to the lenses when displaying a green arrow in order to balance the intensity between colors .
no color shall appear in the lenses when not illuminated regardless of sunlight intensity .
num hardware the complete signal unit shall be mounted in a standard aluminum numinch round signal case .
an aluminum front panel num inches in diameter and lens mounts shall be colored black to minimize legibility of arrow when not illuminated .
all fiber optics transformers and lamps shall be mounted on the door of the unit .
lamps shall be mounted horizontally to prevent their collecting water from condensation or possible gasket leaks .
no moving parts are permitted .
all screws washers nuts and bolts shall be corrosion resistant .
all components shall be readily accessible when the door is opened .
maintenance or replacement of components shall require only simple tools .
num transformers a separate transformer having class a insulation rated at num voltamps shall be used for each color display to reduce the voltage to num volts ac .
num temperatures the fiber optic signal assembly shall be capable of continuous operation over a temperature range of num to num degrees f. num pedestrian signals neon international manhand symbol pedestrian signals shall be furnished and installed unless specified otherwise .
pedestrian signal assemblies shall be complete and operational with the international manhand symbol indications and the mounting assemblies shall be furnished and installed by the contractor as shown on the plans .
a neon pedestrian signal indications num general requirements the maximum overall dimensions of the pedestrian unit including the visor shall be num inches wide num inches high and nine inches deep .
the manhand symbols shall be in a single housing containing both message symbols .
section num num the pedestrian signals shall be energy efficient with a maximum energy usage of num watts at num volts .
num case the case shall be a onepiece corrosionresistant aluminum alloy die casting complete with integrally cast top bottom sides and back .
four integrally cast hinge lug pairs two at the top and two at the bottom of each case shall be provided for operation of a swingdown door .
the case shall be properly matched to other pedestrian signal components to provide a dustproof and weatherproof enclosure and shall provide easy access to replace all components .
num door frame the door frame shall be a onepiece corrosion resistant aluminum alloy die casting complete with two hinge lugs cast at the bottom and two latch slots cast at the top of each door .
the door shall be attached to the case by means of two typenum stainless steel spring pins .
two stainless steel hinged bolts with captive stainless steel wing nuts and washers shall be attached to the case with the use of stainless steel spring pins .
latching or unlatching of the door shall not require tools .
num solid state message module a molded support tray manufactured from black polycarbonate plastic shall protect the two neon tube light sources and the solid state controller .
the tube for the hand symbol shall be num millimeters in diameter and be coated on the inside with portland orange fluorescent material .
the tubing for the w alking man symbol shall be nine millimeters in diameter and be coated on the inside with lunar white fluorescent material .
both shall be formed and positioned for maximum intensity .
the message lens shall consist of a numinch minimum thickness clear u.v.stabilized refractortype polycarbonate plastic with outer prisms and shall be heat craze and water resistant .
the two neon compartments shall be sealed into an integral assembly with a onepiece sponge gasket fitted around the perimeter to protect the enclosed neon tubing from handling and weather .
solid state circuitry shall be assembled on circuit boards as necessary to energize to high voltage flyback transformers and the neon tubes .
section num num each controller circuit shall be sealed into an integral assembly with a onepiece sponge fitted around the perimeter to protect the enclosed neon tubing from handling and weather .
the entire unit including neon tubing and solid state controller shall have a factory warranty of five years against defects in workmanship or materials .
each controller circuit shall be powered from numvolt ac numhertz and shall have a power factor of num percent minimum .
num messages messages shall be the portland orange hand and the white w alking man illuminated by multiple configuration neon tubes encased in the plastic solid state message module .
the symbols shall be a minimum of num inches in height and seven inches in width and shall be configured as shown in the mutcd .
the inside face of the message lens shall be painted in all areas except where the desired symbols are formed .
the first coating of paint shall be black to form a contrasting background .
the second coating shall be white to reflect internal light in between symbols .
num visors the visor shall be the crate type to eliminate sun phantom and shall be num inches deep .
the crate assembly shall contain a minimum of num zigzagpattern horizontal louvers and num straight horizontal louvers .
every other formal louver shall be reversed to form oneinch diamond shaped cells .
the material used for the visor shall be num inches thick and shall be num percent impregnated black polycarbonate plastic with a flat finish .
b incandescent pedestrian signal indications num general requirements each incandescent pedestrian signal shall consist of a housing twocolor message plate a reflector assembly two incandescent lamps and a front screen .
the pedestrian signal shall be furnished complete with incandescent lamps as described herein .
the overall maximum dimensions of each housing including the front screen shall be num inches wide num inches high and num inches deep .
num case and door frame section num num the case and door frame for the incandescent pedestrian signals shall conform to the requirements of subsection numa .
num message lenses each message lens shall be onepiece and shall be made of numinch minimum thickness ultravioletstabilized polycarbonate or numinch thick tempered glass .
either lens shall have a textured outside surface to eliminate message hot spots .
num reflector each reflector shall be a singlepiece doubleparabolic reflector constructed from textured plastic or aluminum .
all reflectors shall conform to the requirements of ite standards .
plastic reflectors shall consist of vacuumformed polycarbonate with a vacuumdeposited aluminum reflector surface and shall not distort when used with a lamp of specified wattage normally used in the signal .
num lamp holder each lamp holder shall be positioned so as to be centered and prefocused in its respective position when an anum bulb with medium base is used .
the lamp holder shall be made of molded phenolic and shall have a brass screw shell with lamp grip .
num visor each incandescent pedestrian signal shall be provided with an eggcrate type visor designed to eliminate sun phantom .
the crate assembly shall consist of num vertical members and num horizontal members plus two integral locking strips to prevent vandalism .
the vertical spacing of the horizontal member shall be num inch .
the completed eggcrate portion shall be num inches deep .
the material for the crate visor shall be as specified in subsection numanum .
num wiring and terminal blocks each lamp socket for incandescent pedestrian signals shall be provided with one red lead for hand symbol and one green lead for w alking man and one white lead from the shell .
leads shall be number num aw g and shall be wired to respective terminals of a threeterminal block .
the two white wires shall be connected to a common terminal .
num flashing beacons section num num flashing beacons shall consist of one or two signal sections as designated on the project plans conforming to the provisions in subsection numa .
a yellow or red lens shall be used as specified on the project plans .
a overhead flashers the overhead flashing beacon shall consist of two signal sections mounted on a cantilever arm assembly .
each overhead assembly shall incorporate numinch signal sections with yellow lenses unless otherwise specified .
the signal ahead sign to be mounted on the mast arm will be furnished by the department unless otherwise specified .
b pole flashers each pole flasher shall consist of two signal sections .
each pole flasher assembly shall contain eightinch signal sections with yellow lenses .
c control equipment housing the control equipment housing shall be a type i load center cabinet as shown in the plans unless otherwise specified .
num mounting assemblies mounting assemblies shall consist of terminal compartments and assemblies of num inch nominal standard pipe and fittings .
all members shall be so fabricated that they shall provide plumb symmetrically arranged and securely fabricated assemblies .
terminal compartments a terminal compartment shall be assembled in the mounting brackets as shown in the standard drawings .
the terminal compartment shall be manufactured of bronze type numtnum aluminum or ductile iron .
each terminal compartment shall be fitted with a numposition numterminal block .
each type of mounting assembly shall be supplied with wiring from the terminal block through the support arm which holds the signal .
this wiring shall be in the form of colorcoded wire leads with spade terminals for connecting to signal head and soldered ends for connecting to terminal strips in the terminal compartment .
the wiring shall be coloredcoded as follows w hite common to all heads red red lens head yellow yellow lens head green green lens head the leads shall be minimum number num stranded aw g typethw with nummil thermoplastic insulation .
leads shall be of sufficient length to section num num extend from the center section of the signal head to the top of the terminal compartment .
terminal compartment wire hookup shall be as follows top terminal phase a red next terminal phase a yellow next terminal phase a green next three terminals phase b ryg bottom terminal common w hite a rainproof cover shall be provided for all terminal compartments which will provide ready access to the internal terminal block wiring .
the types of frameworks used and the methods of mounting them shall be as shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
num construction requirements construction shall be such that all conductors are concealed within assemblies .
cable guides shall be used to support and protect conductors entering through poles .
all threads shall be coated with rustpreventive paint during assembly .
each vehicle pedestrian signal or flasher assembly shall be mounted at the location and in the manner shown on the project plans .
w hen signal faces are mounted on a mast arm the plumbizer when specified shall be placed on the mast arm and a numinch by fourinch bolt shall be used to fasten both together .
materials removed and not designated to be salvaged or incorporated into the work shall become the property of the contractor .
all traffic signal heads not in use shall be covered with burlap and shall be unmistakably out of service when observed by an approaching driver .
plastic coverings shall not be allowed .
num method of measurement traffic signal faces pedestrian signal faces traffic signal mounting assemblies and flashing beacons will be measured as a unit for each type of signal face mounting assembly or flashing beacon furnished and installed or modified .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of traffic signal faces pedestrian signal faces traffic signal mounting assemblies and flashing beacons measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the type signal face mounting assembly or flashing beacon designated in the bidding schedule complete in place which price shall be full section num num compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans including visors backplates lamps and all hardware necessary to provide a complete functional traffic signal installation .
no direct payment will be made for assembly of departmentfurnished items the cost being considered as included in the contract price bid for the item in place .
section num traffic controller assembly num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing traffic controller assemblies at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
a traffic controller assembly shall consist of a complete assemblage of electrical equipment and components for controlling the operation and timing of traffic control signals .
num materials the controller assembly shall include the controller unit all necessary auxiliary equipment the controller cabinet concrete foundation conduit elbows anchor bolts and clearance pad .
the auxiliary equipment shall include all appurtenances such as flasher controls loop detector amplifiers power assemblies signal load switches conflict monitors preemptors controllers coordinators time switches external logic lighting controls cabinet wiring and accessories as indicated on the plans or in the special provisions .
the entire surface area of each circuit board shall be sealed to protect against moisture .
the following auxiliary equipment shall be furnished with all wired traffic controller assemblies when required controller power panel signal load switches signal conflict monitor detectors controller flasher assembly flash switches surge protector radio interference suppresser cabinet ventilation fan terminal tie points section num num field terminals num general requirements the traffic controller assembly equipment shall conform to the requirements of the current edition of nema publication tsnum .
a documentation the contractors material proposal shall include complete technical information shop drawings photographs graphs circuit diagrams instruction manuals and any other necessary documents to fully describe the proposed traffic controller assembly items .
at the time of delivery the contractor shall furnish three sets of instruction books and an itemized price list for each type of equipment their subassemblies and their replacement parts .
the instruction books shall include the following information table of contents operating procedure theory of operation step by step maintenance and troubleshooting information for the entire assembly and for all components capable of being adjusted circuit w iring diagrams pictorial diagrams of parts locations and parts numbers .
the instruction manuals shall include itemized parts lists .
the itemized parts list shall include the manufacturers name and part number for all components such as transistors integrated circuits diodes switches resistors capacitors relays etc .
used in each circuit module .
the list shall also include crossreferences to parts numbers of other manufacturers who make the same replacement part .
b warranties each controller unit and all of its auxiliary equipment shall be warranted by the supplier against all defects in materials and workmanship in accordance with subsection num with the additional requirements as specified hereinafter .
the warranty for the controller unit and its auxiliary equipment shall provide that in the event of malfunction during the warranty period a like controller unit module or auxiliary equipment shall be furnished within three working days for use while the warranted unit is being repaired .
the isolation of any malfunction and the repair andor replacement of any device within the warranty period shall be the responsibility of the supplier .
section num num the department reserves the right to reject equipment of a specific model type in which the department has determined that its past field performance has been unsatisfactory .
the departments rejection of an item shall be final .
c certificate of compliance a certificate of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted for each traffic controller assembly .
the department reserves the right to require certificates of compliance for each controller assembly component .
the department reserves the right to perform tests on any equipment supplied by the contractor in the departments testing facilities .
d preapproval of controller equipment the department will only accept equipment furnished by manufacturers or vendors with proof of liability insurance for controller units conflict monitors load switches flashers and flash relays and which have been preapproved by the department .
all traffic signal controller units shall be tested by the departments testing procedures and be preapproved by the department .
preapproved traffic signal controller units will be listed in the special provisions .
any controller unit and specified component not listed in the special provisions will not be accepted .
the department reserves the right to retest any preapproved equipment supplied by the contractor in the departments testing facilities .
e department testing of control equipment a completely wired controller assembly with wiring diagrams and instruction books shall be delivered for inspection and testing unless otherwise specified .
the equipment shall be delivered to arizona department of transportation traffic operations services traffic signal shop num south numnd avenue phoenix arizona num it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to correct or replace any equipment that fails department testing .
such corrections or replacements shall be as directed by the engineer .
f department testing procedures of bid items section num num the traffic controller assembly shop test procedure shall be as follows num the contractor shall deliver the equipment to the traffic signal shop .
num the department will take inventory of the delivered equipment .
num the department will conduct a load test for a minimum of num hours under online conditions .
num environmental or other tests will be performed by the department at the discretion of the engineer .
num after any test failures the contractor shall have three working days to correct the failure .
procedures num and num above shall then be repeated until the equipment passes the tests .
the engineer may require the replacement of any component after that components second failure under test .
num after the controller operation tests are approved the contractor shall pick up the control cabinet and equipment haul them to the job site and install them as specified .
after the contractor has mounted the control cabinet on the cabinet foundation department personnel will connect all the field wiring inside the control cabinet and test the signal circuits .
num scheduling the activation of traffic signals shall require a minimum of num working days notice to the departments electrical inspection unit at num south numnd avenue phoenix arizona num num num .
no activations outside the phoenix metropolitan area shall be scheduled either on monday or friday .
the contractor shall be responsible to ensure that all the required work has been completed and that the traffic signals are ready to be activated on the prearranged date .
if the department determines that the traffic signal work is not complete and can not be activated then the contractor shall be responsible for costs incurred by the department personnel equipment lodging per diem salary etc .. num traffic signal controllers a traffic signal controller shall consist of an electronic device dedicated to the selection and timing of traffic movements .
each controller shall provide all the features functions and phasing operations as indicated on the plans and the special provisions .
a solid state digital controllers section num num the solid state digital controllers shall utilize modular construction solid state circuitry and digital timing techniques .
integrated or discrete semiconductor devices shall be used exclusively .
controller logic shall have high noise immunity .
solid state components shall be standard production types and shall be readily available .
components shall be properly rated with respect to heat dissipating capacity and rated voltage .
the minimum rated life of all components shall be num years under numhouraday operation .
components shall be clearly identifiable by markings on circuit boards or parts numbers on pictorial diagrams .
the digital timing techniques and repeatability shall be accordance with num module circuit boards the controller shall contain plugconnected module boards .
the solid state components shall be mounted on printed circuit module boards .
the module boards from the controller shall be easily removed without the use of special tools and shall be designed to permit replacement of all components without damage to the board or its circuits .
each individual printed circuit board shall be identified by a serial number or parts number clearly stamped or etched on the board .
the module circuit boards shall be arranged by functional groupings .
each module board by functional design shall be electrically and mechanically interchangeable with other controllers of the same model controller series or frame type .
the module boards shall be fabricated from epoxy glass laminate nema grade gnum or gnum with a minimum weight of two ounces of copper per square foot .
the copper track shall have adequate crosssection to carry the designed current capacity .
all contact surfaces shall be noncorrosive construction .
the entire surface area of each circuit board shall be sealed to protect against moisture .
phase timing modules which time more than one phase shall be programmable to permit the selective disabling of unused phases .
modules that have a numvolt ac input shall be properly fused within the controller .
section num num the interfaces and the power supply for the controller shall be designed to accommodate the maximum module configuration possible for the controller such that no additional future modifications are required .
interchangeable connectors except data buss type shall be keyed to prevent their insertion into the wrong receptacle of the controller .
the controllers housing shall be an integral frame assembly constructed of nonferrous metals .
the housing shall conform to all nema requirements .
num volatile memory all volatile memory in controllers time switches and time base coordinators shall utilize a battery backup supply to maintain memory as follows a complete memory retention for num days if ram board is removed from controller .
b nonrechargeable battery the nonrechargeable battery shall be rated to maintain memory for not less than five years in continuous use and include a battery condition indicator .
c rechargeable battery the rechargeable batteries shall be the type that can be operated stored or charged in any position and be capable of being recharged not less than num times .
the rechargeable batteries shall have an automatic battery charger with a battery discharge indicator and shall operate within the nema environment standards .
num indicators indicators shall be the subminiature type and may be either incandescent lamps or solid state .
incandescent lamps shall be replaceable from the front of the panel .
all programming pins shall be the printed circuit receptacle noncorrosive turning fork type .
the pin contactor shall fit any standard numinch to numinch board .
the pin shall be rated for num volts and five amperes .
b digital pretimed solid state controllers the dpt controller shall designate a digital pretimed controller compatible with nema standards these specifications the special provisions and the plans .
section num num the type dpt controller shall be designated with sixposition alphanumeric code .
the two numbers in the code shall have the following meanings dptnum_ capacity of up to num signal load circuits dptnum_ capacity of up to num signal load circuits the letters in the last position shall have the following meanings dpt__s computer supervised unit dpt__p programmed for preemption dpt__t programmed for time base coordination dpt__h hard w ire intertie w hen the last position has more than one letter the controller shall have all the functional features defined by each letter .
all the dpt controller units supplied shall be readily programmable for preemption and shall include the time base coordination module and programming .
num the dptnum pretimed controller the dptnum shall meet the following specifications and shall be designed for nonactuated operation of traffic signals having predetermined cycle lengths cycle lengths interval durations and interval sequences .
the controller shall have three independent cycles with three offsets and two splits per cycle .
cycle lengths shall be front panel adjustable with a front panel cycleineffect indicator .
the cycle display shall show the local elapsed time inputs outputs and timing values .
the controller shall have num signal intervals and num independently controlled onoff signal circuit outputs which may be independently programmed for flashing the signal output in a designated interval .
the controller unit for replacement for a typef electromechanical controller shall be a retrofit back panel num inches high num inches wide and num deep .
the back panel shall house nematype flasher load switches and twochannel card rack amplifier .
the flasher transfer relays shall be interfaced with a cinchjones type eightpin socket .
the signal load shall be controlled by a numampere tungsten mercury contactor .
a indicators section num num indicators shall include digital readouts to display all inputs countdown timing intervals cycle split local master and preemption .
b controller programming program entries shall be front panel programmable without the use of tools or software .
c preemption preemption functions shall be programmable assignments to include entrance times track clearance passage and clearance times minimum duration protection time and exit .
the programming shall also include detection mode pedestrian indications operation delay time and flash operation .
d vehicle detection the back panel shall include cardrack mounted nematype vehicle detector for two detector channels .
each channel shall input each actuated vehicle signal phase group .
e pedestrian detection the actuated signal phase groups shall have pedestrian actuated movements .
f startup and flash the startup operation and flash operation intervals and timing shall be programmable in the unit .
g control cabinet for dptnum th the control cabinet shall be the type specified on the plans and in the special provisions .
the control cabinet shall include the following items cabinet fan light convenience outlet and police panel .
the following switches shall be included mainonoff controller auto oncontroller onflashcontroller offflash signal lights onoff and automanual .
the following switches shall be mounted inside the police panel main switch autoflash switch and automanual switch and manual control cord .
h conflict monitor section num num the conflict monitor shall be a cableconnected unit external shelf mounted six channel nemawired to monitor all functions .
all the equipment housed in the control cabinet shall be installed and removed from the front with ease .
num the dptnum pretimed controller the dptnum shall be designed for nonactuated operation of traffic signals with predetermined cycle lengths interval durations and interval sequences .
the controller unit shall have a minimum of three independent cycles .
each cycle shall have a minimum timing range of num seconds and interval timing of num seconds in onesecond and onetenthsecond increments .
each cycle length shall be front panel adjustable with a front panel cycleineffect indicator .
a cycle readout shall show the time of the local cycle that has elapsed .
each cycle shall have three offsets and four splits .
the four splits signal interval plans shall be selected by either a remote interconnect time switch or a local detector actuation .
the controller unit shall have num signal intervals and num independently controlled onoff signal circuit outputs which may be independently programmed for flashing the signal output in a designated interval .
a synchronization the pretimed controller unit shall have a manual switch to synchronize itself with an intertie system input or the controller unit shall be capable of providing a syncpulse to an intertie system when programmed to be a master controller unit .
b interconnected system the controller unit shall be capable of operating with an existing master controller unit with six of num functions .
the controller unit inputs from a standardtype pretimed interconnect shall be as follows dial num one input num offset num num num split num num num num flash common ac neutral note splits num num num and num shall be used with a numfunction intertie system only .
section num num dial num shall be in effect when neither the dial num nor the dial num lines are energized .
a master controller unit with direct control by a computer system shall have nemalogic level inputs .
c conflict monitor the conflict monitor shall be an external shelfmounted numchannel or larger nema cableconnect unit wired to monitor all functions .
d manual control an automanual control switch and wiring terminals shall be furnished in the controller cabinet assembly for a momentary contact hand held switch .
the automanual control switch shall be accessible with a standard police type key .
the handheld manual switch shall be weatherproof on a retractable cable .
manual operation of the controller shall provide the same color sequence as was programmed for the automatic operation .
the duration of all intervals except the yellow vehicle interval and the red vehicle clearance interval shall be controlled by operation of the manual switch .
duration of the yellow interval and red clearance interval shall be the minimum time specified to be programmed in the controller unit .
e minimum timing a guaranteed minimum backup time for each interval programmed in accordance with the signal plan nonvolatile programmable readonly memory shall be provided as specified on the plans or in the special provisions .
f manufacturer programmed functions the following functions shall be programmed by the manufacturer into the programmable read only memory in accordance with the signal plan specified on the project plans num startup programs num each signal plan and sequence programs num backup times num remote flash operation programs num cycle backup times num offset backup times section num num num preemption plan and sequence programs num field programmable functions the following functions shall be programmable from the front panel by the operator in the field timing entry cycle lengths offsets interval time readout of cycle split and interval readout of timing in the prom and preemption interval timing .
num function switches the following function switches shall be provided locknonlock recall for each detector localremote selection of cycle offset split and plan synchold for noninterconnected operation the programming of the timing entry cycle offsets selectable functions and phase timing intervals shall be set by entry switches programming pins or by keyboard entry .
programming shall include digital solid state readouts of keyboard programmed functions .
num inputoutput connectors the signal output connectors shall be compatible with the nema fourphase controllers .
the controller unit shall use the standard nema connectors a and b per nema table num fourphase terminations and the following tables section num num connector a pin no .
function pin no .
function a reserved f det .
num b numvolt dc g det .
num c voltage monitor h det .
num d sig .
ckt .
num i e sig .
ckt .
num j remote flash f sig .
ckt .
num k guar .
interval g sig .
ckt .
num m h sig .
ckt .
num n signal plan num preempt num j sig .
ckt .
num p ac k det .
num q master sync out l det .
num r spare m det .
num s sig .
ckt .
num n stop time t sig .
ckt .
num p coord .
sync in u r external start v s manual interval advance w overlap advance t indicator lamp control x free u ac y cycle num v chassis gnd z split num w logic gnd aa signal plan num preempt num x flash logic numpps bb ol mode y spare cc spare z sig .
ckt .
num dd sig .
ckt .
num a sig .
ckt .
num ee b sig .
ckt .
num ff signal plan c sig .
ckt .
num gg split num d hh cycle num e sig .
ckt .
num section num num connector b pin no .
function pin no .
function a free output f spare b flash cont .
g spare c spare h det .
num d sig .
ckt .
num i det .
num e sig .
ckt .
num j cycle num optional function f sig .
ckt .
num k g sig .
ckt .
num m h sig .
ckt .
num n j sig .
ckt .
num p sig .
ckt .
num k q sig .
ckt .
num l det .
num r m det .
num s sig .
ckt .
num n det .
num t spare p det .
num u sig .
ckt .
num r offset num v s offset num w sig .
ckt .
num t x u offset num y v cmu stop time z w split num aa sig .
ckt .
num x bb sig .
ckt .
num y sig .
ckt .
num cc sig .
ckt .
num z sig .
ckt .
num dd sig .
ckt .
num a sig .
ckt .
num ee sig .
ckt .
num b sig .
ckt .
num ff sig .
ckt .
num c sig .
ckt .
num gg sig .
ckt .
num d sig .
ckt .
num hh sig .
ckt .
num e sig .
ckt .
num the following inputs shall be in accordance with nema stop timing shall have the effect of halting the local percent counter .
manual enable guaranteed interval inhibit .
interval advance manual shall step controller through each programmed interval sequentially .
shall operate on trailing edge of pulse .
w hen asserted with stop timing shall provide manual control of all intervals .
indicator lamp control shall extinguish all front panel indicators .
external start shall force the controller to the specified starting interval .
the normal cycle shall resume immediately upon release of this input .
detectors chassis ground and preemption .
section num num the following outputs shall be in accordance with nema signal output circuits interval num on shall be active for the duration of interval num .
voltage monitor shall be active as long as the controller is providing proper operation .
num volts dc logic common master sync shall be active at all times except during the master sync period .
flash logic shall alternate between truefalse logic levels at a one pulse per second repetition rate .
num preemption w hen specified a preemption program shall be provided in the controller software .
the preemption program shall be initiated by a nonlocking preemption call .
the preemption mode shall have its own timing including minimum timing and signal plan .
num electrical characteristics the controller programs provided by the manufacturer shall be permanently stored in a nonvolatile memory such that batteries shall not be required to maintain the minimum interval timing interval sequences starton offsets cycle and splits flash onoff detectors signal circuits flash and preemption .
c actuated solid state digital controllers num general the actuated solid state digital controller shall be designed for the operation of traffic signals with fully actuated or semiactuated timing of the traffic signals including operation with auxiliary equipment .
each actuated controller shall be furnished with the required number of phases phase sequence phase timing features and all other control functions that are specified herein on the plans or in the special provisions .
num danactuated controller and features actuated controllers shall be designated on the plans or special provisions with the following designations the dan controller shall designate a digital actuated controller conforming to nema standards these specifications the special provisions and the plans .
section num num the number in the alphanumeric code type shall mean the following dannum twophase controller dannum the controller shall be capable of operating four phases .
dannum the controller shall be capable of operating eight phases .
a phase timing each dan controller unit phase timing or phase module shall include timing periods for each vehicle and pedestrian phase actuated with volume density timing or nonactuated timing for semiactuated phase operation .
each phase timing period shall be not less than the minimum required by nema .
b controller preapproval the dan controller preapproval shall be in accordance with current nema specifications and these specifications .
no additional functions shall be in the dan controller .
preapproval tests and evaluations shall be performed by the department and approved by the engineer .
c overlap phases controllers with more than two phases shall be furnished with a nema num overlap program board and driver outputs .
the nematype overlaps shall be programmed by the nema program board assembly with hard wire jumpers easily accessible inside the controller or programmed in the controller without the use of tools .
d frame sizes the controller unit frames shall be two four and eightphase not exceeding the nemaspecified dimensions except height which shall be num inches maximum .
equipment shall be interchangeable in the controller cabinet .
e phase sequence operation each phase and associated overlap phases of a singlering controller shall be sequentially timed as indicated on the plans .
dualring controllers shall be sequentially timed per ring and concurrently timed per nonconflicting phase .
dualring controllers shall be programmed for the dual entry mode of operation .
dualring traffic signal controllers that are prom programmable shall include three proms one installed prom and include two spare phase sequence proms as follows section num num prom a eightphase quad left turn operation .
prom b eightphase dual left turn ring one operation sequential ring two operation .
prom c eightphase sequential operation .
the two spare proms shall be identified and packaged for future use .
f controller inputoutput functions and connectors the controller shall provide all the nema inputoutput functions .
the a b and c connectors and their pin assignments shall be the same as shown in table num of num nema for two four and eightphase controller units and their cables .
all a and b connectors and cables shall include specified four and eightphase functions for future use .
auxiliary connectors shall not be permitted on type dan controllers .
g standard functions standard controller functions specified by nema and as specified in these specifications shall be furnished .
the controller unit functions shall include nema tsnum sections num and num .
the standard functions shall be the nemaspecified features on a per phase per ring and per unit basis .
h preprogrammable guaranteed minimum clearance timing all controllers shall have a guaranteed minimum clearance timing program and shall be programmed as follows num guaranteed yellow change interval three seconds num guaranteed pedestrian clearance interval five seconds the controller shall have the capability to permit exclusive pedestrian phase when required .
i preprogrammable backup timing all controllers with a backup timing prom capability shall be programmed for the type of phase movement for the minimum times as follows section num num any vehicle and pedestrian phase movement nonactuated interval time in seconds minimum green num w alk solid num ped clearance flashing num yellow change num red clearance num any vehicle and pedestrian phase movement actuated interval time in seconds initial green num vehicle extension passage num max i num max ii num w alk solid num red clearance flashing num detector memory on recall mode ped .
any vehicle exclusive turning phase movement interval time in seconds initial green num vehicle extension passage num max i num max ii num yellow change num red clearance num detector memory on recall mode vehicle any required change or additions by the manufacturer to these time values shall be cleared through the engineer before delivery of the controller assembly .
num the mps controller features the mps controller shall designate a digital microprocessor controller that conforms to all the dan controller specifications and shall include special programmable applications as specified in these specifications and the plans .
a mps controller minimum phase requirements the mps controller shall be a fourphase or eightphase dual ring operation or twelvephase dual or three ring operation as required in the plans .
the type of mps controller shall be designated by the special program applications required .
section num num the last letters shall designate the following mpssi computer supervised unit interconnected mpssd computer supervised unit dial up mpsp programmed for preemption mpst programmed for time base coordination mpsc programmed for tm coordination traffic actuated coordination mpsm arterial master controller interconnected mpssf programmed for any additional special functions per special provisions .
the mps controller shall include the following features num each mps controller shall include the programming and module for time base coordination with a front panel d connector or auxiliary connector for all nonnema functions .
num all nonnema inputoutput functions shall be contained in a system or d connector only .
num each mps controller shall include the printer interface and port .
the printer interface shall permit printout of all controller coordinator and preemptor operator entered data .
num the d connector shall be located on the front panel .
num the mps controller main frame shall be readily compatible for mpsp preemptor programming .
b mps controller preapproval in addition to meeting the dan controller preapproval requirements the department will require each mps controller model and special program type to be tested and evaluated on a programbyprogram basis before approval by the engineer .
each approval will be limited to each type of program required by the department not by manufacturer or model .
the number of manufacturers preapproved by the department may be limited for each type of program the department requires .
section num num existing department approved controller programs shall be limited to the manufacturers program version and model currently in operation for a specified geographic area as required by the engineer .
approval of a mps arterial or interconnected supervised controller unit shall be limited to the departments operating computer management software and hardware .
c mps twelvephase controller the twelvephase controller shall meet all dan controller specifications plus the following functions num all nonnema functions and phases shall be contained in a d connector or auxiliary connector on the front panel .
num the controller shall include twelve phases with both vehicle and pedestrian timing .
num the controller shall have allocation of phases to be operated in a special programmable concurrent phase or cophase mode .
up to six phases may be used as cophases .
the cophases shall be capable of being implemented to create additional rings .
the cophase timing parameters shall be entered from the front panel .
num the controller shall contain two additional overlaps to the four nema overlaps .
num the controller shall include time base coordination and three preemption programs .
num the controller shall accept up to sixteen detector inputs .
d mps coordination programming preapproval the mpss computer supervised controller and the mpsm arterial master controller for systems shall be preapproved by the engineer per the departments computer hardware and software requirements .
the mpsc tm coordination and mpst time base coordination shall be preapproved by the engineer per the departments system requirements .
each manufacturers unit shall be readily interchangeable within the same model line .
e mpst time base coordination program num the mpst program for time base coordination shall be included in each mps controller unit .
section num num the mpst program shall consist of the hardware software and cabinet wiring to provide coordinated traffic flow without the use of interconnect cables between controller units in a dedicated geographic area .
the mpst program shall be supervised by its own clock which will monitor the programs memory so as to implement routine time of day day of week and week of year programs as well as automatic daylight savings selection .
num the mpst controller program shall include the following functions a shall be capable of being system interfaced intertie or dialup for a program monitoring and data downloading and system data uploading .
the data downloading and clock updating shall also be accomplished by a handheld device .
b the coordination programming shall include the following phase timing options the mpst controller shall have a coordination system d connector .
the system connector shall function as inputoutput port and auxiliary output connector .
all outputs shall be nema compatible .
c the mpst controller shall provide for all time base coordination user program data input and the status readouts including cycle countdown and program data display on the front panel .
f mpst controller cabinet wiring the following cabinet wiring functions shall be included with the mpst controller cabinet assembly num the cabinet shall be wired for call to nonactuated mode i for the highway and mode ii for cross street unless otherwise specified .
num the inside cabinet switch panel shall include a switch for coordination and free run modes of the coordinator program .
the remote free input shall be wired to a cabinet terminal tie point .
num two auxiliary time of day num hour outputs shall be wired in the cabinet to program special functions via the coordination system d connector .
g mps preemption programming section num num the mps controller shall include all the required hardware and cpu software so as to readily accept the addition of a mpsp program .
the mpsp preemptor programmed controller unit shall be preapproved by the engineer as per the departments requirements for any geographic area or system .
each manufacturers unit shall be readily interchangeable within the same model line .
the mpsp preemptor program shall include all required hardware and programming with an inputoutput connector cable interface .
the removal of the preemption module shall not interfere with the normal operation of the controller unit .
the mpsp controller shall have the preemption user program data inputs and status readouts including preemption intervals and program data displayed on the front panel .
the following is an outline for a mpsp program scheme .
each mpsp program shall be evaluated by this scheme .
num preemptor intervals the preemptor shall control intervals by ring .
before the initiation of preemption a delay input interval must be completed .
if the delay is released before timing out the preemptor will not initiate time .
during preemptor timing any higher priority preemption input will override the active preemptor mode .
num interval programs the following interval functions and sequence per ring shall be programmed in the preemptor module .
interval num the minimum guaranteed green interval .
the effective start time for this interval is when the phase that is timing enters green .
therefore if the phase was in green longer than the interval programmed time prior to initiation of preemption the preemptor will advance to interval num .
interval num the minimum guaranteed greenpedestrian clearance interval .
the effective start time for this interval is when the phase that is timing enters pedestrian clearance .
therefore if the phase was in pedestrian clearance longer then the interval programmed time prior to initiation of preemption the preemptor will advance to interval num .
interval num the minimum guaranteed phase yellow clearance interval .
section num num the effective start time for this interval is when the phase that is timing enters yellow clearance .
therefore if the phase was in yellow clearance longer than the interval programmed time prior to initiation of preemption the preemptor will advance to interval num .
this interval will only be in effect if preemption was initiated during green or yellow .
preemption will terminate the green or yellow phase .
interval num the minimum guaranteed overlap yellow clearance interval .
any overlap is assigned to one ring that is timing during entry into preemption .
the overlap will terminate when that ring starts interval .
the effective start time for this interval is when overlaps go into yellow clearance .
if the overlaps have been in yellow clearance longer than the interval programmed time prior to the initiation of preempt the preemptor will advance to interval num .
interval num the minimum guaranteed overlap allred clearance interval .
the effective start time for this interval is when the overlaps that are going to terminate and the phase that is timing are in red .
this interval will stay in effect until all the overlaps that are going to terminate and the phase that is timing has been in red for the programmed allred time .
the preemptor then will advance to interval num .
if there is no track clearance phase assigned to a ring that ring will advance to interval num .
interval num the track clearance green interval .
this interval will time the assigned track clearance green programmed time and upon completion the ring will advance to interval num .
interval num the track clearance yellow interval .
this interval will time the assigned track clearance yellow programmed time .
w hen the timing is complete the ring will advance to interval num .
interval num the track clearance all red interval .
this interval will time the assigned track clearance all red programmed time .
w hen the timing is complete the ring will advance to interval num .
interval num the holdlock interval .
w hen both rings of the preemptor sequence have reached interval num the preemptor will be advanced to interval a. interval a the duration passage interval .
section num num this interval will time the completion of the programmed duration time .
the duration time will start timing when the preemption sequence is started .
interval a will insure that the preemption sequence will not terminate until programmed time after initiation of preemption regardless of the phases and intervals in effect during initiation of preemption or the timing of intervals preceding interval a .
the phase assigned for each ring shall operate as a hold phase .
the options of ped indications active and hold flash take effect during this interval .
interval b the holdpassage interval .
the hold time will start timing when preemption interval a starts .
interval b will insure a minimum time in the passage movement before preemption will be permitted to terminate .
the interval will terminate only when the programmed time is complete and the preemption input is nonactive after which the interval will be set to c. the hold phases ped indications active and hold flash shall be applied during interval b. interval c the holdpassage yellow clearance interval .
at the completion of the holdpassage interval the hold clearance yellow will time unless num there are no exit phases .
the preemptor will be nonactive and exit as soon as interval b is complete .
num the preempt call returns active .
the preemptor will go back to interval b. w hen the holdpassage yellow clearance timing is complete the interval will advance to interval d. interval d the holdclearance allred clearance interval .
if the preemption call returns the preemptor will go back to interval b. w hen the holdpassage all red clearance timing is complete the interval will advance to interval e. interval e the exit lock interval for the preemptor .
w hen both preemption rings get to interval e the preemptor will exit the preemption sequence .
num preemptor flash section num num the type mps controller preemption module flash can be initiated in the following ways a hold flash b power up with preemption c external start with preemption d sum check bad e power upexternal start with illegal phases f illegal controller software valve .
the preemptor flash control output shall be true low during preemptor flash .
the controller signal output drivers will flash red if they are not assigned as a hold phase .
the output shall flash yellow if assigned as a hold phase .
the required preemption intervals shall be programmed for single track or dual track clearance as shown on the plans .
num control cabinets a general the control cabinets covered in this section shall be used to house all traffic pretimed and actuated signal controller assemblies and shall include intersection controller cabinets and auxiliary controller cabinets .
the cabinets shall be wired for all additional future phases and all associated equipment for the future phases shall be furnished and installed .
cabinets shall be wired and tested by the controller manufacturer or a representative designated by the controller manufacturer .
the cabinet wiring shall be covered by the controller manufacturers warranty .
the following cabinet types shall be supplied when specified on the plans .
the cabinets shall be constructed according to the traffic signal and highway lighting standard drawings type i pedestal base cabinet type i controller cabinet type ii controller cabinet type iii controller cabinet section num num type iv controller cabinet type v controller cabinet auxiliary controller cabinets shall be either a type i controller cabinet for pole mounting or a type ii load center cabinet for foundation mounting .
the controller cabinet housings shall be of a nema num weather resistant construction .
the steel cabinet housing and accessories shall be treated on the inside and outside with one coat of primer paint and painted with two coats of aluminum paint in accordance with section num .
cabinets shall have continuous welded seams on all outside seams .
the steel fabricated cabinet housings shall be constructed with no .
num copper bearing sheet steel .
the aluminum fabricated cabinet housings shall be constructed with no .
num gage welded sheet aluminum .
the cabinet finish shall be clean and not painted .
b hardware num doors the doors shall have a neoprene gasket around the perimeters of each door frame .
the door hinge pins shall be stainless steel .
the main controller cabinet door except the type i shall have a twoposition steelbar type door stop .
the main doors of the types iii iv and v controller cabinets shall be secured by a threepoint locking device .
num locks the main doors of controller cabinets shall have a standard traffic signal selflocking tumbler lock .
the threepoint door latch cam shall be steel .
the pedestal base cabinet doors and the police panel doors shall have a standard policetype lock .
the policetype lock key shaft shall be a minimum of num inch in length .
a minimum of two keys per lock shall be furnished with each cabinet .
num shelves each controller cabinet shall be furnished with metal shelves capable of supporting all shelf mounted equipment without bending or sagging .
section num num the shelves shall not sag or restrict the free flow of air .
the cabinets shall contain adjustable support brackets .
for nema controllers the following shelf heights shall be furnished with the delivered cabinet a a minimum shelf height of num inches shall be provided for twophase controllers .
b a minimum shelf height of num inches shall be provided for fourphase and eightphase nema controllers and pretimed controllers .
c cabinet accessories the following accessories shall be provided with each controller cabinet as specified herein num cabinet light the types ii and iii controller cabinets shall contain a minimum numinch fluorescent light fixture and lamp .
the types iv and v controller cabinets shall contain a minimum numinch fluorescent light fixture and lamp .
the fixture shall be mounted on the inside top of the cabinet near the front edge of the roof so that the front panels of the control equipment will be illuminated .
a dooractuated refrigeratortype normally closed durable pushbutton type switch shall automatically turn the light fixture on and off when the door is opened and closed .
num switches the switches described in this section shall be provided for all solid state digital controller cabinets .
each switch shall be a commercial grade switch properly rated for the circuits they control .
each switch shall be individually labeled to identify its function .
the label shall be an engraved laminated plastic legend plate or a permanently printed metallic legend plate .
the following switches shall be mounted on the cabinet switch panel inside the controller cabinet housing a indicator lamp control a door actuated switch that shall operate with any controller unit which activates the controller indicator lamps .
b autoflash switch a toggle switch to transfer to flashing operation .
during the flash operation the ac power shall be disconnected from the controller .
section num num c detector call test switches including pretimedcabinets a test switch shall be furnished to simulate a vehicle and pedestrian actuation .
each switch shall be a momentary contact push button .
the metering controller shall have test switches for each detector input shown on the plans .
each switch shall be labeled to identify its function and phase .
d preemptor switch w hen a traffic control preemptor is specified on the plans it shall be controlled by a twoposition toggle switch .
the test position shall manually turn on the preemption operation .
the auto position shall be for automatic external control of the preemptor .
e stop time switch a separate twoposition stop time toggle switch shall be provided to permit stop timingautomatic mode of the controllers stop time function .
the two positions shall be labeled stop time auto .
w hen required other special function switches shall be furnished .
such switches shall be of the proper voltage and current rating to perform the function as specified .
the following switches shall be mounted in the police panel f main switch this shall be the main onoff switch to control the ac power to the signal controller assembly .
the switch shall be properly sized for the amperage of the equipment .
g autoflash switch shall be a toggle switch to transfer from automatic control to flashing operation .
during the flash operation the ac power shall be maintained to the controller .
h photooffmanual switch lighting contactors shall be controlled by a threeposition doublepole doublethrow switch .
the photo position shall place the contactor under the control of the photoelectric cell unit .
the off position shall disconnect the contactors coil from the photoelectric control .
the manual position shall activate the contactor and turn on the intersection lighting .
num convenience outlet a numvolt ac numamp .
nema num g.f.i .
convenience duplex outlet shall be mounted in each cabinet for energizing test equipment or tools .
the outlet shall be fuse protected .
section num num d cabinet ventilation equipment cabinet fan and filters controller cabinets containing solid state electronic equipment shall be ventilated by means of a numvolt ac numhertz tubeaxial compact type fan .
the fans free delivery air flow shall be not less than num cubic feet per minute .
the fan housing shall be approximately four inches square by num inches deep .
the magnetic field of the fan motor shall not affect the performance of the control equipment .
the fan bearings shall operate freely within the environmental standards specified herein .
the fan unit shall not crack creep warp or have bearing failure within a fiveyear rated duty cycle .
the maximum noise level shall be num decibels .
the fan unit shall be corrosion resistant .
the cabinet fan shall be controlled by an adjustable snap action thermostat .
the thermostats turnon setting shall be adjustable from num to num degrees f. the fan shall run until the cabinet temperature decreases to approximately num degrees f below the turnon temperature setting .
the fan shall be fused .
the cabinet fan assembly shall be mounted either inside the control cabinet or inside a rainproof housing on top of the control cabinet .
the cabinet shall have louvered air inlets in the lower portion of the main door .
a standard furnace filter shall be mounted behind all the louvered air inlets .
the air outlets shall be screened on the exhaust side of the fan unit .
the cabinet shall have a dust resistant air outlet baffle well secured and removable in the top of the cabinet .
auxiliary cabinets containing solid state electronic equipment shall use fan units with a free delivery air flow of not less than num cubic feet per minute .
the fan unit shall be approximately num inches square .
all other fan characteristics shall be as described above in this section .
e electrical devices num legend plates an engraved laminated plastic legend plate or a permanently printed metallic legend plate shall be provided inside the control cabinet for each control device connector cable connector and fuse mounted in section num num the cabinet .
each control device shall be labeled to identify the type of device and its connector number .
each fuse shall be labeled to identify its rating and circuit function .
num power panel the power supplied to the controller cabinet shall be numvolt ac twowire numhertz singlephase service unless otherwise specified .
the power leg to the controller and the signal load circuits shall be protected by a singlepole numvolt ac circuit breaker .
the breaker shall have a num ampere interruption rating a trip indicator and shall be the bolton type .
the ampere rating shall be properly sized for the traffic signal intersections load .
the neutral service leg shall be connected to the ac neutral buss .
the numvolt ac intersection lighting control circuit and the convenience outlet shall not be connected to the same service leg to which the controllers power supply is connected .
the lighting load shall be numvolt ac unless otherwise specified .
num radio interference suppressor each control cabinet shall be equipped with a single radio interference suppressor ris of sufficient ampere rating to handle the load requirements .
the ris shall be installed at the input power point .
it shall minimize interference in both the broadcast and the aircraft frequencies and shall provide a minimum attenuation of num decibels over a frequency range of from num kilohertz to num megahertz when used in connection with normal installations .
the ris shall be hermetically sealed in a substantial metal case which shall be filled with a suitable insulating compound .
the terminals shall be nickelplated num brass studs of sufficient external length to provide space to connect on no .
num aw g wires and shall be so mounted that they can not be turned in the case .
ungrounded terminals shall be properly insulated from each other and shall maintain a surface leakage distance of not less than num inch between any exposed current conductor and any other metallic parts .
the terminals shall have an insulation factor of num megohms dependent upon external circuit conditions .
the ris shall not be rated less than num amperes .
the ris shall be designed for operation on numvolt ac num percent numhertz .
singlephase circuits and shall meet the standards of ul and the radio manufacturers association .
num surge protector section num num each controller cabinet shall be provided with a numvolt surge protector at the input power point .
the surge protector shall reduce the effects of power line voltage transients and shall have ratings as follows impulse breakdown less than num volts in less than num microseconds at num kilovolts per microsecond standby current less than num milliampere striking voltage num volts d.c. shall be capable of withstanding num pulses of peak current each of which will rise in num microseconds to onehalf the peak voltage at threeminute intervals .
the peak current rating shall be num amperes .
num inductive suppressors each numvolt ac circuit that serves an inductive device such as a fan motor cabinet light or a mechanical relay shall have a suppressor to protect the controllers solid state devices from excessive voltage surges .
such suppressors shall be in addition to the surge protector at the main input power point .
f cabinet wiring standards num conductors all conductors used in controller cabinet wiring shall be no .
num or larger with a minimum of num copper strands .
conductors shall conform to military specification milw numd type b or better .
the insulation shall have a minimum thickness of num mils and shall be nylonjacketed polyvinyl chloride or shall be irradiated crosslink polyvinyl chloride polyhalocarbon or polychloralkene .
num leadin wires and cable leadin wires from the loop detector field terminals in the cabinet to the amplifier unit inside the cabinet shall conform to one of the following a twisted pair of no .
num or larger conductors .
a cable containing two no .
num or larger conductors with each conductor insulated with either num a minimum of num mils of polyvinyl chloride and two mils of nylon or num a minimum of num mils of polyethylene or polypropylene .
the conductors shall be twisted pairs with three to six turns per foot .
the cable shall be provided with a polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride outer jacket with a minimum thickness of num mils or with a chrome vinyl outer jacket with a minimum thickness of num mils .
section num num all conductors used in controller cabinet wiring shall conform to the following color code requirements the ac common conductors shall be identified by a continuous white or natural gray .
the chassis ground conductors shall be identified by a continuous green color with one or more yellow stripes .
the nongrounded conductors shall be identified by any color not specified above .
num load switch and flasher wiring each of the load switch outputs numvolt ac and the flash transfer relay load base terminals shall be hardwired with a minimum no .
num copper conductor with a num oc rated jacket or no .
num copper conductor with a num oc rated jacket .
the numvolt ac load switch and flash relay terminals shall be soldered to each base terminal .
num signal load switch buss the ac signal load switch buss shall be controlled by a signalpole numvolt ac mercury contactor or an auxiliary control relay .
the minimum contactor size per switch buss shall be num amperes .
num signal load panels all load switches flashers and flash transfer relays shall be mounted on a load bay panel or back panel assembly of the appropriate size .
each load switch input from the controller shall be programmable on the back panel by use of removable jumpers to facilitate possible redesignation of output assignments due to future phasing requirements .
detector amplifier modules may be mounted on the panel in lieu of a detector rack .
the signal load panel or back plane panel shall be easily removable from the cabinet for repair in the field .
all the control hardware and wiring shall be mounted and installed so as to permit the main back panel to be released and dropped for the service repairs in less than num minutes .
the load bay or back plane panel shall be wired to include all future signal phases and operations shown on the plans .
section num num printed circuit board type back panels shall only contain num to numvolt dc circuits .
no numvolt ac circuits will be allowed .
num preemption w hen specified the controller cabinet shall include the cabinet wiring provisions for a preemptor controller unit and its cables .
g meter pedestal cabinet meter pedestal cabinets shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the project plans and specifications .
the cabinet shall be ul listed .
the cabinet shall be num gage steel of tamperproof construction with pianohinged doors and provisions for padlocks .
the top and front covers of the cabinet shall be num gage steel .
the cabinet shall be treated on the inside and outside with one coat of primer paint and painted with two coats of aluminum paint conforming to the requirements of section num .
the cabinet shall be completely wired with copper conductors to include the required circuit breakers and lighting contactors and shall be wired and equipped to handle electrical service loads as detailed on the project plans .
the service pull section shall be num inches deep and shall be located in back of the cabinet .
an access opening in the cabinet shall be provided at the bottom of the service pull section .
each cabinet shall have a detachable pad mount sleeve for easy installation in concrete which can be bolted to the base of the pedestal .
electrical service shall be numvolt numhertz threewire service .
h cabinetmounted service enclosure the cabinetmounted service enclosure shall be mounted on the back of control or loadcenter cabinets to provide a combination of metered and unmetered service for traffic signals and highway lighting respectively .
the service enclosure shall provide for both metered and unmetered load circuits .
the enclosure shall be rated for numampere continuous service and shall comply with the requirements of the serving utility company .
the cabinetmounted service enclosure shall be fabricated from num gage zinccoated steel with tamperproof construction .
the enclosure shall be a nema numr rainproof type with provisions for padlocks .
the enclosure shall have factory installed breakers sockets and other components and shall be u.l .
listed .
the installed conductors shall be section num num copper of the size and type to conform to the nec and u.l .
requirements .
the enclosure shall be finished with one coat of primer paint and two coats of aluminum paint conforming to the requirements of section num .
i cabinet foundations concrete for cabinet foundations shall be numpound per square inch class s concrete .
num auxiliary control equipment the auxiliary equipment described in this section shall be supplied and installed as required inside the controller cabinet .
all auxiliary equipment shall conform to current published nema standards pertaining to that device .
a flasher control assembly the flasher control equipment shall consist of a complete electrical assembly which shall provide flashing traffic signals by enabling flash relays when the autoflash switch or conflict monitor is activated .
the relays shall be the flash load relay type as specified herein .
b solid state flashers the flasher unit shall be a solid state nematype flasher .
all flashers for signalized intersections pole flashers and overhead flashers shall be the dual circuit type .
all the flashers shall be constructed of replaceable molded relay modules .
each relay module shall have the specified ampere capacity and shall operate with zero point switching .
the flasher shall turn on within five degrees of the zero voltage point of the line sinusoid and shall turn off within five degrees of the zero current point of the line sinusoid .
the flashing rate shall be num to num flashes per minute with a num percent duty cycle .
solid state flashers shall be one of the following types type num num amperes per circuit single circuit type num num amperes per circuit dual circuit the flashers shall interconnect with a sixpin cinchjones snumsb socket .
the flasher shall either have a support bracket or shall be mounted in a rack frame .
section num num c solid state load switches load switches shall meet the requirements of nema for threecircuit load switches .
each load switch shall contain three individually replaceable solid state relay modules .
each relay module shall utilize optical isolation between the input and the output .
the relay module shall have the following functions and terminal assignments terminal function num num volt ac output num num volt ac line num num to num volts dc num sequence input ground each panel of load switches shall either be rack mounted or shall have a switch support bracket extending across the entire length of the switch panel .
the load switch unit shall have three indicators to designate when the ac output circuits are activated .
each indicator shall monitor the outputs and shall be labeled top to bottom r red y yellow and g green on the front panel of the load switch unit .
d flash load relays flash load relays shall be for the purpose of providing special circuitry or operational requirements .
the relays shall be the doublepole doublethrow type .
flash relays shall interconnect with a cinchjones type eightpin socket or an approved equal .
the relay shall be covered with a clear dust cover which shall be secured to the relay base with a fastening device .
the relay contact points shall be of fine silver or silver alloy or a superior alternate material and shall be capable of carrying a load of num amperes per contact unless otherwise specified at num volts ac .
the relay shall show no failure while making carrying and breaking a numampere numvolt traffic signal lamp load through num cycles at the rate of num cycles per minute and a num percent duty cycle .
each relay shall be capable of making breaking and carrying all the current for a numwatt tungsten lamp load without burning pitting or otherwise failing for at least one million operations .
the relay shall be electrically and mechanically operative after a momentary current of num amperes at num volts is applied to the set of closed contacts at least five times with a minimum of two minutes between applications of current .
the relay shall not break down or section num num flash over while carrying a load of num amperes at num volts for at least num cycles at the rate of five cycles per minute .
the duty cycle shall be num percent on and num percent off .
the relay shall withstand num volts at num hertz between insulated parts and between current carrying parts and grounded or noncurrent carrying parts .
e auxiliary control relays these types of relays shall be utilized in circuits to provide special operations .
auxiliary control relays shall have a pintype connector on the base .
the relay shall be removable without the use of tools .
the relay shall be covered with a removable dust cover .
the relay coil shall be rated at numvolts ac numvolts acdc or numvolts acdc as required .
the contacts shall be singlepole or doublepole .
the number of contacts shall be as required by the relays operational functions .
the contacts shall be properly rated for the circuit load and shall be constructed of gold andor silverplated material .
f conflict monitors the conflict monitor shall conform to the current nema specifications .
fully programmable monitors shall be programmed with soldered wire jumpers on a nema interchangeable programming card .
jumpered channels shall represent nonconflicting phases .
nonjumpered channels shall be in conflict with any other channel .
w hen a malfunctioning monitor is replaced in the field the replacement monitor shall be field programmable without the use of tools .
the jumper numerical sequence shall be standard nema matrix .
the monitor shall have an active indicator for each channel .
g detector amplifiers num general the correct type and quantity of detector amplifiers shall be furnished as specified herein as required on the plans .
unless otherwise specified all detector amplifiers shall be rack mounted or mounted on a load bay panel with support brackets .
each rack position shall be labeled .
each detector card shall be the edge connected type .
the detector edge connector shall be a numpin double readout contact .
the section num num connector shall have numinch diameter mounting holes on each end milmnum insulation material and milcnum contacts .
the edge connector terminals for the specified type of detector amplifier shall be wired as specified herein .
all of the detector channel inputs and outputs including those channels specified for future use shall be wired from the mounting rack to the tie points and the field terminals of the controller cabinet .
each amplifier rack assembly shall include one power supply card per each set of four detector amplifier modules .
the required number of power supply cards shall be furnished with each rack assembly which shall include the quantity of power supply cards for future phases shown on the plans and one spare edge connector .
the required quantity of amplifier modules including those required for future phases shown on the plans and one spare edge connector shall be furnished with each control cabinet assembly .
the amplifier rack positions shall be mechanically and electrically interchangeable such that amplifier modules of different manufacturers can be connected into any amplifier module positions .
the rack spacing shall be for nema numinch wide front panels on all card rack units .
num detector amplifier power supply a rackmounted numvolt dc power supply shall be furnished with each controller cabinet assembly with more than two amplifier modules .
each detector amplifier module shall have a numvolt dc power supply .
the power supply shall have four power outputs each fused and rated at num milliamps and num volts dc and a maximum ripple voltage of num volts peak to peak .
all numvolt ac circuits shall have fused inputs .
the power supply pin numbers and functions shall be as designated in the following table section num num standard input and output functions for vehicle detection assembly power supply pin no .
function pin no .
function a output logic ground num redundant side b output num numvolt dc num c num d num e num f num h num j num k num l chassis ground num m numvolt ac num n numvolt ac num p num r num s num t num u output num numvolt dc num v output num numvolt dc num w num x num y num z num num loop detector amplifiers a general requirements there shall be one amplifier channel per detector except for the six by sixfoot detectors unless otherwise specified .
the amplifier unit shall utilize digital solid state circuitry .
the detection frequency counting and inductance measuring circuitry shall utilize crystal controlled moslsi microelectronic circuits .
the loop detector amplifiers shall detect all licensed motor vehicles when using the loop configuration shown on the plans .
the loop amplifiers shall be operational when using up to num feet of leadin cable for a six by sixfoot threeturn loop .
each loop detector amplifier shall detect vehicles at speeds of zero to num miles per hour using loop configurations ranging from six by six feet twoturn six by num feet oneturn six by num feet oneturn up to six by num feet oneturn loops .
the smaller size six by sixfoot loop sensors shall be capable of being connected to the amplifier in series andor parallel as required .
section num num b loop detector the loop detector amplifier unit shall contain two to four channels per unit .
the following types of loop detector card rack units shall be used to identify the number of detector channels and timing functions for each card lcrnum loop detector card unit with two channels .
lcrnumt loop detector card unit with two channels having timing functions .
lcrnum loop detector card unit with four channels .
lcrnumt loop detector card unit with four channels having functions .
no single channel amplifier shall be utilized .
all loop detector card units shall be mechanically and electrically interchangeable with other card units of the same type and function from different manufacturers .
the loop modules and loop modules with timing function pin numbers and functions shall be as designated in the following table standard input and output functions for vehicle detection assembly loop module num or num channel pin no .
function pin no .
function a logic ground num channel num green b numvolt dc in num channel num green c num channel num green d loop num twisted num e loop num pair num f output num num h output num num j loop num twisted num k loop num pair num l chassis num channel num green m num n num p loop num twisted num r loop num pair num s output num num t output num num u loop num twisted num v loop num pair num w output num num x output num num y output num num z output num num section num num standard loop detector racks for amplifiers not requiring timing functions shall still be wired for possible future use of timing functions pins num num num and num .
the wires from these pins shall be tied to spare terminal block tie points in the cabinet .
polarization keys shall be located at four positions num .
between bnum and cnum num .
between mh and nnum num .
between enum and fnum c amplifier requirements each amplifier channel shall have a front panel mounted indicator to provide a visual indication of each vehicle detection .
the indicator shall be visible in bright sunlight from three feet directly in front of the amplifier .
the amplifier shall operate in compliance with all the requirements herein specified when connected to an inductance loop plus leadin of from num to num microhenries with a loop q parameter as low as num at the amplifiers operating frequency .
each channels call output shall be an optically isolated solid state type .
each amplifier channel shall conform to the following requirements num amplifier tuning each channel shall be manual or selftuning and shall be fully operational within three minutes after power up .
after a power interruption the channel shall automatically return to normal operation .
num tracking each channels circuits shall be designed so that changes due to environmental drift and applied power fluctuations shall not cause an actuation .
selftracking shall be capable of compensating for environmental changes of up to num percent per second .
the requirement must be met within two hours after initial power up .
the channel shall be capable of normal operation as the input inductance is changed num percent from the quiescent turning point regardless of initial circuit drift .
num detection modes each channel shall have a mode selection switch on the front panel which shall permit the selection of either the presence mode or the pulse mode of operation .
in the pulse mode the pulse width shall be num milliseconds unless otherwise specified .
each module shall have an off switch position for disabling unused channels .
section num num d special timing functions the following special timing functions shall be furnished only when specified on the plans or in the special provisions .
num delay timing function this timing function shall delay the call output up to num seconds after the vehicle enters the loop sensor .
the timer shall be adjustable from num to num seconds into no more than numsecond increments .
num extension timing function this timing function shall carry over i.e .
extend the call output up to seven seconds after the vehicle leaves the loop sensor .
the timer shall be adjustable from zero to seven seconds in not more than numsecond increments .
w hen any of the above special functions are specified then that special function shall be furnished on all channels of the same amplifier module .
e amplifier sensitivity each of the amplifier channels shall have a minimum of three sensitivity settings per detection mode .
the settings shall be selectable from the front panel .
the highest sensitivity sheeting shall consistently respond to a loop inductance change of num percent .
the lowest sensitivity setting shall respond to nominal loop inductance changes of from num to num percent .
all modules must have sensitivities which differ by not more than num percent change in inductance from the nominal value chosen .
a channel shall not respond to loop inductance changes less than num percent in the lowest sensitivity setting .
f amplifier response time the amplifier channel response time in the lowest sensitivity setting shall be less than num milliseconds .
for any negative inductive change which exceeds the sensitivity threshold the channel shall output a ground true logic level within num milliseconds .
w hen such inductance change is removed the output shall become an open circuit within num milliseconds .
for test purposes a negative change of inductance shall be maintained for a minimum of num milliseconds and a maximum of num milliseconds after it is applied .
w hen the response time differences are averaged over num trials the value of that average difference shall not exceed num milliseconds .
the response time of the detector channel for the highest sensitivity setting shall be less than num milliseconds for a num percent inductance change .
g operating frequency section num num each channel shall have a minimum of three operating frequencies .
the frequency switch may be either on the front panel or on the circuit board .
frequency selection shall be possible without the use of tools .
h detection holding time the detector channel in the least sensitive position shall maintain the presence detection of a vehicle for a minimum of four minutes while the vehicle is over the loop sensor and is causing an inductance change of num percent or greater .
the channel in the highest sensitivity position shall maintain the presence detection of a vehicle for a minimum of three minutes while the vehicle is over the loop sensor and is causing an inductance change of num percent or greater .
i temperature changes the operation of the amplifier shall not be affected by environmental temperature changes at the rate of num degrees f per three minutes .
j interference each channel shall not cause crosstalk with any other channel either within the same amplifier or within any other amplifier that is mounted in the same cabinet assembly .
an amplifier channel shall not detect vehicles moving or stopped at distances of three feet or more from the loop perimeter to which it is connected .
k lightning protection each amplifier shall have lightning protection as an integral part of its own circuitry .
the protection shall enable the detector to withstand the discharge of a nummicrofarad capacitor charged to num volts .
the discharge shall be applied directly across the detector loop input pins with no loop load present .
the protection shall enable the detector to withstand the discharge of a nummicrofarad capacitor charged to num volts .
the discharge shall be applied directly across either the detector loop input pins or across either side of the loop input pins to earth ground .
for this test the detector chassis shall be grounded and the detector loop input pins shall have a numohm dummy resistive load connected across them .
l failsafe operation each channel shall have a failsafe design such that if the loop sensor circuit is open the channel shall output a continuous vehicle call .
m isolation transformers section num num each loop sensor shall be coupled to the channel input by isolated transformers .
the isolated input shall provide continued operation of the channel if the loop sensor in the street becomes grounded or has resistive leakage to ground .
num magnetometer detector amplifier a general the magnetometer detector shall detect all licensed motor vehicles when using the probe configuration shown on the plans .
b amplifier requirements the amplifier shall be operational with up to num probes per channel up to num feet of leadin cable and vehicular speeds up to num miles per hour .
each amplifier shall have two independent channels per card .
the card shall be connectable in any detector rack position .
solid state circuitry shall accurately measure changes in the earths vertical magnetic field intensity caused by motor vehicles .
the front panel shall have a calibration control for each channel to calibrate the amplifier for the local magnetic field strength .
each amplifier channel shall have a front panel mounted indicator to provide a visual indication of each vehicle detection .
the indicator shall be visible in bright sunlight .
each channel call output shall be an optically isolated solid state npn transistor with a normally open collector which shall be rated for a fivemilliampere load and numvolt drop maximum .
the collector shall be rated for numvolts dc when in the off mode .
each magnetometer amplifier shall conform to the magnetometer table and the following requirements c detection modes each channel shall permit the selection of either a presence mode or a pulse mode .
each channel shall be independent of the other channel of the amplifier .
in the presence mode the channel shall indicate the presence of a vehicle until the vehicle leaves the detection area .
the indication shall then cease in num milliseconds .
in the pulse mode the channel shall output a single num to nummillisecond pulse for each vehicle entering the detection area .
d timing functions each channel shall have the following independently selectable functions .
the functions shall be selectable from the front panel section num num num inhibit pulse timing this timing function shall inhibit subsequent call outputs up to five seconds after each vehicle leaves the sensor area .
num extended presence timing this timing function shall carryover or extend the call output up to five seconds after each vehicle leaves the sensor area .
e environmental the operation of the amplifier shall not be affected by nominal changes in the environment .
f number of probes each amplifier channel shall operate with one to twelve sensor probes .
standard input and output functions for vehicle detection assembly magnetometer module numchannel pin no .
function pin no .
function a logic ground num no connection b numvolt dc in num no connection c num no connection d probe set num w hite num e probe set num black num f output num num h output num num j probe set num red num k probe set num green num l chassis ground num no connection m num n num p probe set num w hite num t output num num u probe set num red num v probe set num green num w num x num y num z num a polarization key shall be located between pins rnum and snum .
num external detector inputs section num num each pedestrian push button bicycle push button or remote vehicle detector call input to the controller shall be isolated from the controllers logic ground by an auxiliary isolation relay .
the isolation relay will be provided and installed by the department .
the size of the relay will be num inches wide by two inches long .
the terminal strip shall be provided and wired by the contractor .
the terminal strip shall be the type num with terminals in multiples of four .
the size shall be num inches wide by num inch deep .
the terminal spacing shall be num inch .
the screw size shall be num. a terminal strip aside the isolation relay shall be mounted on the aside of the terminal strip .
the aside shall be the left hand side when the terminal strip is mounted vertically the top side when the terminal strip is mounted vertically or the top side when the terminal strip is mounted horizontally .
terminal no .
num shall be the top terminal when mounted vertically or the first terminal from the right when mounted horizontally .
a field terminal shall be provided to connect the detector call field inputs to the aterminal strip .
b terminal strip bside the bside of the terminal shall be wired as follows for each relay required terminal function num num or numvolt dc or ac num logic ground num n.o .
det .
call for specified phase num det .
call field input for specified phase a power supply external to the controller shall be provided for the isolation relays .
the controller power supply shall not be used for this purpose .
num external logic circuit boards a general external logic that is required to supplement the controller or auxiliary control units shall be on solid state plugin cards .
the logic cards shall be designed as specified herein .
the logic cards shall be the numpin edgeconnector or octalbase type .
the pins shall be either single or doublesided as required .
each card shall be keyed to prevent the improper connection of the card .
the printed circuit board shall meet the requirements of nema tsnum .
section num num power supplied from the controllers power supply shall not exceed num milliamperes .
if more than num milliamperes is required then a separate external power supply must be utilized .
such an external power supply may be either shelfmounted or rackmounted .
the logic circuitry shall be properly interfaced and buffered from the controller and other controller assembly equipment .
all external logic timing functions shall be digital and shall be in the required timing range .
timing entries shall be frontpanel programmed without the use of tools or software and shall be accessible without the removal of the enclosures cover .
the timing shall be set by thumbwheel switches programming pins or digital binary dip switches .
the timing accuracy shall conform to nema tsnum for digital timing .
b digital time switch w hen specified each controller cabinet shall include a solid state digital time switch of the type specified wired for the function detailed in the special provisions or plans .
the solid state digital time switch shall utilize solid state circuitry and digital timing techniques .
integrated or discrete semiconductor devices shall be used exclusively .
no electromechanical parts shall be employed except for the controlled circuit output relay .
the design life of all components under numhouraday operation in their electrical applications shall be not less than num years .
all components shall be clearly identifiable by markings on circuits boards or parts numbers on pictorial diagrams .
num operational requirements each time switch shall control the required number of circuit outputs in a numhour period for seven days with an omit control for any one or more of the seven days .
the time switch shall be powered by a numvolt numhertz input in the temperature range between num and num degrees f. the numhertz line frequency shall be the time base for the clock .
num time clock backup the time switch shall have a battery backup circuit which shall power the timer for not less than num continuous hours during the loss of electrical a.c. power .
battery backup shall generate its own time base and clock accuracy shall be within num percent .
during battery backup operation all luminous displays and relays shall be disabled .
section num num during normal operation the battery shall be trickle charged .
the rechargeable battery system shall be an integral part of the time switch housing .
the battery unit shall include an onoff control switch to permit it to be disconnected from the time switches .
num programming programmed time entries shall be frontpanel programmed without the use of tools or software .
the programming of the selectable functions and time operations shall be set by thumbwheel switches programming pins dip switch or frontpanel keyboard entry .
all programming pins shall be the printed circuit receptacle noncorrosive turningfork type .
the pin contactor shall fit any standard numinch to numinch board .
the pins shall be rated num volts rms at five amperes .
the time operations shall be programmable to a oneminute increment .
num displays the time switch shall have a digital timeofday display numhour or with a.m.p.m .
indicator in hours and minutes past midnight .
there shall be a dayoftheweekineffect indicator .
a separate indicator shall indicate when an output circuit is active on .
num output control circuit each output control circuit shall be a singlepole doublethrow independent relay output .
the relay shall be rated not less than five amperes at num volts ac .
the relay shall be energized when the clock program is on and deenergized when the clock program is off .
num power supply the time switch shall have the numvolt ac input fused to protect its internal circuitry .
line transients normally experienced in traffic signal controller environments shall not affect the clock accuracy herein specified .
line transient protection devices shall be provided to prevent these inaccuracies .
num housing and connector the entire time switch shall be completely enclosed in a dust resistant housing .
the housing door shall enclose all the program switches display and indicators .
the housing shall contain solderless lugtype terminals or a detached connector .
section num num num digital time switch types the solid state digital time switches shall be designated in the special provisions or plans with the following fiveposition alphanumeric code .
the code shall have the following meaning the type dts clock shall mean the solid state digital time switch .
dtsnum is a single program single circuit .
dtsnum is a single program threecircuit .
dtsnum is a three program three or fourcircuit as required .
the single program shall have seven onoff operations per unit and three onoff operations per circuit in a numhour period .
each program shall be selectable for day omit days num through num .
the solid state time switches shall have an numpin octal connector .
the cabinet shall have a female interface connector as shown in the following table cabinet solid state time switch interface connector pin no .
function num common no .
num num output no .
num n.o .
num output no .
num n.c. num common no .
num num output no .
num n.o .
num output no .
num n.c. num ac common num common no .
num num numvolt ac input num output no .
num n.c. num output no .
num n.o .
num construction requirements num general requirements all traffic controller assembly equipment shall be furnished and installed as shown on the plans and in accordance with the special provisions and these specifications .
cabinet wiring connecting cables support bases and shelves shall be provided to allow for future installation and use .
num test requirements section num num general all specified traffic controller assembly items shall meet the applicable environmental and testing standards of nema publication tsnum .
all traffic signal controller units shall be tested by the departments testing procedures .
num wiring and grounding requirements a cabinet wiring all cabinet wiring shall be neatly arranged and made tight by the use of wiring harnesses cable sheaths cable wraps or raceways .
all wires in a harness shall be laced or bound together .
harnesses shall be routed to minimize crosstalk and electrical interference .
cabling shall be routed to prevent conductors from being in contact with metal edges .
cabling shall be arranged so that any removable assembly may be removed without disturbing conductors not associated with that assembly .
all pin assignments shall be wired to the controller cabinet terminal for future use .
the following timebase coordination wiring functions shall be provided when mps coordination is specified to be furnished in the control cabinet .
num fully actuated controller units shall be wired to operate in nonactuated mode during coordination period .
num the inside cabinet switch panel shall include a switch for coordination and free run modes of operations .
the remote free input shall be wired to a cabinet terminal tie point to permit control input from a remote input .
num an auxiliary time of day numhour from the mps d connector output shall be wired in the cabinet to program the max num function .
b conflict monitor wiring the conflict monitor unit cable shall be wired to perform the following functions num to monitor conflicts of green yellow and walk signal for each applicable phase .
num to monitor absence of red voltage .
any phase specified for future use shall have a removable jumper so as to section num num permit future implementation of that phase without rewiring the controller cabinet .
num to monitor voltage numvolt dc source of the controller unit and any auxiliary controller unit .
num to startdelay the controller unit per nema standards .
num the conflict monitor cable shall have the cabinet interlock a and b wired to control cabinet tie points for future use .
num the monitor input for each signal circuit shall be terminated at the furthest field terminal point so as to monitor both the automatic and flash modes of the controller cabinet .
c cabinet grounding all controller cabinets and auxiliary cabinets shall have the ac common the logic ground and the chassis ground isolated from each other as detailed in the current nema standards .
d field and tiepoint terminalwiring num controller cabinet all field terminals shall be installed on a terminal support which shall be located at the rear of the lower portion of the controller cabinet and not less than five inches from the base of the cabinet .
all connectors for field terminals shall be connected to barriertype terminal blocks .
each terminal block position shall have two no .
num screw connectors not less than num inch in length and a removable shorting bar .
each terminal shall accommodate at least three no .
num aw g conductors .
the terminal block shall have a labeling strip for each position .
all controller assembly wiring tie points on the front side of the terminal blocks shall be the spade type .
tie points of the back side of terminal blocks shall be soldered to a lug .
all crimp style connectors shall be applied with the proper tool .
the tools handles shall not open until the crimp is completed .
each terminal position shall be permanently labeled at the terminal position .
tie points shall be required for all controller unit and auxiliary control equipment circuits .
num preemption cabinet wiring the preemption cabinet shall include a load switch circuit to operate the preemption no right turn illuminated message signal numvolt section num num ac output .
the field terminals shall include the following terminal positions a to railroad numvolt ac b from railroad not wired c no right turn signal num cabinet wiring diagrams each controller cabinet assembly shall have a complete set of wiring diagrams which shall show the intersection plan signal phasing layout and all control device connections .
two sets of the final wiring diagrams and a second original shall be required with delivery with each control cabinet assembly .
the second original shall be a legible reproducible linen cloth mylar film or polyester film .
each controller cabinet shall be furnished with a sheet metal wiring diagram print holder .
the minimum size of the print holder shall be not less than nine inches wide by eight inches high by num inches deep mounted inside .
num cabinet foundations before the concrete for cabinet foundations has set depressions shall be made around the anchor bolts for adjustment of the cabinet leveling nuts .
cabinet foundations shall be four inches above ground level .
num method of measurement traffic signal control cabinets and meter pedestal cabinets will be measured as a unit for each controller assembly or control cabinet furnished and installed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of traffic signal control cabinets and meter pedestal cabinets measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the type controller assembly or control cabinet designated in the bidding schedule complete in place which price shall be full compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans including service terminal boxes cabinet mounted service enclosures meter sockets breaker panels foundations conduit elbows anchor bolts clearance pad auxiliary signal controls external logic modules and all other components necessary to provide a complete functional assembly for controlling the operation and timing of traffic control signals .
section num num section num detectors num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing vehicular and pedestrian detectors at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num vehicle detectors a general detectors shall conform to the minimum acceptable design and operating requirements of these specifications for detecting the presence and passage of vehicles .
b loop detectors the detector loop dimensions shall be as specified on the plans .
the conductors for the inductive loop detector and the loop detector leadin cable shall be as specified in subsection numbnum .
c magnetometer detector each sensing probe shall consist of a sensitive flux gate magnetometer .
the magnetometer shall operate properly when excited by a triangular current of plus or minus num milliamps peak at five kilohertz .
for a single probe in a magnetic field of num millioersted the return signal shall be at least num millivolts rms at num kilohertz .
the return signal shall reverse phase when the field passes through zero .
the sensing probes shall be cylindrical having maximum dimensions of numinch diameter by four inches long .
the sensing probes shall be suitable for installation in a oneinch diameter bored hole .
the interconnecting fourconductor cable shall be suitable for installation in a numinch wide pavement sawed slot .
the jacket on the interconnecting cable and the casing on the sensing probe shall be an abrasion resistant polyurethane elastomer .
the device shall be impervious to moisture and chemically resistant to all normal motor vehicle petroleum products .
probe set operation shall be unaffected by temperature change water and ice .
the probes shall be operational in power line ac magnetic fields ranging to num millioersted peak to peak .
the probe set shall be operational from num to num degrees f. section num num the conductor cable from the magnetometer to the adjacent pull box shall be as specified by the detector manufacturer and shall be a minimum of num feet in length .
each magnetometer sensor shall have one leadin cable .
the leadin cable from the pull box adjacent to the magnetometer to the control cabinet shall be unspliced and the type specified in subsection num .
d encapsulated loop detector probe the encapsulated loop detector probe shall detect the passage or presence of all vehicles with a standard loop detector amplifier .
the dimensions of the loop detector probe shall be num inches in diameter and num inches in length .
the leadin cable shall fit in a numinch saw cut .
the loop detector probe shall operate in a temperature range from num to num degrees f with zero to num percent relative humidity .
the operating field intensity range shall be num to num millioersted with a nominal inductance of num microhenries plus num microhenries per num feet of cable .
the nominal dc resistance shall be num ohms plus num ohms per num feet of probe cable .
num pedestrian pushbutton detectors the pedestrian detector shall be a pushbutton switch mounted inside an approved pushbutton housing .
the switch shall be the phenolicenclosed spsttype with momentary contacts .
the contacts shall be rated at num amps and num volts ac .
the switch shall have screwtype terminals and shall have a rated life of not less than one million operations .
the switch shall operate in the normally open position .
the housing of the pushbutton station shall be of substantial tamperproof construction made of cast aluminum .
the assembly shall be weatherproof and so constructed that it will be impossible to receive any electrical shock under any weather conditions .
the housing shall be shaped to fit the curvature of the pole to which it is attached and shall provide a rigid installation .
the housing body shall contain a direct pushtype actuator button microswitchtype or approved equal .
the housing cover shall contain the pushbutton sign as described below or as specified in the special provisions .
pedestrian pushbutton signs shall be made with porcelain enameled num gage sheet steel num inches by num inches in size .
corners of the sign shall be finished round for safety and neat appearance .
each hole shall be provided with a brass grommet .
instructions on the signs shall be black enameled letters or symbols on a white enamel background .
section num num the legend shall be as shown on the plans or as specified in the special provisions .
num isolated relay inputs each pedestrian pushbutton or remote vehicle detector call input from an auxiliary cabinet shall be isolated from the controller logic ground as specified in subsection num .
num saw cut sealant saw cut sealants shall be a flexible encapsulant intended for sealing and protecting vehicle detector loop wires installed in saw cuts .
a emulsified crack filler sealant for asphaltic concrete emulsified crack filler sealant may be used to seal saw cuts in asphaltic concrete and lean concrete base .
the emulsified crack filler sealant shall conform to the requirements of the following table emulsion for crack filling tests on emulsion test method requirement viscosity saybolt furol num oc seconds range astm d num num retained on no .
num sieve percent maximum astm d num num num particle charge astm d num positive pumping stability num passes settlement num days percent maximum astm d num num residue percent minimum astm d num num num test on residue viscosity num oc centistokes range astm d num num num num distilled water will be used instead of the two percent sodium oleate solution .
num num ml of emulsion will be charged into a oneliter beaker and circulated through a gear pump roper num b num having a numinch inlet and outlet .
pumping stability is acceptable if there is no significant oil separation after a circulation of num minutes .
num astm d num is modified by heating a numgram sample to num oc until foaming ceases then cooling it immediately .
the emulsified crack sealant shall remain homogeneous within num days of delivery and shall be homogeneous after thorough mixing .
the emulsified crack sealant shall be freezestabilized and if freezing has occurred a homogeneous mixture shall be obtained when the material has thawed and been thoroughly mixed .
b onepart elastomeric sealant section num num onepart elastomeric sealant may be used to seal saw cuts in portland cement concrete pavement and lean concrete base .
the sealant shall provide compressive yield strength to withstand normal vehicular traffic as well as sufficient flexibility to withstand normal movement in concrete pavements while protecting the loop wire from moisture penetration .
the encapsulant shall be a onepart elastomeric compound requiring no mixing measuring or application of heat prior to or during its installation .
the encapsulant shall within its stated shelf life in original undamaged packaging cure only in the presence of moisture .
the rate of cure will therefore depend upon temperature and relative humidity at the time of installation .
cool dry weather will slow curing whereas warm humid weather will accelerate curing .
the encapsulant shall be designed to enable vehicular traffic to pass over the properly filled saw cut immediately after installation without tracking or stringing of the material .
the encapsulant shall form a surface skin allowing exposure to vehicular traffic within num minutes at num degrees f and completely cure to a tough rubberlike consistency in two to seven days after installation .
properly installed and cured encapsulant shall exhibit resistance to effects of weather vehicular abrasion motor oils gasoline antifreeze solution brake fluid deicing chemicals and salt normally encountered in such a manner that the performance of the vehicle detector loop wire is not adversely affected .
the cured encapsulant shall be temperature stable and exhibit no degradation in performance throughout the ambient pavement temperature ranges experienced within the state of arizona .
the encapsulant shall exhibit minimal shrinkage during or after its installation and in no manner affect the performance characteristics of the material .
the encapsulant shall be designed to permit cleanup of material and application equipment with nonflammable solvents such as num trichloroethane or scotchgrip brand solvent no .
num prior to curing of encapsulant .
should any encapsulant material be allowed to cure in the application nozzle it shall be able to be pulled out as a solid plug .
the encapsulant shall have a minimum nummonth shelf life in undamaged original containers when stored in a cool dry environment .
the encapsulant shall be designed for roadway installation when the surface temperature is between num and num degrees f. section num num the encapsulant shall have the following physical properties in its uncured and cured states .
uncured wet encapsulant property requirement test procedures w eight num num poundsgallon a. w eightgallon total solids by w eight num num b .
determination of nonvolatile content viscosity num num centipoise c. dynamic viscosity drying time touch num hrs .
maximum complete num hrs .
max .
d. tackfree time cured encapsulant property requirement test procedure hardness indentation num num e. rex hardness tensile strength num psi minimum f. tensile elongation elongation num minimum c hot applied rubberized sealant hot applied rubberized sealant may be used to seal saw cuts in asphaltic concrete and in lean concrete base .
it shall be suitable for use as a sealant for traffic loop saw cuts and be nontracking under traffic .
at application temperatures the traffic loop sealant shall be a thin free flowing fluid which penetrates saw cuts and selflevels permitting uniform application .
the sealant shall be melted and applied to pavements using a pressure feed melter unit .
pour pot application is not acceptable .
the sealant shall be a relatively stiff sealant but shall remain flexible at low pavement surface temperatures .
the test results shall conform to the following specifications for the loop detector sealant .
test specification penetration num of numg nums num maximum penetration num of numg nums num num softening point num of minimum ductility num of num cm minimum mandrel bend num of num o arc nums num inch diameter pass num of num recommended pour temp num of safe heating temp num of brookfield viscosity num of num centipoise max .
unit w eight num pounds per gallon coverage num by num inch crack num pounds per num feet num construction requirements num detector installation section num num a general detectors shall be installed as shown on the project plans as shown in the standard drawings and as directed by the engineer .
the installation of the detectors shall be such that the operation shall not be affected by temperature changes water ice rain snow chemicals or electromagnetic noise .
b hold down tabs hold down tabs shall be installed in the saw cut on top of the wire every two feet .
the tabs shall be installed after the loop wire installation and prior to the sealant installation .
the tabs shall be individual sections of pvc tubing one inch in length which shall be bent and wedged tightly into the saw cut channel .
c saw cut sealants saw cuts shall be sealed with an approved sealant .
all slots cut in the pavement shall be blown out and dried before installing conductors .
after the conductors are installed in the slots the slots shall be filled to within num inch of the pavement surface with the sealant .
before the sealant sets up the surplus sealant shall be removed from the road surface without the use of solvents .
the handling of the sealant and the filling of the saw cut shall be in accordance with the directions of the manufacturer .
sand blotter shall be applied as directed by the engineer .
d splices the detector sensor conductors shall be spliced to the detector leadin cable in the adjacent pull box .
detector leadin cables shall run continuous and unspliced to the controller cabinet .
detector leadin cables shall not be spliced without the approval of the engineer .
all detector wire splices shall be soldered using resincore solder with num percent tin and num percent lead .
the splices shall be sealed from moisture with self encapsulating fit caps .
w hen heated the fit caps inner thermoplastic adhesive shall temporarily melt and the fit caps outer wall shall shrink .
a weather proof bond shall form with a dielectric strength of num volts per mil and water absorption shall be less than num percent .
the detector leadin cable shield shall only be grounded on one end in the control cabinet .
e detector loop installation field tests before and after the saw cut sealant has been installed the contractor shall perform an insulation resistancetoground test .
the insulation resistancetoground shall be at least num megohms when measured at a voltage between num and num volts d.c .
section num num any loop detector that does not meet the above requirement or can not be tuned to the engineers satisfaction shall be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the department .
f magnetometer field tests if the probe locations shown on the project plans occur in the following areas the contractor shall request the department to perform a magnetic field analyzer test w ithin num inches of a metal object such as a manhole cover or large pipe .
w ithin num inches of railroad tracks .
w ithin tunnels iron structures or in bridge decks .
after the above analyzer test has been performed the contractor shall install the probes where directed by the engineer .
num blank num method of measurement loop detectors magnetometer detectors and pedestrian detectors will be measured as a unit for each type of detector furnished and installed .
num basis of payment loop detectors magnetometer detectors and pedestrian detectors measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the type detector designated in the bidding schedule complete in place which price shall be full compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans .
section num highway and sign lighting num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and installing or modifying highway lighting systems or sign illumination systems at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
the work as described above shall include furnishing and installing all materials and equipment designated on the project plans necessary for the installation of future systems .
num materials section num num num highway lighting materials highway lighting materials shall conform to the requirements of this section and be of the type and size specified .
all lighting fixtures shall be supplied complete with lamps .
a horizontallymounted high pressure sodium luminaries the luminaires shall be num num or numwatt as specified high pressure sodium luminaires of the horizontal burning type .
the housing together with the reflector shall be of sufficient size to properly utilize the high pressure sodium lamps designated .
the light distribution shall be type iii medium cutoff unless otherwise specified and shall conform to the illumination engineering society ies standards .
each luminaire shall be furnished with an instruction sheet which clearly shows installation procedures and instructions for adjusting the lamp socket .
this instruction sheet shall include complete information on all socket positions and the ies light distribution produced from each setting .
num luminaire housing the luminaire housing shall be fabricated from a noncorrosive material .
the lower portion of the luminaire shall be composed of two parts .
one part shall contain the numdegree cutoff type flat glass optical assembly and the other part shall be the ballast module door .
the ballast module door shall contain all the major electrical components and shall be capable of being lowered after loosening a single stainless steel captive screw .
the ballast shall be prewired to the lamp socket and terminal board .
the ballast module door assembly shall be removable and replaceable by the use of quick disconnect plugs .
the optical assembly holder shall have an automatic latch with a safety catch on the house side .
the holder shall be forced upward at the street side by spring pressure against the gasket seal when in the closed and latched position .
the luminaire shall have a slipfitter for mounting on a twoinch nominal mast arm tenon and shall be adjustable for leveling plus or minus three degrees from the horizontal .
the optical assemblies and housing size for the num and numwatt luminaires shall be the same size as is used for numwatt luminaires .
num optical assembly and gaskets the optical assembly shall incorporate a snapon high specular anodized reflector and shall contain a filter which effectively absorbs gaseous contaminates or particulate matter .
the flat glass of the optical assembly shall be manufactured of high quality heat resistant glass .
section num num a gasket of an approved neoprene material that will maintain a watertight and dusttight seal throughout the temperature ranges inherent with high intensity discharge lamps shall be securely fastened to the reflector .
the gasket between the lamp socket and the reflector shall be polyester fiber that will maintain a dusttight seal throughout the above specified temperature ranges .
the lamp socket shall be of rugged high grade porcelain securely mounted to a support bracket which is adjustable in both the vertical and the horizontal directions .
each adjustment shall be clearly and permanently coded for each light distribution setting .
the coding shall directly relate to the instruction sheet furnished with each luminaire .
num ballast the ballast shall be a threewinding lagtype magnetic regulator and shall be capable of starting lamps at num degrees f and operating the lamps within the limits specified by the lamp manufacturer .
the starting amperes shall be less than operating amperes .
the ballast shall provide the lamp voltage shown in the lamp table of subsection numc .
the ballast shall be prewired to the lamp socket and terminal board .
ballast shall be rated to the circuit voltage and size of the lamp specified .
the ballast shall be capable of operating for a six month period during a short circuit failure lamp open or end of life cycle without any measurable deterioration to the ballast .
the ballast shall have the following characteristics initial percent end of lamp life percent power factor num num lamp regulation spread num num input voltage dip tolerance num num lamp w attage regulation num percent for of line voltage each one percent line voltage variation num b verticallymounted high pressure sodium luminaires the num or numwatt vertical luminaires specified on the plans shall be a poletoptype fixture and shall be mounted with a vertical slipfitter .
the vertical luminaires shall be an approved poletop fixture designed to illuminate roadways from offsets of up to num feet .
the luminaire shall be an enclosed design with an optical system consisting of a singlepiece hydroformed specular anodic finished aluminum reflector and a prismatic borosilicate thermal resistant glass refractor .
section num num the lamp socket shall be permanently attached to the reflector to assure correct lamp positioning at all times and shall be provided with a quick disconnect for easy removal of the reflector socket assembly .
num luminaire housing the housing of the luminaire shall be cast aluminum with a baked enamel finish and shall consist of a housing containing the reflector and electrical equipment and a refractor housing which shall be securely attached to the main housing by means of two stainless steel top hinges and two trigger actuated bottom latches .
the refractor housing shall be readily removable for luminaire servicing .
num gaskets seals andor gaskets shall be provided at all critical points to prevent entry of contaminants .
a breathing seal polyester fiber gasket shall be provided at the lower juncture of the housings to filter air entering the fixture .
neoprene gasketing shall be used at all other junctures between the housings .
num adjusting and aiming device the luminaire shall be equipped with a vertical slipfitter and a leveling and aiming adjustment assembly for rapid and versatile field installation and adjustment .
the slipfitter assembly may be manufactured from cast steel or have a galvanized steel pipe and yoke assembly .
the galvanized steel pipe and yoke assembly shall have a weathertight wiring box with a no .
num aw g threeconductor type st num oc ballast cord .
the slipfitter shall accept pole tenons from numinches to num inches outside diameter .
the assembly shall provide a horizontal leveling adjustment of plus or minus five degrees and a vertical angle adjustment of num degrees above and below a standard luminaire angle position of num degrees .
the reference line for measuring vertical angles shall be the vertical axis of the pole looking downward from the pole top .
each luminaire shall be furnished with an instruction sheet which clearly shows installation procedures and instructions for proper luminaire tilt angle and aiming adjustments .
num ballast module the ballast and all major electrical components shall be combined into one padtype unit which shall be removable from the luminaire and replaceable by use of any easy operating latching device and a quick disconnect electrical plug .
num high pressure sodium ballast operation section num num the ballast shall be rated to the circuit voltage and size of the lamp specified .
the regulatortype ballast shall be capable of starting the lamp at num degrees f and shall deliver the required lamp watts within plus or minus five percent with num percent variation in applied voltage .
at rated line voltage the ballast shall have a minimum power factor at end of life of num percent .
the starting amperes shall be less than the operating amperes .
the ballast shall provide the lamp voltage shown in the lamp table of subsection numc .
the ballast shall be prewired to the lamp socket and terminal board .
the electrical connections shall be made by means of prewired quick disconnect plugs .
the ballast shall be capable of operating for a six month period during a short circuit failure lamp open or end of life cycle without any measurable deterioration to the ballast .
num uplight shield the uplight shield shall be numinch aluminum sheet material mounted with a minimum of nine stainless steel screws .
the shields inside and outside surfaces shall have a polyester powder painted finish .
the shield shall be the same color as the luminaire .
it shall be configured to provide less than one percent uplight above the horizontal as shown by independent test lab reports .
the equivalent projected area shall be less than or equal to num square feet .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with certified copies of the results of the independent test lab reports .
the entire luminaire shall have passed a numcycle numg vibration test under normal operating conditions without mechanical failure of any part including the pole and foundation .
all components shall be of noncorrosive material or have positive corrosion protection .
c lamps the lamps shall be universal burning clear high pressure sodium type .
each lamp shall be clearly and permanently marked giving the wattage and the american standard association number or the manufacturers reference number .
lamps of the wattage specified shall conform to the following wattage lamp voltage min .
initial lumens rated life hours num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num d lighting controls num photo electric controls section num num the photo electric controls hereinafter referred to as pec shall have a supply voltage rating of num to num volts ac num hertz .
the nominal dimensions shall be num inches outside diameter and num inches maximum height .
the operating temperature range shall be from num to num degrees f with zero to num percent relative humidity .
a time delay shall be incorporated into the circuit to prevent the lights from being turned off at night by transient lights which might be focused on the control .
the pec shall be a conventional glass faced hermetically sealed cell .
w hen the north sky illumination in the area falls to the preset value the lighting load shall be turned on .
a switch to permit manual operation of the lighting circuit shall be provided for each pec .
the pec shall work in conjunction with an external auxiliary load relay for handling the required lighting loads unless specified otherwise .
the pec shall have a builtin lightning arrester .
the encapsulated surge protector shall have a sparkover value of two kilovolts and shall interrupt up to num kiloamperes of followthrough current without affecting the operating characteristics .
the pec shall meet the following electrical requirements supply voltage num num volts num hz .
ac photo cell coil num volts ac inrush current num amperes at num volts num amperes at num volts lamp loads incandescent num watts mercury vapor num voltamperes fluorescent num voltamperes hps num voltamperes relay contacts single pole single throw normally closed turn on num num foot candles turn on maximum num footcandles life at rated load num onoff operations minimum num amperes num volts ac operating levels num amperes num volts ac turn off average num footcandles control power num watts maximum num volts ac num watts maximum num volts ac num auxiliary contactor unless otherwise specified an auxiliary contactor shall be used in conjunction with a pec to control the required lighting loads .
the contactor shall have contacts rated to switch the specified lighting section num num loads and shall be normally open .
the contactor shall be singlepole or doublepole as required .
the contactor shall be installed as shown on the plans .
the contactor shall be of the mechanical armature type and shall consist of a numvolt operating coil a laminated core a laminated armature contacts and terminals .
the contacts shall be fine silver silveralloy or other superior low contact resistance metal .
num manualoffphoto switch a manualoffphoto switch shall be installed as shown on the standard drawing to manually activate the contactor to turn the lights on or off .
the switch shall be the toggletype having doublepole doublethrow contacts with the center position being the off position and be rated at num amperes at num volts a.c .
the switch shall be manually activated in the up position and shall be activated by the pec in the down position .
num sign lighting materials a general sign lighting fixtures and all necessary hardware shall conform to these specifications and shall be ul approved .
each sign lighting fixture shall be designed for mounting at the top of the sign panels as shown on the plans on an overhead sign structure .
the mounting and number of fixtures required per sign shall be as shown on the project plans .
all sign lighting fixtures shall be supplied complete with lamps .
b high pressure sodium fixtures high pressure sodium sign lighting fixtures shall be designed for mounting at the top of the sign panel on an overhead sign structure .
the fixture shall be of an enclosed design and shall be watertight and corrosion resistant .
each fixture shall consist of a housing with uplight shield door reflector refractor lamp socket assembly internal ballast terminal block quick connect harness and all necessary hardware .
the fixture shall be ul listed and shall conform to the following num housing the housing shall have a door designed to hold a refractor .
housings and doors shall be fabricated of diecast aluminum .
all external bolts screws hinges hinge pins and door closure devices shall be stainless steel .
each housing shall be drilled and tapped for num inch conduit at the center of the fixture nearest the sign panel .
section num num each housing shall be provided with holes as recommended by the manufacturer to permit condensed water to drain .
each hole shall be countersunk to a depth appropriate for the thickness of the housing .
the door shall be hinged to the housing on the side of the fixture away from the sign panel and shall be provided with two captive latch bolts or other closure devices .
the door shall include an integral glare shield .
the juncture of the door and the housing shall be gasketed to provide a watertight and dusttight joint .
the gasket material shall be a minimum numinch seamless closed cell sponge epdm meeting ul specification requirements for tensile strength and elongation after seven days aging at num oc .
num reflector the reflector shall be onepiece hydroformed and shall be made from specularly finished aluminum protected with an electrochemically applied anodized finish .
the reflector shall be designed so that water deposited on it due to condensation will drain away .
the reflector shall be contoured to match the refractor design .
num refractor the refractor shall be made from borosilicate heat resistant glass .
the outer surface of the refractor shall be smooth and the inner surface shall contain the splitting and bending prisms .
a singlepiece weather resistant gasket shall seal the refractor to the housing .
the refractor shall be so designed or shielded that no fixture luminance is visible when the fixture is approached directly from the rear and the viewing level is the bottom of the fixture .
w hen a shield is used it shall be an integral part of the door casting .
num lamp each fixture shall be furnished with a numwatt high pressure sodium lamp ansi code snumscnum in accordance with the lamp table of subsection numc num lamp socket each lamp socket shall be a porcelain enclosed mogul type .
the socket shell shall contain integral lamp grips to assure electrical contact under conditions of normal vibration .
the center contact shall be springloaded .
shell and center contact shall be nickel plated brass .
the socket shall be rated for num watts num volts .
num ballast the ballast for each hps sign fixture shall be num percent copper wound and shall be designed for the characteristics and wattage of the section num num lamp it is to operate and it shall provide the proper starting voltage and operating waveforms voltage and current .
ballasts shall be of high power factor lag circuit design capable of starting and operating one numwatt high pressure sodium lamp within the limits specified by the lamp manufacturer .
ballasts shall be num percent copper wound and have a class h insulation system .
core laminations shall be mnum magnetic steel .
a num percent line voltage variation will not result in more than a num percent variation in wattage .
input wattage shall not exceed num watts .
the power factor shall be over num percent throughout the life of the lamp .
the corecoil starting aid and capacitor shall have a minimum ambient starting temperature of num degrees f and be capable of operating for a six month period during a short circuit failure lamp open or end of life cycle without any measurable deterioration to the ballast .
ballasts shall have a design life of not less than num hours .
the input voltage for ballasts shall be as shown on the plans or as specified in the special provisions .
each ballast shall consist of separate components each of which shall be capable of being easily removed .
each component shall be provided with screw terminals nema tab connectors or a single multicircuit connector .
all conductor terminals shall be identified as to the component terminal to which they connect .
heat generating components shall be mounted so as to use the portion of the sign lighting fixture housing upon which they are mounted as a heat sink .
capacitors shall be located as far as practicable from heatgenerating components or shall be thermally shielded to limit the case temperature to num oc .
transformers and inductors shall be resinimpregnated for protection against moisture .
capacitors shall be metal cased and hermetically sealed .
num terminal block each fixture shall be provided with a barrier type terminal block for terminating field connections .
the terminal block shall be secured to the housing and shall be provided with protection from water due to condensation .
means shall be provided for both fusing and disconnecting the input circuit .
fuses shall be numinch diameter num inches long ferrule type and shall be ul listed .
fuses for use with numvolt input fixtures shall be rated at six amperes num volts fuses for use with numvolt and numvolt input fixtures shall be rated at section num num three amperes num volts .
a quick connect wire harness shall be included for internal wiring .
num performance w hen the fixture with its specified lamp is located so that the light center of the lamp is four feet in front of one foot above and centered on a sign panel eight feet high and num feet wide the ratio of the maximum to minimum illuminance level on the panel shall not exceed numtoone and the average to minimum illuminance ratio shall not exceed numtoone .
in addition the illuminance gradient shall not exceed twotoone .
the illuminance gradient is defined as the ratio of the minimum illuminance per one square foot of panel to that on any adjacent square foot of panel square panel of the same size .
the average maintained illumination level on the panel shall be num foot candles .
num uplight shield the fixture shall be provided with an uplight shield that eliminates light above the horizontal plane .
the shield shall be of the same manufacturer as the fixture constructed of numinch aluminum sheet material and shall be mounted with a minimum of eight stainless steel screws .
the shield shall be finished inside and outside with a baked polyester powder paint with a minimum num percent reflectance to match the luminaire .
the shield shall be configured to provide zero light above the horizontal plane as shown by independent test lab reports .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with certified copies of the results of the independent test lab reports .
the equivalent projected area shall be num square feet maximum .
the shield shall flare at num degrees from the fixture housing to a point num inch below the lowest horizontal plane of the refractor .
num load center cabinets load center cabinets including pole mounted cabinets shall have photoelectric controls and shall also include the concrete foundation conduit stubouts meter socket rigid metal conduit riser cabinet housing panel breakers contactor selection switch fuses dry transformer internal wiring and other incidentals in accordance with the project plans and these specifications .
the load center cabinet housings shall be of a nema num weather resistant construction .
the steel cabinet housing and accessories shall be treated on the inside and outside with one coat of primer paint and painted with two coats of aluminum paint in accordance with section num .
cabinets shall have continuous welded seams on all outside seams .
circuit breakers shall be molded case thermal magnetic bolton or plugin type and shall be u.l .
listed .
section num num load center cabinets shall have a dead front panel to isolate all live electrical circuitry .
the panel shall be fabricated from numgage sheet steel and shall be painted the same as the cabinet .
the dead front panels shall be hinged on one side and securely fastened on the other with bolts .
switches breakers and other components shall have openings to operate from the front panel .
num construction requirements field adjustments of the lamp sockets shall not be made for horizontallymounted type luminaires .
the lamp socket shall be adjusted at the factory to achieve the light distribution as specified on the plans and in the special provisions .
after the poles have been erected and plumbed the verticalmounted type luminaires shall be aimed as described on the instruction sheet and specified herein .
the contractor shall provide and utilize a manufacturersupplied aiming device to adjust the tilt angle of each luminaire .
the device shall be adjusted to the numerical factors given for each luminaire in the tiltangle column of the project plans .
operation of the aiming device shall be as described on the instruction sheet .
the contractor shall maintain full nighttime operation of the existing lighting system during the duration of the construction project .
num method of measurement luminaires will be measured as a unit for each luminaire furnished and installed .
load center cabinets will be measured as a unit for each load center cabinet furnished and installed .
sign lighting fixtures will be measured as a unit for each fixture furnished and installed .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of luminaires and load center cabinets measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the types of luminaires and load center cabinets designated in the bidding schedule complete in place which price shall be full compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans .
the accepted quantities of sign lighting fixtures measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place which price shall be full compensation for the work described and specified herein and on the plans including incidentals such as mounting hardware electrical wiring and conduit on sign structure and section num num to adjacent pull box circuit breaker disconnect and any other equipment necessary to complete the work .
section num incidental electrical work num description the work under this section shall consist of maintaining existing traffic signals and lighting systems furnishing and installing complete and functioning temporary traffic signal systems and removing and salvaging or reinstalling electrical equipment all in accordance with the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num maintaining existing traffic signals and lighting systems replacement items necessary for maintaining existing traffic signal and lighting systems shall be of similar make and manufacture and meet the minimum material requirements of those items they are to replace .
num temporary traffic signals a general department approved poleline hardware shall be utilized in the installation of poles messenger cable pole anchors etc .
b wood poles w ood poles shall be num feet in length class num unless otherwise specified and meet the requirements of section num of the specifications .
holes for poles shall be dug at an angle with the vertical to allow for proper raking of the top of the pole .
poles shall be set six feet deep in the ground be well tamped and raked one foot out from the vertical position and in line with the pull of the cable .
the wood poles for temporary signals and their associated cables wires supports etc .
shall be located so as to provide clearance for all permanent construction .
c messenger cable the messenger cable used for aerial signals and anchoring shall be numinch minimum sevenstrand highstrength grade galvanized steel messenger cable securely attached to the poles and anchors in an approved manner .
section num num d department furnished material the department will be responsible for any changes required in the control cabinet .
the existing pedestrian units shall be used on the temporary traffic signals .
the existing controller cabinet shall be used .
all other equipment and materials necessary for the temporary signals shall be furnished by the contractor .
num removing and salvaging or reinstalling electrical equipment replacement parts for salvaged or reinstalled electrical equipment shall meet the material requirements for like items as hereinbefore specified as directed by the engineer or as designated in the special provisions .
num construction num maintaining existing traffic signals and lighting systems all existing traffic signal and lighting systems or other designated electrical systems shall be kept in effective operation for the benefit of the traveling public during the progress of the work except when shutdown is permitted to allow for alterations or final removal of the systems .
the work shall also include the relocation andor modification of existing traffic signals and lighting systems as required during construction .
the traffic signal system shutdowns shall be limited to the normal working hours as directed by the engineer .
during periods of shutdown flaggers shall be employed to manually direct traffic .
at all other times the traffic signal system shall remain operational .
all traffic signal heads not in use shall be covered with burlap and shall be unmistakably out of service when observed by an approaching driver .
plastic coverings shall not be allowed .
during construction the maintenance care and control of the existing traffic signal control cabinet will be the responsibility of the department or the local agency .
all other maintenance of the existing traffic signal system shall be accomplished by the contractor .
the contractor shall maintain full nighttime operation of the existing lighting system for the duration of the construction project .
the contractor shall designate a person who will be available for emergency maintenance calls after normal working hours .
the contractor shall furnish this persons name and telephone number to the engineer .
the contractor shall have labor and the necessary equipment available on a numhour per day basis for such emergency maintenance .
num temporary traffic signals section num num messenger cable shall have a maximum sag of five percent of the distance of spans .
the lowest point of any back plate shall initially be num feet above the roadway to allow for settling of poles and anchors .
backplates shall be maintained so that the clearance between the lowest point of any backplate and the future finished roadway grade shall be not less than num feet .
the contractor shall check each day to insure that the minimum clearance is maintained and shall take corrective measures if necessary .
cable rings on numinch maximum spacing shall be used to secure the signal wires to the messenger cable .
the wires shall also be taped to the cable if necessary to prevent excessive and unsightly slack in the lines .
the continuous operation of traffic signals shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the contractor shall maintain the electrical systems for the duration of the construction project .
the contractor shall designate a person who will be available for emergency maintenance calls after normal working hours .
the contractor shall furnish this persons name and telephone number to the engineer .
the contractor shall have labor and the necessary equipment available on a numhour per day basis for such emergency maintenance .
w hen required the contractor shall remove and salvage all material associated with the temporary traffic signal .
all salvaged material shall be the property of the department and shall be dismantled and stockpiled as directed by the engineer .
material broken or damaged by the contractor shall be replaced with new and like material at no additional cost to the department .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to remove and dispose of all traffic signal equipment and materials not salvaged .
cavities resulting from the removal of pull boxes foundations or other material shall be backfilled and compacted with material equivalent to or better than the surrounding material .
num removing and salvaging or reinstalling electrical equipment the contractor shall remove and salvage all existing traffic signal and lighting equipment as specified in the special provisions project plans or as directed by the engineer .
the work shall also include the removal and disposal of foundations .
all equipment and materials to be salvaged shall be the property of the department .
salvageable material shall be dismantled and stockpiled prior to project completion as directed by the engineer or as shown on the plans .
all equipment damaged or destroyed by improper care or handling shall be replaced with new equipment .
unless otherwise specified it shall section num num be the responsibility of the contractor to remove and dispose of all discarded materials not salvaged .
holes resulting from removal of pull boxes foundations and other material shall be backfilled and compacted with material equivalent to the surrounding area or as designated by the engineer .
w hen salvaged equipment is to be reinstalled the contractor shall furnish and install all necessary materials equipment and hardware as required to complete the new installation .
reinstalled poles pull boxes and cabinets shall be relocated as shown on the plans with conduit and conductors installed and all circuit connections complete and operational .
signal faces mounting assemblies and backplates shall be cleaned and repainted when reinstalled .
all traffic signal faces either to be reinstalled or part of a modified system shall be relamped .
luminaires to be reinstalled shall be cleaned and relamped .
existing materials to be relocated and found to be unsatisfactory by the engineer shall be replaced with new material and will be paid for in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num method of measurement maintaining existing traffic signals and lighting systems will be measured as a single complete unit of work .
temporary traffic signal will be measured as a single complete unit of work .
removing and salvaging or reinstalling electrical equipment will be measured as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of maintaining existing traffic signals and lighting systems measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete as specified and described herein and as shown on the project plans .
the accepted quantities of temporary traffic signal measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified and described herein and as shown on the project plans .
the accepted quantities of removing and salvaging or reinstalling electrical equipment measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as specified and described herein and as shown on the project plans .
section num num section num landscape excavation num description the work under this section shall consist of excavating areas to be landscaped hauling and satisfactory disposal of surplus excavated material in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num blank num construction requirements all landscape excavation shall be performed in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades dimensions and cross sections established by the engineer or shown on the project plans .
the hauling and disposal of surplus excavated material shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection nume .
num method of measurement landscape excavation will be measured either by the cubic yard or by the ton .
landscape excavation measured by the cubic yard will be measured in its original position by the engineer and the volume will be computed by the average end area method or by other methods approved by the engineer .
landscape excavation measured by the ton will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of landscape excavation measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard or per ton for the pay unit designated in the bidding schedule .
section num landscape grading num description the work under this section shall consist of grading contouring smoothing or otherwise shaping areas at the locations designated on the project plans .
num blank num construction requirements section num num roadway shoulders and soil areas left exposed after planting shall be graded as required to leave a generally smooth appearance conforming to the general shape and cross section indicated on the project plans .
the final surfaces shall be raked smooth .
all objectionable material trash brush weeds and stones larger than two inches in diameter shall be removed from the site and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
num method of measurement landscape grading will be measured either by the square yard of area actually graded or as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of landscape grading measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or per lump sum for the pay unit designated in the bidding schedule .
w hen landscape grading is not included as a contract item full compensation for any landscape grading necessary to perform the construction operations specified on the project plans and in the special provisions will be considered as included in the unit price paid for contract items .
section num landscape plating materials num description the work under this section shall consist of grading surfaces eradicating grasses weeds and undesirable vegetation furnishing hauling placing and compacting imported materials for plating embankment slopes dikes and other designated areas all in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num soil backfill and plating material soil backfill and plating material shall be secured from commercial sources or from contractor furnished sources unless otherwise designated in the special provisions .
the material shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num decomposed granite and granite mulch decomposed granite and granite mulch shall be free of lumps or balls of clay and shall not contain calcareous coatings caliche organic section num num matter or foreign substances .
all material shall be from a single production source and shall present a uniform appearance throughout the project .
the gradation of the decomposed granite shall be as specified in the special provisions .
num rock mulch rock mulch shall be free of calcareous coating caliche organic matter or other foreign substances .
num construction requirements num soil backfill and plating material areas to receive soil backfill and plating material shall be cleared of all undesirable vegetation brush trash or rock which is two inches in diameter or larger and other objectionable material as directed by the engineer .
undesirable vegetation grasses and weeds shall be eradicated with an approved herbicide and by mechanical methods .
the soil backfill and plating material shall be spread and shaped to conform to the lines grades and cross sections shown on the project plans or as established by the engineer .
the material shall be watered and compacted as specified in the special provisions .
num decomposed granite and granite mulch decomposed granite or granite mulch shall not be placed until the required water distribution systems acceptable finished grading and planting operations have been completed within the area .
the surfaces and planting areas upon which decomposed granite or granite mulch is to be placed shall be graded and compacted to a density of num percent of the maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
areas which shall not be compacted will be designated by the engineer .
the areas on which decomposed granite or granite mulch is to be placed shall be reasonably smooth and firm and all deleterious material and rocks larger than num inches in diameter shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
decomposed granite or granite mulch shall be evenly distributed over the designated areas .
the depth of the decomposed granite or granite mulch shall be within num inch of the depth shown on the project plans .
all areas to receive decomposed granite or granite mulch shall be as approved by the engineer prior to placement of the decomposed granite or granite mulch .
section num num all vehicles used for spreading grading and raking the granite mulch and decomposed granite shall have one set of wheels with floatation tires having a minimum width of num inches to allow equal compaction of the granite mulch and decomposed granite .
after rough spreading and rough grading of the granite mulch and decomposed granite within the designated areas the granite mulch and decomposed granite shall be raked to evenly blend the different gradation sizes .
following approval by the engineer the granite mulch and decomposed granite shall be saturated with water to optimum moisture level .
the engineer will approve the amount of water necessary to aid in the compaction of the granite mulch and decomposed granite .
w here granite mulch and decomposed granite are within the planting pits the maximum depth shall be one inch .
during the final spreading and final grading operations all surfaces within the granite mulch and decomposed granite areas shall be passed over by the spreading and grading equipment a minimum of two times .
all equipment operations for spreading and grading raking chemical application water settling and any other operations shall be done in a manner that uniformly maximizes the vehicles wheel compaction over the surface .
the contractor shall apply one application of an approved preemergent herbicide on all granite areas following placement of the granite .
w ater to activate the preemergent herbicide shall be applied to the areas of the herbicide application as recommended by the manufacturers label .
the amount of water specified by the manufacturer may be adjusted due to rainfall if approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall notify the engineer and obtain prior approval for the use of any herbicides for weed eradication .
the contractor shall keep a record of all applications the type of herbicides used the rate and method of application and the date and location of such applications .
a copy of this record shall be submitted to the engineer after each application .
after placing spreading and grading the granite the contractor shall water settle the total thickness of the granite to remove the fine material from the surface .
any erosion which occurs within the decomposed granite and granite mulch areas shall be corrected by the contractor and approved by the engineer prior to final acceptance .
num rock mulch the surfaces upon which the rock mulch is to be placed shall be fine graded and compacted to num percent of the maximum density as section num num determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
all deleterious material shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
the areas shall be totally free of grasses weeds and undesirable vegetation using herbicides in accordance with subsection num .
all dead grass and weeds shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall repair eroded areas and compact soil as approved by the engineer .
prior to placement of rock mulch the contractor shall stake out all areas to receive rock mulch and a preemergent herbicide shall be applied to the staked areas in accordance with the manufacturers printed instructions and as approved by the engineer .
w ater shall be applied to the areas of the herbicide application as required by the manufacturers label .
this water may be supplemented by rainfall as determined by the engineer .
the rock shall be placed in an even application tightly packed to provide complete coverage of the area shown on the project plans so that soil will not be visible between rocks .
after placing and grading the rock mulch the contractor shall water the mulch with a light spray to remove fine material from the surface as approved by the engineer .
any regrading that is necessary after placement of the rock mulch shall be at no additional cost to the department .
care shall be taken in the placement of the rock mulch so as not to disturb or damage any plant material adjacent surfaces or irrigation equipment .
num method of measurement decomposed granite and granite mulch will be measured by the square yard or by the cubic yard of material in place at the specified thickness .
the quantity for this item as shown on the bidding schedule will be used for payment of this item unless the contractor and the engineer agree that there is a variation in excess of num percent .
the engineer will determine the new quantities for variations in excess of num percent .
rock mulch will be measured by the cubic yard of material in place at the specified thickness .
the quantity for this item as shown on the bidding schedule will be used for payment of this item unless the contractor and the engineer agree that there is a variation in excess of num percent .
the engineer will determine the new quantities for variations in excess of num percent .
soil backfill and plating material landscape borrow will be measured either by the cubic yard or by the ton .
section num num soil backfill and plating material landscape borrow measured by the cubic yard will be measured in its original position by the engineer and the volume will be computed by the average end area method or by other methods approved by the engineer .
soil backfill and plating material landscape borrow measured by the ton will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the weight of the material will be determined by deducting the difference in weight between the average inplace moisture content of the material prior to any prewetting in accordance with the requirements of subsection num and the average moisture content of the material at the time of weighing .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of landscape borrow decomposed granite granite mulch and rock mulch measured as provided above complete in place will be paid for at the contract unit price for the pay unit designated in the bidding schedule .
no direct payment will be made for the eradication of grasses weeds and undesirable vegetation herbicide material applied in excess of the specified thickness or erosion repair work the cost being considered as part of contract items .
section num topsoil num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing hauling and placing topsoil in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials w hen a source of topsoil is not designated the contractor shall furnish a source in accordance with the requirements of section num .
topsoil from sources furnished by the contractor shall conform to the following requirements prior to hauling any topsoil to the project site the contractor shall furnish a written soil analysis prepared by a laboratory approved by the engineer for each source of topsoil proposed for use .
the soil analysis shall indicate the ph soluble salts percent calcium carbonate exchangeable sodium in percent and parts per million plasticity index and size gradation .
a minimum of three samples per each num cubic yards with at least three samples per source shall be tested .
all tests shall be performed in accordance with the following requirements and test procedures listed in table num .
at the contractors option the engineer will test these topsoil samples .
the contractor shall bear the expense of any topsoil testing from proposed sources .
section num num topsoil shall be fertile friable soil obtained from well drained arable land which has or is producing healthy crops grasses or other vegetation .
it shall be free draining nontoxic and capable of sustaining healthy plant growth .
topsoil shall be reasonably free of subsoil refuse roots heavy clay clods noxious weed seeds phytotoxic materials coarse sand large rocks sticks brush litter and other deleterious substances .
a written soil analysis shall be submitted to the engineer for each source of topsoil proposed for use .
the engineers approval shall be obtained prior to delivery of topsoil to the project site from each source .
for acceptance purposes each approximate num cubic yards of topsoil material delivered from a given source to the project site shall be considered a lot .
for each lot of topsoil six representative samples shall be taken at random locations designated by the engineer .
topsoil shall be sampled after final placement .
each source of topsoil shall be tested separately .
the samples from each lot shall be tested by the engineer for ph soluble salts calcium carbonate exchangeable sodium in percentage and parts per million p.i .
and gradation in accordance with the test procedures listed in table num .
the average test result obtained for each characteristic from each lot shall meet the following requirements .
table num characteristics test method requirement average of num samples ph ariz num num num soluble salts ppm ariz num num maximum calcium carbonate ariz num num maximum exchangeable sodium ariz num num maximum exchangeable sodium ppm ariz num num maximum p.i .
aashto t num num num gradation num inch num inch no .
num ariz num passing num num num num num if the average test result for a lot fails to meet all the specifications listed above the material from that lot shall be rejected .
in lieu of removal and replacement the contractor may propose for the engineers consideration a method of treatment of the inplace material to obtain specification compliance .
provided the engineer approves the topsoil shall be treated at no additional cost to the department .
the lot shall then be resampled and tested for specification compliance by the engineer .
section num num if the ph of the topsoil for a lot exceeds num the topsoil shall either be removed and replaced or be treated as provided for in the preceding paragraph .
any treatment for ph shall be sufficient to obtain an average ph between num and num inclusive .
the treatment for ph shall follow the recommendations of a recognized soil analyst and shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
any treatment for ph shall be at no additional cost to the department .
additional acceptance testing after treatment for ph will not be required .
num construction requirements topsoil shall be spread uniformly on the designated areas to the depths or contours shown on the plans .
the contractor shall avoid overcompaction in spreading and shaping operations .
scarification shall be required for overcompacted areas and haul roads .
w hen topsoil is placed over subgrade material as plating the subgrade shall be scarified or disked to a sixinch depth prior to placement of the topsoil .
num method of measurement topsoil will be measured by the cubic yard .
topsoil will be measured in its final position and the volume will be computed by the average end area method or by other methods approved by the engineer .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of topsoil measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard complete in place .
section num seeding num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials preparing the soil and applying seed to all areas designated on the project plans or established by the engineer .
seeding shall be class i class ii or class iii and shall be performed in accordance with the project plans and requirements of these specifications .
num materials num general certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num seed section num num the species strain or origin of seed shall be as designated in the special provisions .
no substitution of species strain or origin of seed will be allowed unless evidence is submitted in writing by the contractor to the engineer showing that the specified materials are not reasonably available during the contract period .
the substitution of species strains or origins shall be made only with the written approval of the engineer prior to making said substitution .
the seed shall be delivered to the project site in standard sealed undamaged containers .
each container shall be labeled in accordance with arizona revised statues and the u.s. department of agriculture rules and regulations under the federal seed act .
labels shall indicate the variety or strain of seed the percentage of germination purity and weed content and the date of analysis which shall not be more than nine months prior to the delivery date .
legume seed shall be inoculated with appropriate bacteria cultures approved by the engineer in accordance with the culture manufacturers instructions .
num mulch a general the type and application rate of mulch shall be as specified in the special provisions .
b manure manure shall be steer manure that has been well composted and unleached and which has been collected from cattle feeder operations .
manure shall be free of sticks stones earth weed seed substances injurious or toxic to plant growth and visible amounts of under composted straw or bedding material .
manure shall not contain lumps or any foreign substance that will not pass a numinch screen and when specified for lawn use the material shall be ground or screened so as to pass a numinch screen .
c peat humus peat humus shall be natural domestic peat of peat humus from fresh water saturated areas consisting of sedge sphagnum or reed peat and shall be of such physical condition that it will pass through a numinch screen .
the humus shall be free of sticks stones roots and other objectionable materials .
peat humus shall have a ph value between num and num inclusive and the minimum organic content shall be num percent of the dry weight .
the section num num ash content as determined by igniting a five gram sample for num hours at a temperature of num degrees f shall not exceed num percent by weight .
peat humus shall be furnished in undamaged commercial bales in an airdry condition .
d wood cellulose fibers natural wood cellulose fiber shall have the property of dispersing readily in water and shall have no toxic effect when combined with seed or other materials .
a colored dye which is noninjurious to plant growth may be used .
w ood cellulose fiber shall be delivered in undamaged labeled containers bearing the name of the manufacturer and showing the airdry water content .
e straw straw shall be from oats wheat rye or other grain crops of current season as approved by the engineer and shall be free of noxious weeds mold or other objectionable material .
straw mulch shall be from the current seasons crop and shall be in an airdry condition and suitable for placing with mulch blower equipment .
num water w ater shall be free of oil acid salts or other substances which are harmful to plants .
the source shall be as approved by the engineer prior to use .
num tacking agent tacking agent shall be as specified in the special provisions .
num chemical fertilizer chemical fertilizer shall be a standard commercial fertilizer conforming to the analysis and in the physical form specified in the special provisions .
chemical fertilizer shall be furnished in standard containers with the name weight and guaranteed analysis of the contents clearly marked .
w hen a mixed fertilizer is specified such as num the first number shall represent the minimum percent of soluble nitrogen the second number shall represent the minimum percent of available phosphoric acid and the third number shall represent the minimum percent of water soluble potash .
num construction requirements num general section num num seed shall be of the class and variety specified and shall be applied at the rate specified in the special provisions .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least two days prior to commencing seeding operations .
bermuda seed shall be planted only at times when the daytime atmospheric temperatures are consistently above num degrees f and the nighttime atmospheric temperatures are consistently above num degrees f. seeding operations shall not be performed when wind would prevent uniform application of materials or would carry seeding materials into areas not designated to be seeded .
preparation of areas for seeding shall be as specified herein and in the special provisions .
the equipment and methods used to distribute seeding materials shall be such as to provide an even and uniform application of seed mulch andor other materials at the specified rates .
unless specified otherwise in the special provisions seeding operations shall not be performed on undisturbed soil outside the clearing and grubbing limits of the project or on steep rock cuts .
num classes of seeding a seeding class i seeding class i shall consist of furnishing and planting lawn seed .
immediately before seeding the surface area shall be raked or otherwise loosened to obtain a smooth friable surface free of earth clods humps and depressions .
loose stones having a dimension greater than one inch and debris brought to the surface during cultivation shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor in a manner approved by the engineer .
w here indicated on the project plans or specified in the special provisions topsoil shall be placed and allowed to settle for at least one week prior to seeding .
the topsoil shall be thoroughly watered at least twice during the settlement period .
seed shall be uniformly applied in two directions at right angles to each other with onehalf the specified application rate applied in each direction .
immediately after seeding the area shall be uniformly covered with screened manure at the rate of one cubic yard per num square feet section num num and then watered until the ground is wet to a minimum depth of two inches .
hydroseeding hydraulic seeding using num pounds of wood cellulose fiber per acre will be an acceptable alternate for planting and mulching seeding class i .
machines used for hydroseeding shall be approved types capable of continuous agitation of the slurry mixture during the seeding operation .
pump pressure shall be such as to maintain a continuous nonfluctuating spray capable of reaching the extremities of the seeding area with the pump unit located on the roadbed .
the sprayer shall be equipped to use the proper type of nozzles to obtain a uniform application on the various slopes at the distance to be covered .
the seed fertilizer mulch tacking agent when required and water shall be combined in the proportions of the various materials as provided in the special provisions and allowed to mix a minimum of five minutes prior to starting the application of the slurry .
seed shall be applied within num minutes after mixing with water .
hydroseeding which is deposited on adjacent trees and shrubs roadways in drain ditches on structures and upon any areas where seeding is not specified or which is placed in excessive depths on seeding areas shall be removed .
seeding areas flooded or eroded as a result of irrigation shall be repaired reseeded and refertilized by the contractor at no expense to the department .
b seeding class ii seeding class ii shall consist of furnishing and planting range grass seed flower seed andor shrub seed including mulch .
w here equipment can operate the area to be seeded shall be prepared by disking harrowing or by other approved methods of loosening the surface soil to the depth specified in the special provisions .
on slopes too steep for equipment to operate the area shall be prepared by hand raking to the specified depth .
on sloping areas all disking harrowing and raking shall be directional along the contours of the areas involved .
loose stones having a dimension greater than four inches which are brought to the surface during cultivation shall be removed and disposed of in an approved manner prior to grading and seeding .
all areas which are eroded shall be restored to the specified condition grade and slope as directed prior to seeding .
on cut and fill slopes the operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to form minor ridges thereon to assist in retarding erosion and favor germination of the seed .
section num num care shall be taken during the seeding operations to prevent damage to existing trees and shrubs in the seeding area in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
seed shall be drilled broadcast or otherwise planted in the manner and at the rate specified in the special provisions .
the type of mulch and the manner and rate of application shall be as specified in the special provisions .
mulch material which is placed upon trees and shrubs roadways structures and upon any areas where mulching is not specified or which is placed in excessive depths on mulching areas shall be removed as directed .
mulch materials which are deposited in a matted condition shall be loosened and uniformly spread to the specified depth over the mulching areas .
during seeding and mulching operations care shall be exercised to prevent drift and displacement of materials .
any unevenness in materials shall be immediately corrected by the contractor .
mulch shall be immediately affixed by crimping and tacking after application .
the engineer shall determine which areas are not conducive to anchoring by crimping and will direct the contractor to anchor such mulch by tacking only .
no mulch shall be applied to seeding areas which can not be crimped andor tacked by the end of each day .
any drifting or displacement of mulch before crimping andor tacking shall be corrected by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
if a tacking agent is specified in order to bind the mulch in place the type rate and manner of application shall be as specified in the special provisions .
prior to the application of a tacking agent protective covering shall be placed on all structures and objects where stains would be objectionable .
all necessary precautions shall be taken to protect the traveling public and vehicles from damage due to drifting spray .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions class ii seeding areas shall not be watered after planting .
c seeding class iii seeding class iii shall consist of furnishing and planting range grass seed flower seed andor shrub seed all without mulching .
seeding class iii shall conform to the requirements specified under subsection numb except that mulching will not be required .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions class iii seeded areas shall not be watered after planting .
section num num num preservation of seeded areas the contractor shall protect seeded areas from damage by traffic or construction equipment .
surfaces which are eroded or otherwise damaged following seeding and prior to final acceptance shall be repaired by regrading reseeding and remulching as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement seeding class i will be measured by the square foot of ground surface measured to the nearest num square feet seeded or as a single complete unit of work .
seeding class ii and seeding class iii will be measured by the acre of ground surface seeded or as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of seeding measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price for the pay unit specified in the bidding schedule complete in place .
no direct measurement or payment will be made for the preservation or repairs of seeded areas .
section num trees shrubs and plants num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and planting trees palms shrubs vines cacti and other plants nursery stock and transplanting trees palms shrubs vines cacti and other plants collected stock andor local stock all as designated on the project plans .
the work shall also include the layout and preparation of planting pits trenches and beds including excavating and backfilling the storage and protection of all planted and unplanted stock and other materials amendments all mulching fertilizing watering staking guying pruning and wrapping the cleanup of the area application of preemergent herbicide removal of grass weed and undesirable vegetation application of rodent repellent disposal of unwanted and deleterious materials and the care and maintenance all in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer for all contractor furnished materials unless otherwise specified .
section num num num nursery stock all plants shall be grown in a nursery and shall conform to the applicable requirements specified in the current edition of american standard for nursery stock as approved by the american national standards institute inc. and sponsored by the american association of nurserymen inc. subject to certain variations in size and measurement when specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
botanical plant names shall be in accordance with the current edition of standardized plant names prepared by the american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature .
all plants shall be true to type and species shown on the project plans and at least one plant in each group of plants of the same species delivered to the project shall be tagged with a weatherproof label stating both the botanical and common name of the plants in that group .
w ithin thirty calendar days after the preconstruction conference the contractor shall supply the engineer with written verification that it has located and reserved all the plant material necessary to complete the work as specified .
this verification will serve as proof of availability for all plant material required .
all plants shall be in a healthy condition with normal symmetrical form welldeveloped foliage branches and cane systems at the time of delivery to the project .
plants shall be free of disease insect eggs or infestations disfiguring knots bark abrasions broken tops branches or canes damaged roots sun wind or frost injury or other objectionable features .
plants pruned from larger sizes to meet specified sizes will not be accepted .
plants which are furnished in containers shall have been growing in the containers for a sufficient period of time for uniform root development throughout the plants ball but the roots shall show no evidence of having been restricted or deformed .
the presence of grass weeds or any undesirable organism in the soil surrounding the plants or any of the previously listed conditions may be cause for rejection of the plants .
no substitution of species andor sizes of specified plants shall be made unless evidence is submitted in writing to the engineer showing that plants in the species quantity andor sizes specified are not available during the contract period .
the substitution of species andor sizes shall be made only with the written approval of the engineer prior to making said substitution .
substitution of a larger size of the same species may be made by the contractor without written approval .
however the contractor shall be section num num responsible for any additional cost of the plants or for any additional planting costs .
all plants shall comply with federal and state laws requiring inspection for diseases and infestations .
all shipments or deliveries of plant material grown within the state will be inspected at the nursery or growing site by the authorized state of arizona authorities prior to delivery to the project .
a copy of the state inspection record shall accompany all plant material which is grown out of state and shall show that the plant material has been inspected for plant diseases and insects .
all rejected plants shall be removed from the project immediately upon rejection by the engineer .
num collected stock collected stock shall be secured from sources outside the project limits for transplanting and shall comply with the size type and species requirements designated on the project plans or in the special provisions .
w hen sources for collected stock are not designated the contractor shall furnish the source .
collected stock shall be healthy and free of weeds grasses insects disease defects and disfigurements and shall be as approved by the engineer before transplanting operations are begun .
palm trees shall be free of scars and damage considered unsightly or unhealthy as determined by the engineer .
the contractor shall comply with all state and federal laws regarding the removal sale and transporting of native plants .
num local stock local stock shall be secured from within the project limits for transplanting and will be designated on the project plans in the special provisions or by the engineer .
all plants shall be as approved by the engineer before transplanting operations are begun .
num prepared topsoil prepared topsoil shall consist of prepared soil mixed as specified under subsection num prepared soil except the existing soil shall be replaced with topsoil .
the existing soil excavated from the planting pits shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
soil conditioner shall be as specified under subsection num .
topsoil shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
soil excavated from existing planting pits trenches and beds which meet the requirements of subsection num may be used as topsoil .
section num num num prepared soil prepared soil shall consist of a uniform mixture of existing soil peat humus manure chemical fertilizer soil conditioners andor other needed amendments conforming to the specifications contained herein for the respective items and proportioned as specified in the special provisions .
soil conditioner shall consist of composted ground or shredded fir redwood ponderosa bark or shavings and shall have a ph not exceeding num a minimum total nitrogen content of num percent an organic matter content of not less than num percent and shall contain a wetting agent or be hygroscopic .
the soil conditioner shall be graded so that a minimum of num percent of the material will pass a numinch sieve .
prepared soil shall be produced prior to use in the planting pits by combining the approved component materials into a homogeneous uniform mixture .
the engineer shall be notified and shall approve the components and the method of mixing prior to the production of the prepared soil .
num mulch mulch shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num water w ater shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num chemical fertilizer chemical fertilizer shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num lumber and treestakes treestakes supports and braces shall be sound straight construction grade treated douglas fir lodge pole pine heart redwood or other species approved by the engineer .
douglas fir stakes and braces shall have nominal dimensions of two by two inches and lodge pole pine stakes shall have a diameter of two inches or greater .
treestakes and braces may be furnished either rough or dressed .
lumber stored at the project site shall be neatly stacked on skids a minimum of num inches above the ground and shall be protected from the elements to prevent damage or warping .
num hardware section num num nails lag screws staples and other hardware shall be galvanized and of commercial quality .
all bolts and lag screws shall be furnished with galvanized malleable washers .
w ire shall be new soft annealed galvanized steel wire of the size detailed on the project plans .
covers for guying wires shall be new numinch minimum diameter vinyl or twoply fabricbearing rubber hose .
num existing plant material the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all existing plants and providing an adequate water supply to any existing plants affected by construction activities .
existing plants that are removed damaged or destroyed during construction shall be replaced with trees and shrubs of the same species at no additional cost to the department .
existing plants removed damaged or destroyed shall be replaced with plants of a similar size as directed by the engineer .
num construction requirements num general at the time of the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the engineer seven copies of a list of all materials and equipment that it proposes to incorporate into the work .
the contractor shall have materials and equipment correctly marked on each copy of the list .
the list shall show the catalog number manufacturers name model numbers sizes complete specifications instructions design data andor drawings to determine whether or not each piece of material or equipment is acceptable and to assure that all such materials and equipment when incorporated into the work will be in accordance with the requirements of the project plans and these specifications .
plant material shall be approved as specified under subsection num .
the contractors failure to comply with these material submittal instructions will not constitute time extensions .
no material or equipment shall be ordered and work shall not begin until the material and equipment has been approved in writing by the engineer .
all planting shall be done during the times andor temperatures specified in the special provisions .
num excavation the contractor shall be responsible for laying out all planting areas and staking all plant locations in reasonably close conformity to the dimensions and locations shown on the project plans .
the engineers section num num approval of all planting areas and locations shall be obtained prior to any excavating of planting pits trenches or beds .
in the event that existing field conditions such as subsurface utilities pipes structures impervious materials or inadequate drainage necessitate relocation of planting areas the engineer will designate new locations .
prior to excavating planting pits or trenches or beds for plants these areas shall be graded to the lines and grades designated on the project plans or as approved by the engineer .
planting pits and trenches shall be excavated to the dimensions indicated on the project plans or in the special provisions and shall have vertical sides and horizontal bottoms .
w hen dimensions are not specified the pits and trenches shall be excavated to a depth num inches below the bottom of the root system and to a width twice the root system diameter .
w hen excavation of any planting pit is difficult and the engineer determines that poor drainage may result the pit shall be filled with water twice in order to check the drainage .
any pit which has not fully drained after each filling within a twelve hour period shall be deepened until proper drainage is achieved .
if proper drainage can not be achieved the pit shall be moved or deleted as determined by the engineer .
if required this work shall be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
excavation of planting pits trenches and beds shall not be done when in the opinion of the engineer the moisture content of the soil is excessive with respect to accepted horticultural practice .
num shipping and handling plants prior to shipping all plants shall be dug handled prepared and packed for shipment with care and skill in accordance with recognized standard practice for the kind of plant involved .
the root systems of all plants shall not be permitted to dry out at any time .
w hile in transit plants shall be protected at all times against freezing temperatures the sun the wind and other adverse weather conditions .
during transportation in closed vehicles plants shall receive adequate ventilation to prevent sweating .
plants delivered in a wilted condition will be rejected .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours prior to the date for inspection of plants at any arizona plant source or at the project site .
the engineer will inspect all plants for conformity with the specifications and upon the engineers acceptance planting may begin .
the engineer may select at random no more than three containergrown plants of each species in every delivery to the site for root development inspection .
plants of the same species from different growers shall be considered as separate shipments .
if upon inspection section num num of root development of plants so selected the engineer determines the roots have become restricted or deformed in their containers all plants of that species in that shipment including the inspected plants will be rejected and shall be removed from the site .
the contractors project supervisor shall attend all plant inspections .
deciduous plants may be furnished bareroot and evergreen plants and conifers shall be furnished balled and burlapped or in containers as specified in the special provisions or on the project plans .
the balling and burlapping of trees and shrubs shall conform to the recommended specifications set forth in the american standard for nursery stock .
all plant balls shall be firm and intact .
plants whose stems are loose in the ball will be rejected .
all balled or burlapped plants shall at all times be handled by the ball and not by the top leaders or canes .
all bareroot plants delivered in bundles shall have the bundles broken and the plants placed separately prior to being temporarily heeledin .
care shall be taken so that all plants removed from bundles will have an identifying label .
bareroot plants shall be stored with roots completely covered with damp sawdust soil or other suitable moistureretaining material .
plants delivered inspected and found acceptable for planting shall normally be planted within num hours after delivery to the project site .
plants which can not be planted within num hours after delivery shall be stored as specified herein .
balled and burlapped plants shall have the root ball protected by moist sawdust earth or other acceptable material .
all temporarily stored plants shall be protected from extreme weather conditions and the roots shall be kept moist .
num planting a general on landscaping projects with irrigation systems no planting shall be done until installation and acceptance of the irrigation system in total or in increments .
the initial watering and all subsequent watering of the planting shall be done using the newly constructed irrigation system .
the plant material may need temporary irrigation systems acceptable to the engineer for the initial watering of large plant material over and above the designed irrigation system .
b nursery stock after the planting pits are refilled with amended soil and the irrigation system has been installed and accepted the planting pits shall be prewatered by the irrigation system for a minimum duration of twelve hours .
planting shall be accomplished during a threeday period starting two days following the prewetting as specified .
areas not section num num planted during the threeday period shall be rewatered and allowed to dry as specified above .
planting shall not be done in soil that is excessively moist or otherwise in a condition not satisfactory for planting in accordance with accepted horticultural practice .
plants which are in containers bare root or balled and burlapped shall be planted and watered the same day the container wrap or moisture protection is cut .
the contractor shall adequately water plants to maintain a healthy and vigorous growing condition during the planting period .
plants shall be removed from containers such that the root ball is not broken .
plants with broken root balls or with root balls that fall apart while being planted will be rejected .
plants shall be planted plumb and shall be centered in the planting pit or trench .
all planting pits shall have vertical sides and flat bottoms .
backfill material shall be prepared soil conforming to the requirements of subsection num or prepared topsoil conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
backfill shall be carefully firmed around the roots or the ball of the plant so as to eliminate all air pockets and shall not be compacted around the roots or ball of the plants during or after planting operations .
clods or stones exceeding two inches in diameter and foreign matter deemed objectionable by the engineer will not be allowed .
all excess soil that has objectionable stones shall be disposed of off the project site in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
no additional payment will be made for the removal and disposal of objectionable stone or soil containing foreign matter .
any excess soil which is not used to backfill the planting pits may be evenly distributed in the landscape areas if it will not interfere with the final grading of any landscape areas .
all planting areas shall be graded as specified to facilitate proper watering of all material and leave a generally smooth appearance after completion of planting .
plants shall be set to a depth such that after backfilling and watering the top of the root ball and the level of the backfill will match the surrounding grade as shown on the project plans .
any plant that settles more than num inches below the specified grade shall be reset or replaced .
any additional backfill material required shall be as specified in the special provisions and on the project plans .
immediately after planting all plants shall be thoroughly irrigated until the backfill soil around and below the roots or the root ball of each plant is saturated .
section num num c collected stock and local stock if slings or cables are used to support stock during transporting and planting the plant trunk shall be protected at the points of contact with slings and cables with burlap canvas sections of automobile tire casing or other suitable protective material .
cables shall be placed to maintain proper support and balance at all times .
a tree spade may be used for digging and moving the stock .
a thin layer of soil conditioner shall be placed in the planting hole before planting the stock with a tree spade .
dead fronds certain live fronds flower stalks and seed pods shall be removed from palm trees leaving a minimum crown of six to eight tiers of live fronds on each tree .
crown fronds shall be pulled together and loosely but securely tied in an upward position to protect the heart of the tree .
fronds shall be tied with light manila rope or multiple strands of binder twine .
frond ties shall remain in place for a minimum of num days after planting .
the contractor shall be responsible for preventing damage or death of the stock during moving operations and after planting is completed .
damaged stock shall be replaced with stock of the same species and of equal size .
after planting the contractor shall maintain all collected stock and local stock in established positions during construction and landscaping establishment periods .
the contractor shall ensure that palms have been chemically sprayed with an approved preventative treatment to inhibit development of bud rot during the planting operation and during periods of high humidity and warm temperatures .
the treatment shall be applied to allow deep penetration into the palm tree hearts .
care shall be taken such that no palm tree is dropped or mishandled during the planting operations .
bending the palm tree trunk or causing uneven contact of the tree trunk with another surface may damage the palm tree heart and eventually kill the tree .
num pruning and staking all plants shall be pruned in accordance with accepted horticultural practices .
all dead and damaged twigs and branches shall be removed in order to form each type of plant to the standard shape for its species .
trees shall be supported as shown on the project plans or as specified in the special provisions .
section num num treestakes shall be driven vertically at least six inches into firm undisturbed ground at the bottom of the planting pit or trench .
stakes shall be positioned to clear the root system without disturbing the integrity of the roots .
guying shall be as shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
tree ties and guy wires shall be periodically inspected and adjusted as necessary to prevent girdling or injury to tree trunks or branches .
trees shall be secured to the stakes with tree ties after backfilling and prior to irrigating as shown on the project plans andor as specified in the special provisions .
num care and protection of trees shrubs and plants prior to beginning work under section num the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining and protecting all planting areas as specified in subsection num including the care and protection of trees shrubs and plants planted under this section .
such care and protection shall include but not be limited to the watering of stock removal of construction trash and debris eradicating and removing all weeds and undesirable vegetation as specified in the special provisions repairing adjusting or replacing stakes and guying repairing weather damage or damage caused by the public furnishing and applying sprays dust andor cages to combat vandalism disease insects and pests and taking all precautions necessary to prevent damage from cold frost sunburn or other hazards .
all existing undesirable grasses and weeds shall be eradicated with herbicides or manual methods during phase i and disposed of by the contractor in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall remove and replace at no additional cost to the department all dead plants and all plants that show signs of failure to grow or which are injured or damaged so as to render them unsuitable for the purpose intended as determined by the engineer .
the contractor may with the approval of the engineer delay replacement of plants killed by frost until such time that frost is not imminent .
plants shall be staked as detailed on the project plans .
all wire ties used on plant staking shall be stapled to stakes in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
staking shall be driven into undisturbed soil below the planting pit bottom as detailed on the project plans .
rubber hoses on tree ties shall be a minimum of six inches in length at each wire loop .
all tie wire exposed to tree trunks shall be covered with hose or other material approved by the engineer .
any person or persons applying pesticides will be considered as doing so for hire and shall be licensed in accordance with the requirements of title num chapter num arizona revised statutes article num section num .
section num num the contractor shall notify the engineer and obtain prior approval of the use of any chemicals for weed eradication or control .
the types of herbicide to be used and the methods of application shall conform to environmental protection agency requirements the labeling instructions and shall be as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall keep a record of all applications types of herbicide used such as pre or postemergent rates and methods of application and the dates and locations of such applications on forms supplied by the engineer .
a copy of this record shall be submitted to the engineer after each application .
preemergent herbicides or manual weed control shall be used on noxious weeds in planting areas located within the project limits but noxious weed control within granite mulch decomposed granite or rock mulch shall be as specified under those items of work .
all areas shall be kept free of noxious weeds .
all planting areas within the project limits shall receive an approved preemergent herbicide as specified under subsection num .
the application of herbicide shall include all areas not covered under other items of the specifications .
the contractor shall pay special attention to the infestation of nut and bermuda grasses .
either of these items found in the planting pits of that material shall be grounds for immediate removal disposal and replacement of that item .
the planting pit shall be excavated and inspected to assure complete eradication of any roots or rhizomes which may have grown into the area .
all this work and material shall be the responsibility of the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement planting trees shrubs and plants and transplanting trees shrubs and plants will be measured on a lump sum basis except that when the bidding schedule sets forth specific items under this section on a unit basis measurement will be made by the unit for each item designated in the bidding schedule .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of trees shrubs and plants measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price or contract unit price each for the pay unit designated in the bidding schedule complete in place .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for plants selected for inspection and not planted or for the care and protection of trees shrubs and plants prior to the beginning of the landscaping establishment period the costs being considered as included in the prices paid for plants accepted and paid for under the various contract bid items .
section num num section num landscaping establishment num description the work under this section shall consist of the care of all stock in accordance with accepted horticultural practices keeping all areas free of weeds grasses and construction related debris applying all irrigation water repairing adjusting or replacing stakes and guys repairing public or weather damage furnishing and applying sprays dust andor cages to combat vandalism disease insects and other pests pruning as required by the engineer and the testing adjusting repairing and operating of irrigation systems as shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num materials materials necessary for the establishment of seeding and planted stock and the operations of irrigation systems shall be furnished by the contractor and shall conform to the requirements of these specifications and the special provisions .
the contractor shall notify the engineer and obtain prior approval for the use of any chemicals for weed control or eradication .
num construction requirements num general the work period for landscaping establishment shall be the number of calendar days specified in the special provisions .
the work period shall begin after all other work under the contract has been completed and only when the engineer is assured that the work can be performed in a continuous and consistent manner without restricting the use of any facilities by the traveling public .
each month the contractor shall submit a work schedule of operations for approval by the engineer .
the work schedule shall show the dates of work to be completed including the dates of replanting weed control pruning staking and guying furnishing and applying sprays and dust to combat diseases insects and other pests and irrigation testing or other work required by the engineer .
each calendar day during which the engineer determines that no work under landscaping establishment is required and the contractor is so advised regardless of whether or not the contractor performs landscaping establishment work will be used to reduce the total number of calendar days specified .
each calendar day during which the engineer determines that work under landscaping establishment is required and the contractor is so advised and the contractor fails to accomplish the required work will not be used to reduce the total number of calendar days specified .
section num num thirty calendar days after the beginning of the landscaping establishment period and at the end of each additional num calendar days the engineer accompanied by the contractor will inspect all landscaping items planted stock and irrigation systems .
the engineer will notify the contractor at least one week in advance of the date for each inspection .
the final inspection will be made approximately num calendar days prior to the expected termination of the landscaping establishment period .
a special inspection shall be performed at anytime during the landscaping establishment period when in the opinion of the engineer conditions justify such action .
the contractor will not be required to keep planted areas cleared of trash and debris unless such trash and debris is a result of its operations .
if in the opinion of the engineer trash and debris has been deposited within the planted areas not as a result of the contractors operation and such trash and debris is detrimental to the health and proper development of the plant material the engineer may require the contractor to clear the areas of this material .
the contractors responsibility for the work during landscaping establishment shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
all unacceptable planted stock irrigation components andor other work discussed at the monthly inspection and monthly irrigation testing shall be removed replaced andor repaired as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department within num calendar days from the date of the inspection .
payment for replacement of planted stock or irrigation components damaged by traffic or vandalism during landscaping establishment will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing when the replacement work has been performed .
all erosion which occurs within decomposed granite granite mulch and rock mulch areas shall be immediately repaired by the contractor to maintain the final grade in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the project plans or as established by the engineer .
erosion repair work shall be completed before the next monthly inspection and at no additional cost to the department .
all electrical power required to maintain the landscaping will be supplied to the contractor at no charge during landscaping establishment .
electrical power used for electrical equipment and tools andor for the contractors temporary offices shall be paid for by the contractor .
w ater for temporary offices construction equipment and construction yard use shall be furnished and paid for by the contractor .
num planted stock and seeding establishment section num num all dead or unhealthy plant stock shall be removed and replaced as directed at no additional cost to the department within num hours from the date of the inspection and the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing when the replacement work has been performed .
stock furnished for replacement shall be of the same size and species as originally specified .
unhealthy plant material may be corrected by the use of chemical and fertilizer applications where and when approved by the engineer .
after the final inspection and when all dead or unhealthy stock has been removed and if directed replaced the contractor will then no longer be responsible for the replacement of plant stock .
in case of certain plant stock found to be dead or unhealthy at the inspections specified above the contractor may be ordered to remove certain dead or unhealthy plant stock and may be ordered not to replace such plant stock when nonreplacement would not adversely affect the planting design .
the initial furnishing and planting and the subsequent removal of such plant stock ordered removed and not replaced shall be at no additional cost to the department .
all unpaved areas within the rightofway shall be kept cleared of weeds and other undesirable vegetation unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
the control of weeds shall be accomplished either with herbicides or by manual methods .
the types of herbicides to be used and the methods of application shall conform to environmental protection agency requirements and labeling instructions and shall be as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall keep a record of all applications the type of herbicides used such as pre or postemergent the rate and method of applications and the date and location of such applications .
a copy of this record shall be submitted to the engineer after each application .
all grasses or weeds shall be eradicated by spraying with a suitable herbicide and removing by manual means .
any person or persons applying pesticides will be considered as doing so for hire and shall be required to be licensed in accordance with the requirements of title num chapter num arizona revised statutes article num section num .
lawn areas shall be mowed weeded edged and trimmed in accordance with standard horticultural procedures .
w atering and fertilizing of lawns shall be done at intervals necessary to maintain a uniform healthy desirable green color and sturdy growth .
the contractor shall water and maintain seeded areas to provide a uniform and satisfactory stand of grass .
to be acceptable lawns shall section num num have a good uniform color and sturdy growth .
at least num percent of the area designated to be planted shall have an acceptable lawn .
num irrigation system establishment the irrigation system shall be tested adjusted repaired and operated in the manner in which it was designed to function .
components such as backflow prevention units and pressure reducing valves as well as all other appurtenances shall function properly in accordance with the requirements of the design and the special provisions together with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
no change in the system as it was accepted under the contract shall be made without written approval of the engineer .
during landscaping establishment emission points of emitters shall be repositioned as directed by the engineer .
additional tubes shall be installed where necessary as directed by the engineer .
staking of additional tubes shall be done in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
the irrigation system shall be tested within one week prior to each scheduled inspection .
testing of the various components shall be as specified in the special provisions or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall keep a record of the results of all testing and shall submit a copy of these results to the engineer upon completion of each test .
num method of measurement landscaping establishment will be measured as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment landscaping establishment measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price designated in the bidding schedule .
partial payments may be made for landscaping establishment .
payment will be based upon the length of the landscaping establishment period as specified in the special provisions and the contract lump sum price for the item .
partial payment will be made only when the following work is completed prior to submittal of the monthly estimate num the engineers list of necessary work from the prior inspection .
num the contractors list of proposed operations from its monthly work schedule .
section num num if the contractor furnishes the water used during landscaping establishment the cost shall be considered as included in the lump sum price bid for this contract bid item .
payment for removal of trash and debris deposited within the planted areas which is not a result of the contractors operation will be made in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
section num water distribution num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials equipment tools and labor necessary to install a complete and functioning water distribution system andor a complete and functioning landscape irrigation system in accordance with the details and at the locations shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
w ater distribution plans are in general diagrammatic .
the exact location of component units of the water distribution system will be specified by the engineer .
the following water distribution terms conditions and component descriptions shall apply for installation of water distribution systems andor landscape irrigation systems main lines andor pressure mains are defined as the piping under constant pressure .
supply mains are defined as the piping from a water source to a water storage facility and may or may not be under constant pressure .
submains shall be the piping between a control valve manual or automatic and a pressure regulating device and not under constant pressure .
lateral piping is that on the discharge side of a control valve or pressure regulating device and not under constant pressure .
the work period for landscape establishment shall be the number of calendar days specified in the special provisions .
phasing of the project when necessary shall be as specified in the special provisions .
num materials num components a backflow prevention unit backflow prevention units shall be atmospheric pressure or reduced pressure type and the size as specified .
backflow preventers and components shall conform to applicable codes regulations the project documents and the performance requirements of the foundation for section num num cross connection control research university of southern california .
all testing of backflow prevention devices shall be as specified by the foundation for cross connection control research u.s.c .
atmospheric and pressure type units may also be referred to as atmospheric vacuum breaker or pressure vacuum breaker .
num atmospheric backflow preventer atmospheric backflow preventers shall be all bronze body construction nonspilling type with full size orifice molded plastic or composition float disc .
all units shall have female i.p.t .
inlet and outlets sized as shown on the project plans andor as specified in the special provisions .
atmospheric units shall be rated to num pounds per square inch working pressure minimum and shall withstand water temperatures of num to num degrees f. the unit shall be installed with the air inlet in a level position .
num pressure backflow preventer the pressure backflow preventer body and bonnet shall be bronze and the air inlet hood or canopy shall be stainless steel or brass .
internally the spring shall be stainless steel the float shall be polyethylene and the vent and check discs shall be silicone rubber .
internal components of the unit shall be serviceable without removal of the unit from the piping .
pressure type units shall be rated to num pounds per square inch working pressure and shall withstand water temperatures of num to num degrees f. pressure backflow preventers shall incorporate one spring loaded check valve which will close tightly when flow through the unit drops to zero and shall have an air relief valve that opens to break siphon when the internal pressure drops to one pound per square inch .
each backflow device shall be manufacturer equipped with bronzebodied resilient seat shutoff valves on the inlet and outlet of the device and two balltype test cocks .
num reduced pressure backflow preventer the reduced pressure backflow preventer shall consist of two independently operating check valves an independent relief valve resilient seat inlet and outlet full port ball type shutoff valves and test cocks .
the unit shall be designed for installation in a normal horizontal flow attitude .
the independent relief valve shall be located between the two check valves .
section num num the backflow preventer shall include an integral sensing system that will automatically open the relief valve whenever the pressure upstream of the first check valve drops below three pounds per square inch greater than the pressure in the zone between the two check valves .
the relief valve shall remain open until a positive pressure differential of three pounds per square inch is reestablished .
the sensing passage shall be located within the unit housing to protect against accidental damage or crimping .
to assure maximum size passageway snubber or other restrictive elements shall not be used .
in the event that pressure upstream of the first check valve drops to atmosphere or below the construction of the unit shall be such that during the normal operation of the device the level of water in the zone between the two check valves shall be lowered to create within the unit an internal air gap which is greater than the diameter of the inlet pipe .
both check valves and the relief valve shall be spring loaded poppet type of modular design such that the complete assembly including valve spring and seat may be removed and replaced using low cost replacement kits .
all parts shall be made from corrosion resistant materials .
the design shall place the sensing diaphragm and passage within the unit housing to eliminate danger of malfunction due to mechanical or vandalism damage .
the backflow preventer shall conform to the following material pressure and temperature range requirements body bronze check valve enclosures glass filled noryl valve disc ept rubber diaphragm buna n and nylon o rings buna n springs stainless steel screws stainless steel maximum w orking pressure num psi hydrostatic test pressure num psi temperature range num of num of construction of the backflow prevention unit shall be such that any minor leakage at the second check valve will result in a visible flow from the relief valve even if the first check valve is totally disabled .
each reduced pressure backflow preventer shall be factory assembled and tested prior to delivery .
b gate valve section num num gate valves shall be the type and size specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
identification of the valve by trade name manufacturer andor model number shall be stamped or cast on the valve body or on a permanently attached metal plate or tag .
unless otherwise specified valves installed above ground shall be equipped with handwheels .
valves installed below grade shall be equipped with an operating nut or a cross handle except a gate valve installed adjacent to a remote control valve which shall be equipped with a handwheel .
a minimum of one operating key or wrench shall be provided for each size operating nut or cross handle .
num gate valve three inches or smaller gate valves three inches or smaller shall be class num bronze body nonrising stem type with solid disc screwed bonnet and required operator .
the bronze components of the valve shall conform to the requirements of astm b num with the exception of the stem which shall conform to astm b num alloy num .
the handwheel where required shall be noncorrosive metal .
valve end connections shall be as specified in the special provisions or as detailed on the project plans .
num gate valve four inches or larger gate valves four inches or larger in size shall be iron body bronze mounted and shall conform to the requirements of federal specification w w vnum class num type num for class num valves having nonrising stem bolted bonnet and solid wedge configuration .
end connections and required operator shall be as detailed on the project plans andor as specified by the federal specifications .
c quick coupling valve the quick coupling valve shall be bronze or brass with a numinch iron pipe size i.p.s .
female inlet connection unless otherwise specified or detailed .
the valve body shall be of twopiece construction with single slot and spring loaded selfclosing valve with metal or rubber cover .
all numinch quick coupling valves shall have a flow range of num to num gallons per minute and an operating pressure range of five to num pounds per square inch .
all quick coupling valves shall be of a single manufacturer .
two quick coupling keys appropriate to the valve shall be provided for each num valves installed .
section num num quick couplers shall be installed on an approved swing joint riser assembly consisting of two pvc male adapters with acme threads and elastomer seals one polyvinyl chloride pvc numdegree street elbow with male and female acme threads and two pvc numdegree elbows with socket by female acme threads .
necessary pipe fittings andor nipples shall be pvc schedule num with the length as required .
swing joint assembly shall be capable of withstanding a working pressure of num pounds per square inch at num degrees f. d remote control valve the remote control valves shall be the types and sizes specified .
the manufacturers name and identification shall be cast molded or stamped on the valve body or on a permanently attached metal plate or tag .
valves shall have a minimum service rating of num pounds per square inch .
valve bodies bonnets and component parts shall be as specified herein or in the special provisions .
all valves shall have accurately machined or molded valve seat surfaces and internal parts .
end connections shall be machined or molded female i.p.s .
thread unless otherwise specified .
electrically operated valves shall be fully compatible and fully functional in all modes with the automatic controller device specified for the project .
num remote control valve plastic the plastic remote control valve shall be a normally closed numvolt a.c. numcycle solenoidactuated globe pattern diaphragmtype valve capable of regulating water flow for the specified system operation .
valve pressure rating shall not be less than num pounds per square inch .
the valve body and bonnet shall be constructed of glass filled nylon with the handle rings and diaphragm hardware of acetal .
diaphragm shall be constructed of nylon reinforced nitrile rubber .
o rings shall be ethylene propylene rubber .
valve stem shall be brass and all studs and flange nuts shall be stainless steel .
the valve shall be actuated by a low power epoxy encapsulated numvolt a.c. numcycle solenoid with an inrush power requirement of num amperes num va and a holding current of num amperes num va. control water pressure for the solenoid actuator shall be delivered from the inlet of the valve to the actuator by means of an internal or external passage particular to the valve size .
each valve shall be equipped with a manual onoff control and flow adjustment control .
manual operation of the valve shall be by manual internal or external bleed .
section num num the valve construction shall be such as to provide for all internal parts to be removable from the top of the valve without disturbing the valve installation .
num remote control valve brass the brass bodied remote control valve shall be a normally closed numvolt a.c. numcycle solenoidactuated globe pattern diaphragmtype valve capable of regulating water flow for the specified system operation .
the valve body and bonnet shall be constructed of heavy cast brass .
the diaphragm shall be nylon reinforced nitrile rubber .
the valve stem and cross handle shall be brass and all studs shall be stainless steel .
the internal seat spring shall be stainless steel .
the valve shall be actuated by a low power epoxy encapsulated numvolt a.c. numcycle solenoid with an inrush power requirement of num ampere num va and a holding current of num ampere num va. control water pressure for the solenoid actuator shall be delivered from the inlet of the valve to the actuator by means of an internal or external passage particular to the valve size .
each valve shall be equipped with a manual onoff control and flow adjustment control .
manual operation of the valve shall be by manual external bleed .
the valve construction shall be such as to provide for all internal parts to be removable from the top of the valve without disturbing the valve installation .
e automatic controller the automatic controller shall be electromechanical electro mechanical semi solidstate or microprocessor based micro electronic solidstate type and capable of fully automatic or manual operation of the irrigation system .
the controller shall be housed in a wall or in a steel or metal cabinet which is lockable pedestal mountable and waterproof .
the type or types of auto controllers shall be as detailed on the project plans or as specified in the special provisions .
the controller shall operate on a minimum of num volts a.c. power input and shall be capable of operating numvolt a.c. electric remote control valves .
f numvolt wire ground and control the numvolt control and ground wire for operation of remote control valves shall be aw g size ul approved numvolt type uf single conductor wire with nummil pvc insulation .
all control hot wiring shall be a contrasting color to the white common or ground wire .
black section num num wire will not be acceptable for use on any numvolt control circuit .
control wires to water distribution valves used for shrubs shall be a different color than those used for trees .
w ire color shall be approved by the engineer .
control and ground wire sizes shall be the sizes indicated on the project plans .
individual control wires shall be installed to each remote control valve .
common wire installation shall be as detailed on the irrigation system master plan .
g pressure gauge the pressure gauge portable or permanently mounted shall be suitable for use with water and have a twoinch diameter case with hermetically sealed neoprene cover moldedin diaphragm and a shatterproof crystal .
pressure gauges shall have a range of zero to num pounds per square inch unless otherwise specified .
portable pressure gauges shall be equipped with rubber hose and tire chucks capable of attachment to schrader valves located at various pressurecheck locations throughout the project for purposes of verifying pressures and making adjustments as necessary .
permanently mounted pressure gauges shall be equipped with external or internal pulsation dampeners .
all permanently mounted gauges shall be equipped with resilient seat shutoff valves .
h insulation the insulation shall be oneinch thick allservice jacket heavy density glass fiber sectional pipe insulation with vinyl coated embossed vapor barrier laminate .
the jacket shall have a pressure sensitive selfsealing lap .
all insulation shall receive an exterior protective cover of numinch aluminum secured with numinch aluminum straps located six inches center to center .
i pipe num polyvinyl chloride pvc plastic pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of the national sanitation foundation and bear their stamp .
materials used in the manufacture of pvc pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of astm d num class numb .
pvc pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm d num for sdrpr pipe and astm d num for schedule num and schedule num pipe .
the pipe classification and the pressure rating will be specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
section num num pvc pipe unless otherwise specified shall be plainend solvent weld or bellend solvent weld .
bellend solvent weld pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm d num .
pvc piping shall be assembled with solvent weld socket type fittings .
all pvc fittings shall conform to one or more of the following requirements a astm d num for schedule num socket type fittings .
b astm d num for schedule num socket type fittings .
num steel galvanized and black steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
all threaded steel pipe fittings shall be heavy pattern banded malleable iron with a rating of num pounds per square inch working pressure .
fittings shall be galvanized or black steel appropriate to the piping being used .
flanges or flanged fittings where specified detailed or required shall be standard class num or extra heavy class num conforming to ansi b num .
the type of pipe and fittings which shall be used will be specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
num copper all copper pipe shall be rigid or nonrigid copper type k standard meeting the requirements of federal specification w w t num and astm b num .
fittings shall be standard copper wrought and cast .
solder shall be of the lead free type .
num water distribution system w ater distribution systems which include unique or variable components not listed in subsection num shall conform to the component requirements specified in the special provisions .
num landscape irrigation system landscape irrigation systems which include unique or variable components not listed in subsection num shall conform to the requirements specified in the special provisions .
num construction requirements num materials and equipment section num num at the time of the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the engineer seven copies of the manufacturers product sheets of the materials and equipment it proposes to use .
the contractor shall have materials and equipment correctly marked on each copy of the manufacturers product sheets .
these product sheets shall also show the catalog numbers manufacturers name model numbers sizes capacity complete specifications instructions design data andor drawings to determine whether or not each piece of material or equipment is acceptable and to assure that all such materials and equipment when incorporated into the work will be in accordance with the project plans and these specifications .
the contractors failure to comply with these material submittal instructions will not constitute time extensions .
no material or equipment shall be ordered and work shall not begin until the material and equipment has been approved in writing by the engineer .
all water distribution system equipment shall be installed in accordance with the printed instructions of the manufacturer the project plans standard specifications and special provisions .
the contractor shall provide the engineer three copies unless otherwise specified of each manufacturers installation instructions .
all irrigation construction materials for single use on the projects shall be supplied from a single manufacturer unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
num permits warranties and guaranties any warranty guaranty operation andor maintenance manuals provided by the manufacturer for any item shall be furnished to the engineer prior to final acceptance of phase i of the project or upon request by the engineer .
all permits for installation or construction of any of the work included under section num which are required by legally constituted authorities having jurisdiction shall be obtained and paid for by the contractor each at the proper time .
the contractor shall also arrange for and pay all costs in connection with any inspections and examinations required by these authorities .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for any permits the cost being considered as included in the price of the contract items .
num general requirements any use of potable water by the contractor shall be through approved backflow prevention devices .
all backflow prevention devices shall be in place tested and approved for use by the engineer prior to the contractor using any water from the municipal water system .
section num num prior to beginning trench excavation the contractor shall lay out the system or systems for the approval of the engineer by providing approved indicators at the locations of major components such as piping runs valves pumps backflow preventers and tanks .
under no circumstances shall shutoff valves of any type be installed downstream from any atmospheric type backflow prevention device .
w ith the exception of reduced pressure type backflow preventers shall not be subject to back pressure .
structures and enclosures shall be indicated as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall locate any existing water distribution system piping and appurtenances within the limits of the project which will be affected by new system construction andor revisions .
utility connections both water and electrical shall be as shown on the project plans or as determined by the utility company .
unless specifically exempted in the plans or specifications the contractor shall be responsible for all costs to provide these services .
the contractor shall assume full responsibility for the correct installation of the water distribution system as herein specified and unless it can show past experience of installing this type of system it shall arrange with the manufacturer for the services of a qualified manufacturers representative to be on hand at the start of the installation and as necessary during the installation and testing of the system .
all materials and fittings shall be new of manufacturers most current design and shall bear the appropriate national associations seal of approval for example nsf and ul .
similar parts shall be procured from the same manufacturer and internal parts shall be common and interchangeable .
parts listing and source of supply for replacement parts shall be furnished to the engineer .
the contractor shall provide two complete manuals of all materials equipment parts and manufacturers installation maintenance and owner manuals to the engineer prior to final project acceptance .
all enclosures shall remain closed and locked and all valve box covers shall be in place throughout the construction and landscaping establishment periods except when actual work is in progress on the respective unit .
the contractor shall furnish sufficient numbers of pressure gauges with tire chucks which shall be used in the testing and necessary adjustment of the emitter system during construction and landscaping establishment .
all pressure regulators shall be tested at numday intervals throughout phases i and ii of the contract .
regular tests shall be performed a minimum of three working days prior to regularly scheduled project inspections .
section num num plastic pipe shall be delivered to the site in unbroken bundles or packages and shall be wrapped such that pipe ends are adequately protected .
if the pipe is delivered from a local warehouse the pipe need not be bundled or wrapped .
upon delivery to the site the contractor shall inspect all pipe for possible shipping damage .
shipping straps shall be removed to prevent damage due to expansion in hot weather .
all copper pipe required to install the backflow prevention unit or fertilizer injector assembly shall be type k hard drawn of the size shown on the project plans .
copper fittings shall be wrought or cast and of the configuration and size shown on the project plans .
all pvc pipe and fittings shall be stored as recommended by the manufacturer and as directed by the engineer .
all pvc pipe shall be covered to prevent exposure to sunlight .
sufficient air space shall be provided between the opaque covering material and the pipe to prevent undue heat buildup and retention .
pvc pipe which has been discolored by exposure to sunlight or has been scratched scored or otherwise damaged in handling will not be acceptable .
plastic pipe and fittings shall be installed in accordance with the requirements specified herein and the manufacturers recommendations .
any pvc fitting or nipple marks from any device other than a strap tightening wrench shall be removed and replaced with a new component .
any system replaced shall be retested as herein specified .
no water distribution system main piping laterals other piping or other components shall be installed through or beneath new or existing plant pits or plant material .
the minimum distance between the plant pit and piping shall be num inches .
maximum distance between the plant pit and piping shall be determined by maximum supply lengths as specified on the project plans .
additional flushing of the irrigation system in addition to those specified may be required by the engineer to assure proper function of the system including emission points .
testing of the irrigation system valves shall be performed at system operating pressure or num pounds per square inch whichever is greater .
trenches shall be excavated to uniform grade and shall be no wider than is necessary for the proper installation of the pipe fittings and control wiring .
the bottom of the trench shall be firm and free from large or sharp rocks .
section num num w here pavement or other impervious material is encountered in the excavation of trenches such material shall be removed and wasted as approved by the engineer .
no separate payment will be made for removal and disposal .
all pipe fittings and system components shall be clean prior to installation and shall be maintained in that condition during installation .
plastic pipe shall be uniformly bedded and covered to the depth indicated on the project plans .
bedding and backfill material shall be compacted by approved water settlement methods and after backfilling has been completed the surface shall be brought to the elevation of the adjacent ground .
the contractor shall select a numfoot section of mainline which has been installed and backfilled as a test portion to be water settled for the engineers approval of the water settlement method .
the test shall be completed and approved prior to proceeding with the remainder of the project .
requirements for slack or snaking of pvc pipe shall be in accordance with the pipe manufacturers recommendation .
pvc pipe and fittings shall be clean prior to installation and shall be maintained in that condition during installation .
w here two or more piping systems are indicated on the project plans as adjacent they shall be placed within a common trench and at the depths indicated .
w here threaded plastic to metal or plastic to plastic connections are required the metal connections shall be worked first .
a nonhardening manufacturer recommended sealantlubricant compatible with the plastic fittings andor components shall be used and the joint shall be hand tightened with the final tightening not to exceed one turn with a strap wrench .
threaded pvc schedule num nipples threadoneend t.o.e .
and pvc schedule num couplings solvent weld shall be used where threaded plastic connectors are required .
threaded pvc male or female adapters are not acceptable unless otherwise specified .
cement solvents thinners and joint compounds shall be compatible with and of the kind recognized by the industry as proper for use with the plastic pipe and fittings involved .
solvent weld pipe and fittings shall be assembled using appropriate primers and solvents designated by the manufacturer for use with schedule num andor schedule num fittings .
all wire connections for no .
num or larger shall be wrapped in accordance with the requirements of subsection numb .
all control valve boxes and pressure regulator boxes shall be labeled with a brass tag acceptable to the engineer .
section num num all wire shall be tagged in accordance with the requirements of subsection numc .
flexible conduit shall be supported within num inches of any cabinet or fitting in accordance with the requirements of nec num and in a workmanlike manner acceptable to the engineer .
all surfaces or components requiring protective paint shall receive the finish as specified in sections num and num and as determined by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish and install a steel post to mark the adot end caps in accordance with standard drawing nummnum to a height of num inches without the reflector .
at no time shall any plant material new or existing be allowed to remain without water for any period which will result in stress to the plant material .
any damage to plant material because of lack of water shall be rectified at no additional cost to the department .
w ater distribution andor irrigation systems shall be installed tested operational and approved by the engineer prior to installation of any new plant material .
flush end caps shall be installed as shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer to promote good flushing of the entire irrigation system .
additional flushing of the irrigation system in addition to those specified may be required by the engineer to assure proper function of the system including emission points .
num bedding and cover material bedding and cover material for pvc piping flexible emitter hose and numvolt wiring shall conform to the following gradation requirements when tested in accordance with arizona test method num sieve size percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num all piping and numvolt wire shall be installed as detailed on the project plans and shall have the minimum cover shown .
gravel sumps as detailed on the project plans shall be crushed coarse aggregate number num conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
num components section num num components shall be as required by the details shown on the plans in the project special provisions as specified herein and as directed by the engineer .
a backflow prevention unit the backflow prevention unit shall be installed with necessary supports as required by the project documents .
the piping as detailed shall not be considered as adequate support .
shop drawings shall be provided by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
the supports shall receive protective paint finish as specified in sections num and num of these specifications .
final finish shall be as specified by the engineer .
all exposed piping and unit bodies used in conjunction with the backflow preventer and the backflow preventer shall receive a protective covering of insulation as specified .
access to all drains vents operators unions or reliefs shall be maintained and the insulation shall not restrict their operation .
the backflow prevention units shall be tested in accordance with the requirements as specified in the manual of crossconnection control recommended practice as published by the foundation for crossconnection control research university of southern california .
testing of backflow prevention unit shall be performed by the authorized servicetest personnel .
test reports shall be recorded on forms provided by the engineer .
no separate payment will be made for testing .
testing of backflow prevention units by authorized servicetest personnel shall be performed before acceptance of both phases i and ii .
in addition testing shall be performed following any repairs or servicing of units .
all backflow prevention devices shall be in place tested and approved for use by the engineer prior to the contractor using water from any potable water system .
all testing shall be with available water pressure from the approved pointsofconnection p.o.c .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
bench testing remote from the designated location of the unit will be unacceptable .
b gate valve gate valves shall be the sizes as indicated in the project documents .
gate valve size shall be equal to the larger adjacent pipe size as indicated on the project plans .
section num num all gate valves installed beyond structure lines shall be installed within specified valve boxes .
no valves shall be placed beneath structures sidewalks roadway surfaces or within structural walls or columns unless shown on project plans and approved by the engineer .
concrete support blocks for mainline gate valves shall be the type and size indicated on the project plans .
support blocks shall be installed under the gate valve body and shall not contact or support the adjacent pipe and fittings .
support blocks shall be placed on undisturbed soil or soil which has been compacted as specified in subsection numbnum of these specifications .
no separate payment will be made for the support block .
gate valves installed in valve boxes or enclosures below grade shall be exposed in entirety within the valve box .
extensions shall be added to valve boxes as necessary to prevent the surrounding soil or gravel sump from encroaching on the valve body and associated piping or fittings .
c quick coupling valve quick coupling valves the type and size as detailed on the project plans and as specified shall be installed on the approved swing joint riser assembly .
additional pipe andor nipples required to complete the swing joint assembly shall be pvc schedule num length shall be as required .
quick coupling valves shall be anchored to prevent movement as detailed on the project plans .
d remote control valve remote control valves shall be installed as detailed on the project plans .
size of valves shall be as shown on the plans or as specified in other project documents .
unless otherwise detailed or specified all remote control valves for use on irrigation systems shall be preceded by a gate valve .
the gate valve shall be the size detailed or sized to the larger of either the control valve or the adjacent pipe .
remote control valves accompanying gate valves and other required appurtenances shall be completely exposed and accessible within the valve box .
valve box extension shall be added as necessary to provide valve access and inspectionmaintenance .
e automatic controller automatic controllers or field satellite shall be installed as detailed and specified in the project documents as recommended by the manufacturer and as approved by the engineer .
section num num controller enclosures shall remain closed and locked throughout the project duration except when actual work is in progress on the respective unit .
any finish or enclosure component damaged during transport or installation shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
remote control valve wire ground and control shall terminate within the automatic controller cabinet at a manufacturer supplied terminal strip .
all connections shall be labeled as to function andor valve number as approved by the engineer .
incoming electrical supply circuits shall be separated from the low voltage numvolt circuits by approved conduits or separator panels as approved by nec and prevailing local codes .
f control and ground wire numvolt remote control wire numvolt shall be installed as specified by the project documents and standard specifications .
control wires to be installed throughout pipe sleeves shall be encased in pvc electrical conduit of appropriate size to contain the required number of conductors as determined by standard conduit sizing tables .
conduits shall extend one foot beyond each end of the sleeve unless otherwise noted .
w ire connections at remote control valves and at field splices shall be made with specified wire connectors installed as recommended by the manufacturer .
no field splices of numvolt wiring shall be made unless the length between connections or splices exceeds num feet .
necessary splices shall be made at remote control valve boxes or separate splice boxes .
control and ground wire throughout the project shall be neatly bundled and taped with plastic electrical tape at numfoot intervals between splices andor connections and as directed by the engineer .
g emitters the number of emitters per riser circuit as shown on the project plans is approximate .
the contractor shall add no more than five additional single outlet emitters or one multioutlet emitter per circuit as detailed .
any additional emitters required and exceeding the above indicated amount must be approved by the department .
the contractor shall assume full responsibility for the correct installation of the emitter system as herein specified and unless it can show past experience of installing this type of system it shall arrange with the manufacturer for the services of a qualified manufacturers section num num representative to be on hand at the start of the installation and as necessary during the installation and testing of the system .
the contractor shall use the appropriate installation tools as recommended by the respective manufacturers for correct installation of emitters and emitter tubing .
h insulation all exposed pipe fittings and unit bodies used in conjunction with the backflow preventers fertilizer injectors and filter units as well as all exposed piping and valves at the water storage facilities and pumping facilities shall receive a protective covering of insulation .
access to all drains vents operators unions or reliefs shall be maintained and shall not be restricted in their operation by the insulation .
insulation shall be installed in a workmanlike manner with no voids or openings which will deter from the effectiveness of the insulation .
the contractor shall assume full responsibility for the correct installation of the insulation and shall arrange with the manufacturer for the services of a qualified manufacturers representative to be on hand at the start of the insulation installation and as necessary during installation to assure proper application of all insulation materials .
num testing prior to backfilling the contractor shall furnish a sufficient number of pressure gauges with tire chucks which shall be utilized in the testing and necessary adjustment of the water distribution system during construction and landscaping establishment .
at the completion of the landscaping establishment period the contractor shall deliver two pressure gauges and two tire chucks to the engineer .
all enclosures shall remain closed and locked and all valve box covers shall be in place throughout the construction and landscaping establishment periods except when actual work is in progress on the respective unit .
w hen tests have been completed and any necessary repairs have been completed and accepted trenches shall be backfilled .
pipe lines shall be normalized by water cooling the system just prior to beginning backfilling operations .
the irrigation laterals shall be thoroughly flushed following assembly and backfilling of the trench .
all laterals shall receive an additional flushing prior to installation of the irrigation heads .
additional flushing of the water distribution system may be required by the engineer to section num num assure proper function of the system including irrigation system devices .
the contractor shall operate the irrigation system automatically for a minimum of five days prior to final acceptance of phase i and for the duration of phase ii .
the contractor may operate the system manually in addition to the automatic mode and as necessary during phase ii as approved and directed by the engineer .
any mechanical failure or leak that occurs during the establishment period shall be repaired or the defective materials shall be removed and replaced as directed by the engineer .
the system shall be retested as herein specified .
num water distribution system the specifications for installing a water distribution system will be provided in the special provisions .
num landscape irrigation system the specifications for installing a landscape irrigation system will be provided in the special provisions .
num water distribution system testing following completion of the installation of mains control valves gate valves and other components and after all solventwelded joints have cured for num hours the water distribution system andor landscape irrigation system shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of the specifications and as approved by the engineer .
under no circumstances will air pressure be acceptable for testing .
the contractor shall flush and bleed all lines prior to testing .
metal or plastic caps shall be used to facilitate flushing and testing .
backfill material placed on the lines shall be limited to the quantity required to stabilize the lines under pressure and to serve as insulation during testing procedures .
during testing all fittings and couplings shall be visible for inspection .
any failures evident during the test shall be repaired and the system retested before backfilling .
the contractor shall furnish the necessary equipment required to perform the piping tests .
no additional payment will be made for materials required to perform tests .
any mechanical failures or leaks which develop during testing shall be repaired or the defective materials shall be removed and replaced .
after replacements or repairs have been made the entire testing procedures shall be repeated until it is determined that there are no leaks or failures in the irrigation system .
section num num unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the pressure mains and submains shall be subjected to a static pressure test of num pounds per square inch gage for a minimum period of two hours .
during this time all solventwelded and threaded connections and component parts shall be inspected to determine that no leaks exist .
after installation of emitter laterals and supply tubing but before installation of emitters the emitter laterals and supply tubing shall be subjected to one hour of pressure testing pounds per square inch gage at maximum lateral operating pressure unless otherwise directed by the engineer during which time components shall be inspected for leakage .
all valves shall be tested in sequence starting at the valve most remote from the source of water supply to subject the mainlines to surge pressure .
all valves shall be operated manually .
all electric remote control valves shall also be tested electrically and meet the satisfaction of the engineer prior to burial of wiring .
in addition to the aforementioned testing the contractor shall perform the various testing procedures listed under the various individual bid items .
these tests shall be performed in the presence of the engineer .
the results of the tests shall be documented and provided to the engineer at the completion of the testing procedure .
test document forms shall be provided by andor approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement w ater distribution systems or landscape irrigation systems will be measured either by the system for each system installed or by the unit each for each component furnished and installed which collectively comprises the system .
the applicable unit of measurement will be as designated in the bidding schedule .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of water distribution system or landscape irrigation system measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price for the pay unit designated in the bidding schedule which price shall be full compensation for the item complete in place including excavation and furnishing all labor and materials necessary to provide a functioning water distribution system or landscape irrigation system .
section num sewerage system num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing and constructing a complete and functioning sewerage system including all section num num appurtenances excavating backfilling setting of all parts of the system to the indicated lines and grades testing the system and the disposal of excess materials all in accordance with the details and at the locations shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num plastic sewer pipe the contractor may at its option use either acrylonitrilebutadiene styrene abs or polyvinyl chloride pvc sewer pipe .
all plastic sewer pipe shall be sdr num in the sizes indicated on the project plans .
abs pipe and fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
solvent cement conforming to the requirements of astm d num shall be used on all abs plastic pipe joints .
pvc pipe and fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
solvent cement conforming to the requirements of astm d num or elastomeric rubber ring gasket joints conforming to the requirements of astm d num shall be used on all pvc plastic pipe joints .
all pipe joined with rubber ring gasket joints shall be the pushon bell and spigot type .
each bell joint shall consist of an integral factory made formed bell complete with a single rubber gasket .
num iron pipe and fittings all iron pipe shall be ductile iron pipe conforming to aw w a standard cnum .
all fittings shall be either cast iron or ductile iron pipe fittings conforming to aw w a standard cnum .
all iron pipe shall be of the sizes and classes shown on the project plans .
all iron pipe and fittings shall have an inside cementmortar lining conforming to aw w a standard cnum .
num filter fabric filter fabric shall conform to the requirements of subsection num for the fabric survivability rating shown on the project plans or specified in the special provisions .
num construction requirements num general at the time of the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the engineer seven copies of the manufacturers product sheet of all materials and equipment that it proposes to incorporate into section num num the work .
the contractor shall have materials and equipment correctly marked on each copy of the manufacturers product sheet .
these product sheets shall also show the catalog numbers manufacturers name model numbers sizes capacity complete specification instructions design data andor drawings to determine whether or not each piece of material or equipment is acceptable and to assure that all such materials and equipment when incorporated into the work will be in accordance with the project plans and these specifications .
the contractors failure to comply with these material submittal instructions will not constitute time extensions .
at the time of the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the engineer seven copies of the list of all materials and equipment that it proposes to incorporate into the work .
the contractor shall have materials and equipment correctly marked on each copy of the list .
this list shall show the catalog numbers manufacturers name model numbers sizes capacity complete specification instructions design data andor drawings to determine whether or not each piece of material or equipment is acceptable and to assure that all such materials and equipment when incorporated into the work will be in accordance with the project plans and these specifications .
the contractors failure to comply with these material submittal instructions will not constitute time extensions .
no material or equipment shall be ordered and work shall not begin until the material and equipment has been approved in writing by the engineer .
construction of sewerage systems shall be governed by the applicable requirements of the arizona department of environmental quality .
all plastic and iron pipe shall be transported handled and stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
pvc plastic pipe shall be protected from sunlight with an opaque covering .
w orkmen and inspectors shall be protected from the collapse of trench walls during the excavating for and the placing of pipe and septic tanks during the placing and compacting of all bedding and backfill material and during the determination of all earth work densities .
num manholes manholes and covers shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of section num and as shown on the project plans .
num septic tanks septic tanks shall be constructed in accordance with the project plans and the current edition of arizona department of environmental quality engineering bulletin no .
num .
section num num septic tanks shall be water tight and constructed with class s concrete which has a numday compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch and grade num or better steel reinforcing bars .
if precast septic tanks are used a bituminous or mastic gasket shall be used to seal the joints between each precast section .
the liquid depth in the septic tank shall not be less than four feet or greater than six feet .
the inside length of the septic tank shall be between two and three times the inside width .
the inlet and outlet of the septic tank shall consist of pipe tees which shall be sized to match the sewer line .
the septic tank shall have three access openings in the tank top .
one opening each shall be located over the tank inlet and outlet and the third opening shall be located in the middle of the tank .
concrete adjustment rings shall be used as required so that all three access openings are within six inches of the finished grade .
backfill around and over the septic tank shall be placed in lifts not greater than num inches and thoroughly compacted in a manner that will not place undue strain on the septic tank .
num plastic sewer pipe the installation of solid wall plastic sewer pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm d num .
trenches for plastic sewer pipe shall be excavated to a uniform grade which will not cause undue deflection of the pipe .
the width of the trench at any point below the top of the pipe shall not be greater than that necessary to provide adequate room for joining the pipe and compacting the haunching and initial backfill .
the trench bottom shall be firm and free of large or sharp rocks .
materials for the pipe bedding haunching and initial backfill shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
materials for pipe bedding haunching and initial backfill shall be placed in lifts of not more than eight inches in depth before compaction and each lift shall be compacted to at least num percent of maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
if rock is encountered during trench excavation all rock shall be removed to provide a clearance of at least six inches below and on each side of the pipe and fittings .
after excavation of all rock six inches of pipe bedding material shall be placed in the bottom of the trench and compacted to at least num percent of maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
section num num other pipe bedding shall be a minimum of four inches in depth under the pipe and shall be installed to insure adequate support of the pipe barrel throughout its entire length .
the haunching shall be placed completely around the pipe up to the spring line of the pipe and out to the undisturbed trench walls and uniformly tamped avoiding any lateral displacement of the pipe .
the initial backfill shall extend a minimum of num inches over the top of the pipe and shall be carefully and uniformly tamped .
the final backfill shall be of excavated material containing no slabs or pieces of rock greater than four inches in maximum dimensions and shall be water settled or mechanically placed as approved by the engineer .
w hen completed the final backfill shall be at the same elevation as the adjacent ground surface and shall be passable by conventional rubber tired vehicles without greater rutting than the adjacent natural ground .
proper care shall be taken to avoid contact between the pipe and compaction equipment .
compaction equipment shall not be used directly over the pipe until sufficient backfill has been placed to assure that such equipment will not damage or disturb the pipe .
at least num inches of backfill shall cover the pipe before the trench is wheel loaded and at least num inches of backfill material shall be in place before compacting with a hydrohammer .
num iron pipe trench excavation for the iron pipe shall be no wider than is necessary for proper installation of the pipe .
the trench bottom shall be true and even in order to provide support for the full length of the pipe barrel .
holes for the bells shall be provided at each joint and shall be no larger than necessary for joint assembly and assurance that the pipe barrel will lie flat on the trench bottom .
if rock is encountered during trench excavation all rock shall be removed to provide a clearance of at least six inches below and on each side of the pipe .
after excavation of all rock a sixinch bed of soil which is free of stones large clods or foreign matter shall be placed on the bottom of the trench leveled and tamped .
the materials for pipe bedding if required and for the haunching and initial backfill for the iron pipe shall be soil free from stones large clods or foreign matter .
the backfill shall be placed completely under the pipe haunches and up each side of the pipe and uniformly tamped .
the backfill shall be placed in lifts not exceeding eight inches in depth and each lift shall be compacted to at least num percent of maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
the final backfill shall be excavated material containing no slabs or pieces of rock greater than four inches in maximum dimension and shall be watersettled or mechanically placed as approved by the engineer .
w hen completed section num num the final backfill shall be at the same elevation as the adjacent ground surface and shall be passable by conventional rubbertired vehicles without greater rutting than the adjacent natural ground .
num filter fabric the installation of the filter fabric shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num inspection and testing the inspection and testing of the sewer lines shall be performed following formal notice to the engineer .
the sewer lines shall be inspected tested and accepted prior to being covered .
all pipe and fittings will be carefully examined during the testing procedure .
any damaged or defective pipe or fittings that are discovered during or following testing shall be repaired or replaced with sound material and then retested until approved by the engineer .
the sewer line shall be tested by means of an exfiltration test .
this test shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of engineering bulletin no .
num of the arizona department of health services and as follows plug sewer line at lower end of section to be tested .
plug the highest end of the sewer line to be tested .
the sewer plug shall have a suitable air vent to allow trapped air removal .
place a calibrated container at the average height of four feet above the flow line of the sewer line .
check the system for leaks in hoses plugs calibrated containers etc .
while filling through a positive shutoff valve .
after filling the sewer line allow one hour for absorption of water and refill sewer line .
w hen the water overflows the calibrated container close the input valve and begin the test .
record the elapsed time to empty the container of water and calculate the loss rate in gallons per hour .
the exfiltration rate from the sewer line shall not exceed num gallons per inch of pipe diameter per num feet of pipe length per hour with four feet of head .
num method of measurement sewerage systems will be measured either as a single complete unit of work or by the unit of measurement shown below and listed in the bidding schedule for the specified items septic tanks will be measured either as a single unit of work complete or as a unit for each tank constructed .
section num num sewer pipe will be measured by the linear foot of pipe or as a single unit of work complete including excavating backfilling pipe sand bedding and testing .
manholes will be measured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
filter fabric will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of sewerage system measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price specified in the bidding schedule complete in place .
section num erosion control and pollution prevention num description the work under this section shall include furnishing installing maintaining removing and disposing of temporary erosion control measures such as silt fences check dams straw barriers and other erosion control devices or methods as shown in the storm w ater pollution prevention plan sw ppp and in the special provisions .
the work shall also include furnishing installing and maintaining permanent erosion control measures such as pipe inlet and outlet protection cut and fill slope transitions headwall and wingwall treatments and other permanent erosion control devices or methods as shown in the sw ppp .
num erosion controls erosion controls both temporary and permanent shall be installed in accordance with phasing provisions in the approved sw ppp and coordinated with the related construction .
all work specified in this subsection will be temporary for use during construction unless designated otherwise .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all erosion and pollution control devices in proper functioning condition at all times .
w hen deficiencies in the erosion control devices or other elements of work listed herein are noted by inspection or other observation specified corrections shall be made by the contractor by the end of the day or work shift or as directed by the engineer .
w ork specified herein which is lost destroyed or deemed unacceptable by the engineer as a result of the contractors operations shall be section num num replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
w ork specified herein which is lost or destroyed as a result of natural events such as excessive rainfall shall be replaced by the contractor and be paid for in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
in cases of serious or willful disregard for the protection of the waters of the u.s. andor natural surroundings by the contractor the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy the situation within num hours after receipt of such notice the engineer may immediately place the erosion andor other pollution control elements in proper condition and deduct the cost thereof from moneys due the contractor .
num otherpollutants controls the work shall include implementing controls to eliminate the discharge of pollutants such as fuels lubricants bitumens dust palliatives raw sewage wash water and other harmful materials into storm and other offsite waters .
the work shall include the implementation of spill prevention and material management controls and practices to prevent the release or washoff of pollutants .
these controls and practices shall be specified in the sw ppp and shall include storage procedures for chemicals and construction materials disposal and cleanup procedures the contractors plans for handling of potential pollutants and other pollution prevention measures as required .
handling procedures for potential pollutants shall also be included in the contractors good housekeeping practices as specified in subsection num of the special provisions .
num materials num silt fence material requirements for silt fences including posts wire support fencing and fasteners shall be in accordance with section num .
geotextile fabric shall conform to the requirements of subsections num and num except that the filter cloth shall be woven polypropylene and the fabric apparent opening size shall be between numbers num and num u.s. standard sieve sizes when tested in accordance with astm d num .
num compost stabilization compost stabilization shall consist of composted organic vegetative materials stabilized with a tacking agent and used for erosion control .
compost material shall be dark brown in color with the parent material composted and no longer visible .
the structure shall be a mixture of fine and medium size particles and humus crumbs .
the maximum particle size shall be within the capacity of the contractors equipment section num num for application to the constructed slopes .
the odor shall be that of rich humus with no ammonia or anaerobic odors .
compost shall also meet the following requirements prior to furnishing on the project compost mulch samples shall be tested for the specified microbiological and nutrient conditions including maturity and stability by a testing laboratory approved for testing of organic materials .
certified laboratory test results shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
tacking agent shall be a naturally occurring organic compound and be non toxic .
it shall be a product typically used for binding soil and mulch in seeding or erosion control operations .
approved types shall consist of mucilage or gum by dry weight as active ingredient obtained from guar or plantago .
the tacking agent shall be labeled indicating the type and mucilage purity .
the contractor shall have the tacking agent swell volume tested by an approved testing laboratory using the usp method .
the standard swell volume shall be considered at num milliliters per gram .
material shall have a swell volume of at least num milliliters per gram .
certified laboratory test results shall be furnished to the engineer for each shipment of homogenous consistency to be used on project areas or as directed by the engineer .
tacking agent rates shall be adjusted to compensate for swell volume variation .
material tested with lesser volume shall have the tacking agent rate increased by the same percentage of decrease in swell volume from the standard num milliliters per gram .
material tested with greater volume may reduce tacking agent rates by the same percentage of increase in swell volume from the standard num milliliters per gram .
tacking agent shall be pure material without other starches bentonite or other compounds that would alter the swell volume test results of mucilage or the effectiveness of the tacking .
num riprap and rock mulch compost material cation exchange capacity cec greater than num meqnumg carbon nitrogen ratio less than num ph of extract num num organic matter content greater than num total nitrogen not added greater than num humic acid greater than num maturity index greater than num on maturity index at a num ratio stability less than num mb numkg compost dry solids hour section num num riprap for cut and fill transitions designated on the plans shall be angular in shape and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
unless otherwise specified riprap for cut and fill transitions shall conform to gradation a or b in the table below as designated on the project plans .
sieve size gradation a gradation b percent passing num inch num inch num num num inch num inch num num num inch num inch num num num inch num inch num num num inch num inch num num rock mulch for pipe inlet and outlet protection headwall and wingwall treatment and rock check dams shall be angular in shape and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
rock mulch shall be in accordance with gradation c below unless otherwise specified .
section num requirements for use of preemergent herbicide and for postplacement watering of rock mulch shall not apply to rock mulch applied under section num .
gradation c sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num sand bags sand bags when filled shall measure approximately num inches long by num inches wide by four inches thick .
bags shall be manufactured from polypropylene polyethylene or polyamide woven fabric with the following characteristics unit w eight minimum oz .
per sq .
yd .
num mullen burst strength exceeding psi num ultraviolet stability exceeding num material used to fill sand bags shall be clean sand or a clean sandy soil free of silt as approved by the engineer .
num erosion control blankets a general erosion control blankets shall consist of temporary degradable rolled erosioncontrol products of shortterm or extendedterm duration composed of natural fibers mechanically or structurally bound together with natural or polymer netting to form a continuous matrix .
section num num erosion control blankets of shortterm duration shall have a minimum oneyear degradation period for both the netting and fibers and be composed of num percent virgin aspen excelsior wood fibers or num percent agricultural straw .
extendedterm erosion control blankets shall have a minimum twoyear degradation period for the netting and fibers and be composed of heavyduty excelsior blankets or a mix of num percent straw and num percent coconut fibers or num percent coconut fibers .
heavyduty excelsior blankets used in the extendedterm category shall have a minimum weight of num pounds per square yard .
all other types of blankets whether for shortterm or extendedterm use shall have a minimum weight of num pounds per square yard .
fibers for shortterm erosion control blankets shall be encased top and bottom with photodegradable polypropylene or numpercent biodegradable natural organic fiber netting as specified on the plans .
should the plans not specify type of netting for shortterm blankets fibers shall be encased with photodegradable polypropylene .
fibers for extendedterm blankets shall be encased within either a heavy duty uv stabilized top netting black and bottom netting green or two uv stabilized nettings black .
all netting for extendedterm blankets shall be photodegradable polypropylene .
erosion control blankets shall also conform to the following requirements property test method shortterm duration extendterm duration minimum mass per unit area ouncessq .
yd .
astm d num num num minimum thickness inches astm d num num num minimum tensile strength lbs.ft astm d num numxnum numxnum heavy duty blankets shall have a minimum mass per unit area of num ounces per square yard .
numerical value represents total thickness of blanket including netting .
numerical value represents minimum average test result in either direction .
the contractor shall provide certificates of analysis in accordance with subsection num for all erosion control blankets .
fiber color shall be natural unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
fibers shall be free of weed seed and shall be locked in place to form a mat of consistent thickness .
erosion control blankets using straw shall conform to the requirements of subsection numb .
fibers section num num shall remain evenly distributed over the entire area of the blanket after being placed on the slope .
erosion control blankets shall be furnished in fourfoot to eightfoot wide rolls and shall be wrapped with suitable material to protect against moisture and extensive ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled to provide sufficient identification for quality control purposes .
staples shall be ushaped num gauge steel wire and shall be one inch wide by six inches long or two inches wide by eight inches long .
b straw certification all wheat straw shall be free from noxious weeds in compliance with the standards and procedures of the arizona crop improvement association acia or the north american w eed management association naw ma .
the contractor shall provide documentation that the product containing wheat straw was manufactured solely from straw certified as free of noxious weeds by the acia or naw ma .
such certification shall be provided to the engineer prior to delivery of the products to the project site .
products using wheat straw without such certification will not be acceptable .
num sediment logs sediment wattles and fiber rolls a general sediment logs sediment wattles and fiber rolls shall be manufactured or constructed rolls of fiber matrix secured with netting and used for the purpose of controlling erosion by slowing high flow water velocity and trapping silt sediments .
netting for fiber rolls and sediment wattles shall have a minimum durability of one year after installation and shall be tightly secured at each end of the individual rolls .
the unit weight for wattles and fiber rolls shall be num pounds per inch of diameter per linear foot .
sediment log unit weight shall be num pounds per inch of diameter per linear foot .
the minimum weight per linear foot for sediment logs wattles and fiber rolls shall be determined by multiplying the specified diameter of the device by the appropriate unit weight in pounds per inch of diameter per linear foot as specified above .
netting at each end of sediment logs and wattles shall be secured with metal clips or knotted ends to assure fiber containment .
b sediment logs sediment logs shall be constructed of num percent curledfiber aspen wood excelsior with interlocking barbs and with num percent num section num num percent of the fiber at least six inches in length .
netting shall consist of longterm degradable open weave plastic or natural fiber containment mesh with a maximum oneinch by oneinch grid .
sediment logs may also be filled with compost conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
mesh shall be photodegradable or biodegradable with a life expectancy of num to num months .
sediment logs shall be twenty inches in diameter .
unless approved by the engineer sediment logs shall be num feet num percent in length .
c sediment wattles sediment wattles shall be manufactured rolls composed of weedfree numpercent agricultural wheat or rice straw or excelsior wood fiber encased in a tube of longterm photodegradable plastic or biodegradable natural fiber netting with a maximum oneinch by one inch grid .
sediment wattles shall have nominal diameters of num num or num inches with lengths from seven to twentyfive feet as specified on the plans .
fibers shall be evenly distributed throughout the wattle .
w attles composed of wheat straw shall conform to the requirements of subsection numb .
w heat straw wattles without the specified certification will not be acceptable .
d fiber rolls fiber rolls shall be constructed from heavyweight manufactured blankets consisting of wood excelsior straw or coconut fibers or any combination of such fibers mechanically or structurally bound together with natural or polymer netting to form a continuous matrix .
blankets used to construct fiber rolls shall be between num and num feet wide by approximately num feet long .
w ood excelsior blankets shall have num percent of its fibers equal to or greater than six inches .
blankets used to construct the fiber rolls shall have photodegradable plastic or biodegradable natural netting with a maximum oneinch by oneinch grid on at least one side .
fiber rolls containing any amount of wheat straw shall conform to the requirements of subsection numb .
fiber rolls with wheat straw that are not certified as specified herein will not be acceptable .
the contractor shall produce fiber rolls by rolling the blankets along their width to produce numfoot lengths and securing the rolls with jute twine spaced at numfoot intervals along the roll for the full length and at six inches from each end .
if shown on the plans or directed by the engineer the contractor shall cut the blankets before rolling to produce completed fiber roll lengths of between num and num feet .
the nominal diameter of the finished rolls shall be num num or num inches as specified on the plans .
overlapping of more than one blanket may be required to achieve larger diameters .
w hen overlapping is required the end of one blanket shall overlap six inches onto the end of the next blanket prior to rolling .
section num num num sediment control berms sediment control berms shall consist of soil obtained from within the project limits or compost or both as called for on the plans .
compost and tacking agent used in sediment control berms shall conform to the material requirements of subsection num .
num construction requirements the contractor shall implement the sw ppp throughout the project as specified in subsection num of the special provisions .
erosion control features shall be temporary or permanent as designated herein .
temporary erosion control features specified for removal at the end of the project shall become the property of the contractor unless designated by the engineer to be left for permanent use .
num silt fences installation and maintenance requirements for silt fences shall be accordance with section num unless otherwise specified .
num compost stabilization compost stabilization shall be applied as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num riprap and rock mulch riprap used in cut and fill transitions and rock mulch treatments for pipe inlets and outlets headwalls and wingwalls and rock check dams shall be installed in accordance with the project plans and details or as directed by the engineer .
rock shall be installed so as to conform to and completely cover the treatment area shown on the plans with a uniform cohesive rock unit .
the rock shall not impede flow into the treatment area and shall be feathered at the outflow .
accumulated debris shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor after each rain storm or as directed by the engineer .
pipe treatments headwall and wingwall treatments and cut and fill transitions are permanent project features which shall remain in continuous service after installation and project completion .
rock check dams shall remain in service until the seeding work commences or until they are no longer needed as approved by the engineer .
w hen use of a rock check dam is discontinued the materials section num num shall be removed and wasted on site in a manner that will not impede designed drainage flows as approved by the engineer .
num sand bags the work shall include furnishing sand bags and sand preparing the filled bags and installing filled sand bags where shown on the plans or as approved by the engineer .
sand bags in the vicinity of curbs and catch basins shall be installed to two inches below the height of the adjacent curb to allow drainage into the catch basin .
w hen sediment depth behind the sand bags reaches three inches the sediment shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with local state and federal laws and permit requirements .
sand bag features shall remain in service until disturbed areas have been stabilized as directed by the engineer .
w hen the use of a sand bag feature is discontinued all materials shall be removed and become the property of the contractor .
during removal all sediment shall be disposed of and the area restored to a finished condition as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num erosion control blankets a general erosion control blankets shall be installed in accordance with the project plans and details or as directed by the engineer in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
for slope installations shortterm duration blankets as specified in subsection num shall be used for slopes from num horizontal to vertical to num .
extendedterm blankets shall be used for slopes steeper than num .
for channel installations erosion control blankets shall conform to the requirements for extendedterm duration .
the contractor shall coordinate with the blanket supplier for a qualified representative of the blanket supplier to be present at the job site at the start of installation to provide technical assistance as needed .
b slope installations erosion control blankets shall be oriented in vertical strips and anchored with sixinch long staples in cohesive soil and eightinch long staples in noncohesive soil .
a twotofive inch overlap or as required by the manufacturer shall be required for side seams .
a numinch overlap shinglestyle shall be required for blanket ends .
the distribution of staples shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
a sixinch deep by sixinch wide trench shall be located at the top of section num num the slope .
the erosion control blankets shall be stapled to the bottom of the trench with staples spaced six inches apart across the width of the blanket .
the trench shall then be backfilled and compacted .
c channel installations for channel installations erosion control blankets shall be installed parallel to the flow of water .
the first blanket shall be centered longitudinally in midchannel and anchored with staples as recommended by the manufacturer .
subsequent blankets shall follow from channel center outward .
the distribution of staples shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
successive lengths of erosion control blankets shall be overlapped a minimum of six inches with the upstream end on top .
staple the overlap across the end of the overlapping lengths with staples spaced six inches apart .
a sixinch deep by sixinch wide trench shall be located at the upstream and top of side slope terminations of the blankets .
the erosion control blankets shall be stapled to the bottom of the trench with staples spaced six inches apart across the width of the blanket .
the trench shall be backfilled and compacted .
num sediment logs sediment wattles and fiber rolls a sediment logs sediment logs shall be installed in channel bottoms around catch basins as check dams or on slopes as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
sediment logs shall be secured with oneinch by oneinch by numinch hardwood stakes placed with a maximum spacing of two feet on center or as shown on the plans .
each stake shall be intertwined with the netting on the downstream side of the log and driven approximately two feet below finished grade .
unless otherwise specified soil shall be tamped against the upstream side of the log to assure that storm water is forced to flow through the log rather than under it .
sediment logs installed in drainage channel bottoms shall be perpendicular to the flow of the water and shall continue up the channel side slope two feet above the high water flow line .
spacing of the logs shall be as specified in the plans .
w hen sediment logs are used to construct check dams the logs placed on the ground shall be buried four to six inches deep as shown on plans .
section num num logs placed on slopes shall be installed in a twoinch deep by fiveinch wide anchor trench .
the ends of adjacent logs shall be abutted tightly together so that water can not undermine the logs .
b sediment wattles sediment wattles shall be installed on slopes as shown on the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or as directed by the engineer .
sediment wattles shall be secured with wooden stakes as shown on the plans .
the ends of adjacent wattles shall be abutted tightly together .
c fiber rolls fiber rolls shall be installed on slopes as shown on the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions or as directed by the engineer .
if no spacing is shown on the plans fiber rolls shall be placed as specified in the table below .
fiber rolls shall be installed in a twoinch deep by fiveinch wide anchor trench .
fiber rolls shall be secured with wooden stakes having a numinch by numinch minimum crosssectional dimension and numfoot minimum length or as shown on the plans .
each stake shall be driven through the center of the finished fiber roll spaced a maximum of three feet apart and driven approximately two feet into the ground .
the ends of adjacent rolls shall be abutted together .
fiber roll spacing table slope horizontal to vertical spacing feet less than num num num to num num greater than num and less than num num num to less than num num num and greater num num sediment control berms sediment control berms shall be installed as shown on the plans .
the berm shall be considered a temporary erosion control protection measure .
as directed by the engineer the contractor shall remove segments of the berm within areas that have been successfully re vegetated prior to allowing traffic operations .
num method of measurement silt fence will be measured in accordance with subsection num .
compost stabilization will be measured by the cubic yard of applied and tacked compost material .
section num num pipe inletoutlet treatment headwall and w ingwall treatment and rock check dams will be measured per cubic yard of rock mulch .
cut and fill transitions will be measured per cubic yard of riprap .
sand bags will be measured per each filled sand bag placed into service .
erosion control blankets will be measured by the square yard of total ground area covered .
sediment logs sediment wattles and fiber rolls will be measured by the linear foot .
sediment control berms will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of the berm parallel to the ground surface .
num basis of payment silt fence will be paid for in accordance with subsection num except that no separate measurement and payment will be made for removal of sediment the cost being considered a part of contract items .
the accepted quantity of rock check dams measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of rock mulch which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all excavation preparation and furnishing installing maintaining final removal and disposal or dispersion including returning the area to a natural condition as approved by the engineer .
the accepted quantity of pipe inletoutlet treatment measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of rock mulch which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all excavation preparation and furnishing installing and maintaining of pipe inletoutlet treatment as approved by the engineer .
the accepted quantity of headwall and w ingwall treatment measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of rock mulch which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all excavation preparation and furnishing installing and maintaining of headwall and w ingwall treatment as approved by the engineer .
the accepted quantity of cut and fill transitions measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of riprap which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all excavation preparation and furnishing installing and maintaining of cut and fill transitions as approved by the engineer .
section num num the accepted quantities of sand bags measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per each sand bag which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all excavation preparation and furnishing installing maintaining final removal and disposal of temporary sand bags including returning the area to a natural condition as approved by the engineer .
no separate measurement and payment will be made for removal of sediment the cost being considered a part of contract items .
the accepted quantities of erosion control blankets measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all excavation and preparation and furnishing installing and maintaining the erosion control blankets as approved by the engineer .
such unit bid price shall be considered full compensation for either shortterm or extendedterm blankets .
no additional payment will be made for technical assistance provided by representatives of the blanket supplier the cost being considered as included in the unit bid price .
the accepted quantities of sediment logs sediment wattles and fiber rolls measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for all labor including excavation preparation and installation and all materials tools stakes equipment and incidentals necessary for furnishing and installing the devices complete in place as approved by the engineer .
no additional payment will be made for sediment logs used as check dams the cost being considered as included in the unit bid price paid for sediment logs .
the accepted quantities of compost stabilization measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of compost material applied and tacked as directed by the engineer .
such price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all materials preparation installation tacking maintenance and removal of the compoststabilization area .
the accepted quantities of sediment control berms measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot regardless of the type of material used .
such price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including all materials preparation compaction installation and maintenance and removal of the sediment control berm .
no additional measurement or payment will be made for temporary features subsequently designated by the engineer as permanent the cost being considered as included in the unit bid price .
no additional measurement or payment will be made for associated earthwork ground preparation overlapping stakes silt and debris section num num removal and disposal or maintenance the cost being considered as included in the unit bid price .
section num num section num mobilization num description the work under this section shall consist of preparatory work and operations including but not limited to the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site the establishment of all offices buildings and other facilities necessary for work on the project and for all other work and operations that must be performed and costs incurred prior to beginning work on the various items on the project site .
num blank num blank num method of measurement mobilization will be measured for payment by the lump sum as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment payment for mobilization measured as provided above will be made at the contract lump sum price which shall be full compensation for supplying and furnishing all materials facilities and services and performing all the work involved as specified herein .
partial payments under this item will be made in accordance with the following provisions the first payment of the lump sum price for mobilization will be paid after the preconstruction conference provided that all submissions required under subsection num are submitted by the contractor at the preconstruction conference to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the amount paid for the first partial payment will be in accordance with table num .
the second payment of the lump sum price for mobilization will be made when the engineer has determined that a significant amount of equipment has been mobilized to the project site which will be used to perform portions of the contract work .
the amount paid for the second partial payment will be in accordance with table num .
the third payment of the lump sum price for mobilization will be made on the first estimate following completion of five percent of the contract .
the amount paid for the third payment will be in accordance with table num .
the fourth payment of the lump sum price for mobilization will section num num be made on the first estimate following completion of num percent of the contract .
the amount paid for the fourth payment will be in accordance with table num .
the total sum of all payment shall not exceed the original contract amount bid for mobilization regardless of the fact that the contractor may have for any reason shut down its work on the project or moved its equipment away from the project and back again .
table num amount allowed for mobilization during the life of the contract contract amount of contract basis of payment num num num num of the lump sum price for mobilization or num of the original contract amount whichever is less .
num num num of the lump sum price for mobilization or num of the original contract amount whichever is less .
if the price bid for mobilization exceeds this percentage any excess will be paid to the contractor upon completion of the contract .
the adjustment provisions in section num and the retention of funds provisions in section num shall not apply to the item of mobilization .
w hen other contract items are adjusted as provided in section num and if the costs applicable to such items of work include mobilization costs such mobilization costs will be considered as recovered by the contractor in the lump sum price paid for mobilization and will be excluded from consideration in determining compensation under section num .
w hen mobilization is not included as a contract item full compensation for any necessary mobilization required will be considered as included in the prices paid for the various contract items involved and no additional compensation will be made .
section num chain link fence num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing chain link fence and gates at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
chain link fence shall be either type num or num and shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
section num num the type and height of chain link fence to be constructed will be shown on the project plans .
chain link fabric shall be constructed of either zinccoated steel or aluminumcoated steel .
posts hardware and fittings shall be either zinccoated steel or aluminumcoated steel .
the option used shall be the same on any one project .
the work under this section shall also include constructing chain link fence and gates from salvage .
num materials num general certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num of the standard specifications shall be submitted for all materials except for subsection num barbed w ire .
barbed w ire will be sampled and tested in accordance with methods used by the department and will require written approval by the engineer prior to being incorporated into the work .
num posts a general posts shall be round pipe hsection or rollformed and shall conform to the nominal dimensional requirements shown on the plans .
in addition the material of which posts are fabricated shall have a nominal thickness before galvanizing of not less than num inches .
the option of post type used shall be the same on any one project .
posts shall have provisions to securely hold the top tension wire in position and allow for removal and replacement of a post without damaging the top tension wire .
tubular posts shall be fitted with rainproof tops .
b round pipe pipe shall be zinccoated galvanized round steel pipe conforming to the requirements of astm a num type e or s grade a standard w eight schedule num or shall be round pipe conforming to all of the requirements of aashto m num for grade num pipe .
in addition grade num pipe furnished with an organic topcoat shall have a separate chromate chemical treatment of num micrograms per square inch applied to the zinc coating prior to application of the organic topcoat .
c hsection posts hsection posts shall be manufactured from steel conforming to the minimum requirements of aashto m num grade num and shall meet the section num num zinc coating strength and dimensional requirements of aashto m num for type i grade num steel posts .
d roll formed posts roll formed posts shall be manufactured from steel sheet and strip conforming to the minimum requirements of astm a num grade num and shall meet the strength and dimensional requirements of aashto m num for type i rollformed posts .
the required coating shall be a hotdip zinc coating in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num for grade num steel posts or a coating system meeting the exterior coating requirements of aashto m num for grade num round steel posts consisting of a hotdip zinc coating chromate chemical treatment and organic topcoat .
num concrete concrete for post footings shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
num fence fabric steel wire constituting the fence fabric shall meet the minimum breaking strength shown in table num of aashto m num for type i or ii wire when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
chain link fence fabric shall be either zinccoated or aluminumcoated steel wire fence fabric .
zinccoated steel fabric shall conform to the requirements of astm a num class num coating .
aluminumcoated steel fabric shall conform to the requirements of astm a num with a minimum weight of coating of num ounces per square foot of wire surface area .
the wire used for aluminumcoated chain link fence fabric shall be coated before weaving into fabric .
the wire used in the manufacture of the fabric shall be num gauge for all fence fabric num inches or less in height and shall be nine gauge for fabrics greater than num inches in height .
chain link fence fabric shall be woven throughout in the form of approximately twoinch square mesh .
fabric num inches or less in height shall be furnished with knuckling on one selvage and barbing on the other and fabric over num inches shall be furnished with barbing on both selvages .
num tension wire and fabric fasteners tension wire shall be seven gauge num inch diameter coil spring steel wire of good commercial quality with a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch and shall be zinccoated or aluminumcoated .
zinccoated steel wire shall have a minimum coating of num ounces per square foot of uncoated wire surface .
aluminumcoated steel wire shall have a minimum coating of num ounces per square foot of uncoated wire surface .
section num num tie wires hog rings and post clips shall be zinccoated or aluminumcoated steel of good commercial quality and shall be of the same diameter and breaking strength as the fence fabric being fastened .
the minimum weight of zinccoating shall conform to the requirements of astm a num class num .
the minimum weight of aluminum coating shall be num ounces per square foot of wire surface area .
num truss rods and tighteners truss rods and tighteners shall be fabricated from commercial quality steel and shall be zinccoated in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
truss rods shall be numinch diameter adjustable rods .
truss tighteners shall have a strap thickness of not less than num inch .
num miscellaneous fittings and hardware structural bars stretcher bar bands post caps and miscellaneous hardware shall be fabricated from commercial quality steel and shall be zinccoated in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
stretcher bars shall be numinch by numinch steel flat bars .
stretcher bar bands shall be numinch by oneinch preformed steel bands .
num barbed wire and barbed wire support arm barbed wire for use with type num chain link fence shall conform to the requirements of subsection numa .
barbed wire support arm shall be of the type shown on the plans shall be fabricated from commercial quality steel and shall be zinccoated in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
num gates gates shall be of the sizes shown on the plans .
gates greater than eight feet in width shall have a vertical member installed at the midway point of the gate .
gate frames shall be constructed of not less than num inch steel pipe and interior vertical members shall be constructed of not less than oneinch pipe .
pipe shall be zinccoated steel pipe conforming to the requirements of astm a num standard w eight schedule num or shall be round pipe conforming to all of the requirements of aashto m num for class num pipe .
gate frames shall be fastened together at the corners by welding .
w elding shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the american w elding society structural w elding code dnum and as modified by aashto standard specifications for w elding of structural steel highway bridges .
section num num truss rods and tighteners for the gate frames shall conform to the requirements specified herein under subsection num .
fabric for the gates shall be of the same kind used for the adjoining chain link fence and shall be attached to the gate frame by the use of stretch bars stretcher bands and tie wires as specified under subsection num .
gates shall be hung by at least two steel ductile iron or malleable iron hinges not less than three inches in width so designed as to securely clamp to the gate post and permit the gate to be swung back against the fence .
gates shall be provided with a combination steel ductile iron or malleable iron catch and locking attachment which will not rotate around the latch post .
stops to hold gates open shall be provided where required .
num construction requirements num general in areas where there is livestock the contractor shall take all measures necessary to restrict the livestock to the land where it is being kept .
the contractor shall furnish all materials and construct temporary fence gates and cattle guards as may be necessary to restrict the livestock as specified .
existing fences that are to remain in place and which have been damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced or restored by the contractor at no additional cost to the department in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
the contractor shall clear the fence lines of all earth trees brush and other obstructions which interfere with the proper construction of the fences unless the engineer orders certain trees to remain in place .
disposal of removed material shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
clearing the fence line shall be within the highway rightofway .
fence shall be constructed within the highway rightofway as shown on the plans .
num setting posts line posts shall be spaced at not more than numfoot intervals measured from center to center of posts and such measurement shall be made parallel to the slope of the natural ground .
end intermediate and corner post assemblies shall be as shown on the plans .
intermediate post assemblies shall be spaced at numfoot intervals or midway between pull posts when the distance between such posts is less than num feet and more than num feet .
section num num all posts shall be placed in a vertical position except in unusual locations where the engineer may direct that the posts be set perpendicular to the ground surface .
all posts shall be set in concrete footings conforming to the details shown on the plans and crowned at the top to shed water .
fence fabric or wire shall not be attached to the posts until the concrete has cured a minimum of num hours .
at locations where a change in the vertical alignment of the fence line forms an angle of deflection of num degrees or more a corner post assembly shall be provided .
a change in the horizontal alignment of the fence line where the angle of deflection is num degrees or more shall be considered as a corner and a corner post assembly shall be installed .
num installing fence fabric chain link fence fabric shall be fastened on the outward facing side of the posts unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the fabric shall be stretched taut and fastened to the posts and between posts the top and bottom edges of the fabric shall be fastened to the tension wires .
the tension wires shall be stretched tight and installed on a straight grade between posts .
the distance from the top of the fabric to the top tension wire shall be two inches maximum .
the fabric shall be fastened to end corner latch gate and pull posts with stretcher bars and stretcher bar bands .
stretcher bar bands shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding num inches .
the fabric shall be fastened to the line posts with the wires or post clips spaced at intervals not exceeding num inches and to the tension wires with the wires or hog rings spaced at num inches center to center .
selvage at bottom of chain link fence fabric shall be barbed unless otherwise specified .
selvage at top of chain link fence fabric shall be barbed for heights over num inches and shall be knuckled for heights num inches or less .
num barbed wire barbed wire for type num fence shall be pulled taut before being permanently attached to the barbed wire extension arms and to the posts .
barbed wire across the top of a gate frame shall be made taut by means of eye bolts or ratchet bands at each end .
a maximum of two splices on barbed wire will be allowed between post assemblies but not on the same wire .
no splicing will be allowed within num feet of a pull post .
num construct chain link fence from salvage portions of the existing chain link fence including gates designated for section num num removal and salvage shall be constructed at the new locations shown on the project plans and shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions specified herein for new chain link fence .
the contractor may at its option and at no additional cost to the department construct new chain link fence in lieu of constructing chain link fence from salvage .
if the contractor elects to construct new chain link fence the fence materials originally designated for construction from salvage shall become the property of the contractor .
all posts pipe fabric or hardware which are deemed by the engineer to be unsuitable for use in reconstructing the chain link fence shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the engineer .
if any of these materials require replacement to complete the quantity of chain link fence to be constructed the materials shall be furnished by the contractor and will be paid for as specified in subsection num .
num method of measurement chain link fence will be measured by the linear foot of each type and size of fence specified .
measurement will be made along the top of the completed fence from outside to outside of end posts excluding the widths of gate openings .
gate posts and latch posts will be considered as included in the measurement of the completed fence .
gates will be measured by the unit of each type and size of gate specified .
a gate unit complete in place shall include the necessary fittings hardware and gate bracing .
constructing the various types of chain link fence or gates from salvage will be measured by the linear foot or by the unit each using the limits of measurement specified for new construction .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of chain link fence and gates or construct chain link fence and gates from salvage measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the type and size of fence and per each for the type and size of gates designated in the bidding schedule complete in place .
the accepted quantities of construct chain link fence from salvage measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place including excavation footing concrete backfill and disposal backfill and disposal of surplus material .
any new posts pipe fabric or hardware furnished by the contractor to replace salvaged chain link fence components deemed by the engineer to be unsuitable for use will be measured and paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
no payment will be made for furnishing materials and constructing temporary fence gates and cattle guards as may be necessary to section num num restrict livestock .
section num wire fence num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing barbed wire fence woven wire fence game fence antelope fence and gates at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
fences and gates shall be of the types and sizes shown on the plans and shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
the type of fence to be constructed will be shown on the project plans .
num materials num general certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num of the standard specifications shall be submitted for all materials except for subsection num posts and braces and subsection num fencing w ire .
subsections num and num will be sampled and tested in accordance with methods used by the department and will require written approval by the engineer prior to being incorporated into the work .
num posts and braces line posts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
lengths of posts shall be as shown on the plans .
packaging of posts will not be required .
the type of post furnished tee channel or u or y type shall be the same on any one project .
end corner pull latch and gate posts and braces shall conform to the requirements of astm a num for uprights and braces .
posts and braces shall be painted green .
num concrete concrete for post footings shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
num fencing wire a barbed wire barbed wire shall be num gauge steel wire with fourpoint numgauge barbs spaced five inches apart and shall be either zinccoated class section num num num or aluminumcoated conforming to the requirements of astm a num .
b barbless wire barbless wire shall meet the same requirements as barbed wire except that the barbs shall be omitted .
c woven wire fabric w oven wire fabric shall be no .
num grade num woven steel fence fabric with stay wires spaced six inches apart and shall be either zinccoated class num or aluminumcoated conforming to the requirements of astm a num .
num stays and fasteners stays shall be num gauge twisted wire designed for screwon type installation .
stays shall be zinccoated steel of good commercial quality .
the minimum weight of zinccoating shall be num ounces per square foot of uncoated wire surface .
tie wires hog rings and post clips shall be zinccoated steel of good commercial quality and shall be of the same diameter as the fence fabric being fastened .
the minimum weight of zinccoating shall be num ounces per square foot of uncoated wire surface .
num gates a type num gate gates shall conform to the requirements of subsection num except as specified herein .
gates greater than five feet in width shall have a vertical member installed at the midway point of the gate .
fabric for the gates shall be either chain link fence fabric or woven wire fabric .
chain link fence fabric shall conform to the requirements of subsection num for fabric using num gauge wire .
w oven wire fabric shall be of the same kind used for the adjoining woven wire fence .
w hen the adjoining fence is barbed wire fence gate fabric shall be of the kind used with type num woven wire fence .
gates shall be hung by at least two steel ductile iron or malleable iron hinges so designed as to securely clamp to the type of gate post furnished and permit the gate to be swung back against the fence .
gates shall be provided with a combination steel ductile iron or malleable iron catch and locking attachment which will not rotate section num num around the latch post .
stops to hold gates open shall be provided where required .
b type num gate type num gates shall be constructed so that each line of wire will be securely attached to the gate post and to the latch board .
the three vertical wire stays placed within the gate shall be equally spaced .
above the top fence wire and below the bottom fence wire a double strand of steel wire shall be placed around the latch post forming loops of such size that they will accept the ends of the latch board .
a pry stick shall be sewed to the gate post so as to draw the fence to a taut condition when closed .
the latch board and pry stick assembly shall be made of wood or of steel .
w ood shall be clear select douglas fir two inch by two inch by four feet for the latch board and two inch by two inch by two feet for the pry stick .
steel latch board and pry stick shall be fabricated from the same type of steel utilized for line posts .
num construction requirements num general in areas where there is livestock the contractor shall take all measures necessary to restrict the livestock to the land where it is being kept .
the contractor shall furnish all materials and construct temporary fence gates and cattle guards as may be necessary to restrict the livestock as specified .
existing fences that are to remain in place and which have been damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced or restored by the contractor at no additional cost to the department in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
the contractor shall clear the fence lines of all earth trees brush and other obstructions which interfere with the proper construction of the fences unless the engineer orders certain trees to remain in place .
clearing the fence line shall be within the highway rightofway .
disposal of removed material shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
fence shall be constructed within the highway rightofway as shown on the plans .
num setting fence fence posts shall be spaced at the intervals and set to the depths shown on the plans .
in determining the post spacing measurements shall be made parallel section num num to the ground slope and all posts shall be placed in a vertical position except in unusual locations where the engineer may direct that the posts be set perpendicular to the ground surface .
line posts may be driven into undisturbed earth provided driving does not injure the posts .
all voids around the post shall be backfilled and the material thoroughly tamped .
end corner pull latch and gate posts and braces shall be set in concrete footings crowned at the top to shed water .
any high points which interfere with the placing of wire fence fabric shall be excavated to provide the clearance shown on the plans .
changes in the horizontal alignment of the fence line where the angle of deflection is num degrees or more shall be considered as corners and a corner post assembly shall be installed .
changes in fence alignment where the angle of deflection is less than num degrees but more than five degrees shall be considered as alignment angles and diagonal tension wires shall be installed .
the diagonal tension wires shall consist of two twisted steel wires and shall be attached to the adjacent line posts .
w here the fence line intersects a cross fence the wires of the existing cross fence shall connect to an end post assembly as shown on the plans .
connecting fence assemblies with braces for every direction of strain shall be placed at the junction with new fences .
intermediate post assemblies shall be installed at not more than numfoot intervals between other braced posts but for woven wire fence the spacing shall be such as to use standard rolls of fabric with a minimum of cutting and waste .
after post assemblies have been placed the barbed wire and woven wire fabric shall be pulled taut to the satisfaction of the engineer and each longitudinal wire shall be cut and securely fastened to the braced post with devices customarily used for the purpose .
barbed wire or woven wire fabric shall not be carried past a post assembly but shall be cut and fastened to the post independently of the adjacent spans .
a maximum of two splices on barbed wire will be permitted between post assemblies but not on the same wire .
no splice shall be placed closer than num feet to any post assembly .
w here fence lines are interrupted by openings for gates and cattle guards intermediate post assemblies shall be installed at both sides of the opening at a distance of one panel width from the end of the opening .
after the tensioning of the barbed wire or woven wire fabric between two post assemblies all longitudinal wires shall be attached to each intervening line post at the height and spacing as shown on the plans .
the distance from the bottom wire to the ground may vary at any one section num num point from that shown on the plans four inches plus or minus for barbed wire fence and game fence and one inch plus or minus for woven wire fence .
w here abrupt changes occur in the fence line grade intermediate line posts may be required to maintain proper distances between the bottom wire and the ground .
spacing of the twisted vertical wire stays shall be as shown on the plans for each type of fence .
the vertical wire stays shall be woven into every horizontal wire for each type of fence .
at all grade depressions where stresses tend to pull the posts from the ground the affected fence posts shall be anchored in concrete or the fence wires shall be weighted with concrete sag weights .
the volume of concrete required to anchor the posts shall be not less than one cubic foot .
fence sag weights shall weigh not less than num pounds and shall be made with a wire loop hanger embedded in the concrete .
a double strand of wire shall be attached to each horizontal line of barbed wire and to the top and bottom wire of the woven wire fabric and tied to the wire loop hanger of the sag weight .
num flood gates flood gates shall be constructed at the locations specified on the project plans or where designated by the engineer and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
if the length of the flood gate is such that the engineer determines that line posts are needed the posts shall be placed as necessary and driven to the depth required to keep the flood gate upright .
flood gates shall be constructed to the same requirements specified for barbed wire fence construction except that the concrete sag weights shall weigh num pounds .
num method of measurement w ire fence will be measured by the linear foot of each type of fence specified .
measurement will be made along the top of the completed fence from outside to outside of end posts excluding the widths of gate and cattle guard openings .
gate posts and latch posts will be considered as included in the measurement of the completed fence .
type num gates will be measured as a complete unit in place by the width of the gate opening .
double gates will be measured as one complete unit by the width of the gate opening .
a gate unit complete in place shall include the gate with all necessary fittings hardware and gate bracing .
type num gates will be measured as a complete unit in place by the width of the gate opening .
a gate unit complete in place shall include the wire gate with vertical stays latch board and pry stick .
flood gates will be measured by the linear foot .
measurement will be section num num made on the fence line along the top wire from gate post to gate post as shown on the plans but exclusive of any type num gates .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of wire fence and flood gates measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the type of fence and gate designated in the bidding schedule complete in place .
types num and num gates measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per gate for the type designated in the bidding schedule complete in place .
no payment will be made for furnishing materials and constructing temporary fence gates and cattle guards as may be necessary to restrict livestock .
section num chain link cable barrier num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing chain link cable barrier fence at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of the plans and these specifications .
num materials certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
the wire rope and swaged connection assembly and the associated nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements for the cable assembly specified under subsection num except that the length of the wire rope and the stud bolts shall be as shown on the project plans and the wire rope shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num class b type ii .
concrete shall be class s portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
w elded wire fabric shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the chain link fence fabric ties fasteners hardware and other fittings shall be of the dimensions shown on the project plans and shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
all structural steel shall conform to the requirements of astm a num except that the anchor plate shall be made of steel conforming to the section num num requirements of astm a num or a num .
all structural steel shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
num construction requirements in addition to the requirements of this section the construction of the chain link cable barrier shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num and section num .
the excavation for the concrete anchor block shall be to the neat lines shown on the project plans with a maximum of three inches outside those lines .
the entire volume of the excavation shall be filled with concrete .
the chain link cable barrier shall be constructed at the location shown on the project plans and to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
the chain link fence and cables shall follow the contours of the finished ground surface .
the cables shall have only enough tension to prevent them from sagging more than one inch between clamps .
num method of measurement chain link cable barrier will be measured by the linear foot along the top strain wire from center to center of the fence post at each end .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of chain link cable barrier measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place including excavating furnishing and placing concrete and reinforcing steel for the footings disposal of surplus material and grading immediately adjacent to the barrier .
section num guardrail num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all labor equipment and materials to install guardrail guardrail transitions tangent and flared guardrail terminals and end anchors constructed new reconstructed or constructed guardrail from salvage in accordance with the locations and details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications including all necessary components and delineation .
num materials materials for guardrail guardrail transitions end anchors and reflector tabs shall conform to the requirements of section num and the plans .
section num num materials for tangent and flared guardrail terminals shall conform to the requirements of the approved manufacturer drawings and specifications .
only those tangent and flared guardrail terminals shown on the plans will be allowed .
prismatic guardrailmounted barrier markers shall conform to the requirements of section num .
prismatic guardrailmounted barrier markers shall be ultravioletresistant and shall have a trapezoidalshaped body in accordance with standard drawings .
flexible guardrail markers shall be made of a high quality impact and ultravioletresistant flexible whitecolored plastic or similar material with a minimum thickness of num inch .
this material shall be configured into a rectangular body that is flat curvilinear or tubular with a width of between three and four inches .
the minimum reflective area for lshaped and tshaped markers attached to the top of wooden posts and ushaped markers attached to the top of steel ibeam posts shall be ten square inches .
the reflectorized surface for flexible vertical guardrail markers attached to the approach side of posts shall be three inches wide by five inches long .
adhesive materials for applying reflective sheeting to guardrail terminals metal or plastic guardrail reflector tabs and flexible guardrail markers shall be in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
guardrail delineator material shall be specifically manufactured to provide roadside delineation .
all delineators shall consist of complete units that are precut predrilled as applicable and ready to be installed in the field .
the delineators shall be packaged in such manner as to prevent damage and deterioration during shipping and storage .
reflective sheeting for object markers on tangent and flared guardrail terminals and reflective sheeting used for all other guardrail markers including flexible guardrail markers and reflector tabs shall conform to the requirements of section num .
transparent colors inks and paints used in fabrication shall be of the type and quality recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
transparent colors shall be applied with screen mesh p.e .
num using fill pass .
tangent and flared guardrail terminals flexible guardrail markers reflective sheeting products and inks approved for use are shown on the departments approved products list apl .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center artc through its pride program .
num construction requirements section num num num general the construction of the various types of guardrail guardrail transitions tangent and flared guardrail terminals and end anchors shall include the assembly and erection of all component parts complete at the locations shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
all materials shall be new except as provided for under subsections num and num .
the various types of guardrail shall be constructed with wood blocks on either steel or wood posts at the option of the contractor except where the post materials to be used are specified on the plans .
the same type of post shall be used in any one continuous length of guardrail .
all metal work shall be fabricated in the shop .
no punching drilling cutting or welding shall be done in the field except as provided for under subsections num and num .
all metal cut in the field shall be cleaned and painted with two coats of zinc paint in accordance with section num .
w here field cutting or boring of wood posts and blocks is permitted the affected areas shall be treated in accordance with the american w ood preservers association standard mnum .
w here wood posts with rectangular sections are used the posts shall be set so that the longest dimension is perpendicular to the rail .
all bolts shall extend beyond the nuts a minimum of two threads except that all bolts on posts adjacent to pedestrian traffic shall be cut off num inch from the nut .
all bolts shall be securely tightened unless torque requirements are specified on the plans or manufacturers drawings .
guardrail elements shall be spliced by lapping in the direction of traffic in the nearest adjacent lane .
w hen guardrail is being constructed or reconstructed under traffic the contractor shall conduct its operations so as to constitute the least hazard to the public and construction personnel .
traffic control shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num roadway guardrail guardrail posts shall be set to the line grade and spacing shown on the plans .
earthwork placement grading compacting and bituminous surfacing shall be completed prior to installation of the guardrail posts .
w ood posts shall be placed in prepunched or predrilled pilot holes and driven the final num inches to grade unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
steel posts shall either be driven full depth or placed in section num num manually or mechanically dug holes and driven the final num inches to grade .
prepunched post holes or full depth post driving shall not be used at locations where damage to the curb gutter sidewalk buried items shoulders or pavement might occur .
the engineer will be the sole judge as to whether driving of posts will be allowed .
driving of posts shall be accomplished in a manner which will prevent battering burring separation of the galvanizing from the steel or distortion of the post .
any post which is bent or otherwise damaged to the extent it is unfit for use in the unfinished work as determined by the engineer shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
w here curb gutter sidewalk buried items shoulders or pavement are disturbed in the construction of guardrail the damage shall be repaired as approved by the engineer .
w here the top surface of a box culvert is at an elevation which would interfere with full depth post placement the post shall be placed and anchored in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
w here the top surface of a culvert or other item is at an elevation which would interfere with full depth post placement the post shall be eliminated and nested steel w beam shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the space around and under the posts placed in manually or mechanically dug holes shall be backfilled with moist soils placed in compacted lifts as approved by the engineer .
w ood blocks shall be toenailed to the wood posts with one numpenny galvanized nail on each side of the top of the block .
blocks shall be set so that the top of the block is no more than num inch above or below the top of the post unless otherwise shown on the project plans .
rail elements shall be spliced at numfoot intervals or less .
rail elements shall be spliced at posts unless otherwise shown on the project plans .
rail elements at joints shall have full bearing .
w hen the radius of curvature is num feet or less the rail elements shall be shop curved .
num guardrail end anchors end anchors shall be installed in accordance with the plans .
foundation tubes shall be supplied as part of the end anchor .
foundation tubes shall be installed with an approved driving head .
the tubes shall not be driven with the wood post in place .
if approved by the engineer foundation tubes may also be installed in drilled holes .
w hen foundation tubes are placed in drilled holes the space around and under the tubes shall be backfilled with moist soils placed in compacted lifts as approved by the engineer .
the foundation tube shall not protrude more than four inches above the ground as measured along a five foot cord .
section num num num construct guardrail from salvage salvaged guardrail guardrail transitions end anchors and other guardrail systems shall be constructed at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the provisions specified herein for new construction .
if any salvaged materials are deemed by the engineer to be unsuitable for reuse or if the quantities of salvaged materials are insufficient to complete the work the contractor shall furnish new materials in sufficient quantities to complete the work and the cost of furnishing such materials will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
salvage foundation tubes for end anchors shall not be reused .
w here new bolt holes in rail elements are required the holes shall be made by drilling or punching .
flamecut bolt holes will not be permitted .
all metal cut in the field shall be cleaned and painted in accordance with section num .
num reconstruct guardrail existing guardrail guardrail transitions tangent and flared guardrail terminals end anchors and other guardrail systems shall be removed and reconstructed at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the provisions specified herein for new construction .
w hen reconstruct guardrail is specified posts shall be completely removed and then reconstructed .
w hen end anchors are removed the existing concrete foundation shall be fully removed and the hole backfilled with moist soil in compacted lifts as approved by the engineer .
all guardrail components requiring removal shall be removed in such a manner as to prevent damage to and minimize the loss of the components .
if any materials designated for reconstruction are deemed by the engineer to be unsuitable for reuse or if the quantities of existing materials are insufficient to complete the work the contractor shall furnish new materials in sufficient quantities to complete the work and the cost of furnishing such materials will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
reconstructed tangent and flared guardrail terminals and end anchors shall be installed with new foundation tubes .
items designated to be reused which are lost damaged or destroyed as a result of the contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
section num num existing posts blocks rail elements or hardware which are not required for guardrail reconstruction or which the engineer deems unsuitable for reconstruction shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the engineer .
w here new bolt holes in rail elements are permitted and approved by the engineer the holes shall be made by drilling or punching .
flamecut bolt holes will not be permitted .
all metal cut in the field shall be cleaned and painted in accordance with subsection num .
num bolted guardrail anchors bolted guardrail anchors shall consist of bolting two steel brackets to the shortened post and to the box culvert roof as shown on the plans .
w here the elevation of the top surface of a concrete box culvert or other similar installation prevents the placement of a post of the specified length the posts shall be shortened and anchored in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
w here fieldcutting or boring of wood posts or blocks is required the affected areas shall be treated in accordance with subsection num .
num rub rail rub rail shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num guardrail transitions guardrail transitions to concrete barriers shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num nested guardrail this work shall consist of furnishing and constructing nested guardrail type num num or num including all materials in accordance with the requirements of the project plans .
nested guardrail consists of additional steel w beam sections attached as an appurtenance to guardrail .
num tangent and flared guardrail terminals tangent and flared guardrail terminals shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers specifications and approved drawings .
w hen shown on the plans as alternatives all tangenttype or flaretype terminals shall be from the same manufacturer without mixing brands .
prior to starting work the contractor shall submit the current version of the manufacturers approved drawings and installation manuals for each type of guardrail terminal to be installed on the project .
in case of section num num discrepancy or conflict the current manufacturers specifications and approved drawings shall govern .
manufacturers dimensions relative to the finished surface shall be measured along a fivefoot cord .
earthwork placement grading compacting and bituminous surfacing shall be completed prior to installation of posts for guardrail terminals .
the contractor shall install the posts in a manner that prevents heaving or other damage to the surface material .
if the engineer determines that heaving or other damage has occurred the contractor shall remove and replace surface material at no additional cost to the department .
num guardrail delineation a general flexible guardrail markers shall be either lshaped ushaped for steel ibeam posts or tshaped delineators or flexible vertical delineators .
flexible lshaped ushaped and tshaped delineators shall be installed on the top of the posts and shall be placed as close as possible to the roadway edge of the post with the retroreflective surface facing oncoming traffic of the nearest traveled lane .
flexible vertical delineators shall be installed on the side of the post facing oncoming traffic level and true with the retroreflective sheeting num inches above the roadway surface .
w hen nails are used to secure delineation to the top of wood posts a minimum of two nails shall be driven at an angle to prevent the post from splitting .
sidemounted flexible vertical delineators shall be secured to wood posts with two numinch diameter by twoinch long galvanized lag screws and flat washers .
side mounted delineation shall be secured to metal posts by drilling two holes through the post and attaching with two galvanized numinch diameter by numinch long bolts flat washers and lock nuts .
the color of the retroreflective portion of the barrier markers and flexible delineators shall conform to the color of the adjacent edge line .
silverfaced guardrail reflector tabs shall be installed on the right hand side of all roadways and ramps .
yellowfaced tabs shall be installed on the lefthand side of oneway roadways and ramps .
field application of retroreflective sheeting will not be allowed .
the manufacturer shall apply all sheeting in the factory .
the contractor shall remove and replace damaged delineation at no additional cost to the department .
b guardrail delineation guardrail reflector tabs shall be installed on the w beam at every sixth post beginning with the post number shown in table num .
on radial sections of guardrail the reflector tabs shall be placed on the w beam at every other post .
section num num in addition to the guardrail reflector tabs flexible guardrail markers shall also be installed when the average project elevation as shown on the plans is greater than num feet .
flexible guardrail markers shall be installed on every numth guardrail post beginning with the post number shown in table num .
the slotted part of reflector tabs shall be installed under the guardrail bolt head with the reflector facing oncoming traffic .
the exposed ends of the slotted part of the tab shall be bent up against and then over the top of the bolt head .
c tangent and flared guardrail terminal delineation delineation for tangent and flared guardrail terminals shall be compatible with the average project elevation and traffic direction shown on the plans .
the contractor shall maintain consistency within the project limits by selecting the same type of delineation for all similar installations .
for tangent and flared guardrail terminals used on a project with an average elevation of less than num feet the contractor shall use either prismatic barrier markers lshaped or tshaped markers or flexible vertical delineators on the posts shown in table num .
for tangent and flared guardrail terminals used on a project with an average elevation of greater than num feet the contractor shall use either lshaped or tshaped markers or flexible vertical delineators on the posts shown in table num .
prismatic barrier markers shall not be used for projects greater than num feet in elevation .
w hen using lshaped or tshaped markers with the etplus in asphalt pavement areas or with the srtnum regardless of pavement surface the contractor shall substitute ushaped markers or flexible vertical delineators for steel ibeam posts for post number two regardless of project elevation .
the configuration of reflective sheeting object markers on the approach faces of the etplus sktnum and fleatnum shall conform to standard drawings .
the dimensions of the object marker decals for the approach faces of the fleatnum sktnum and etplus shall be modified as needed to fully cover the head configuration .
the configuration and type of reflective sheeting object markers on the departure sides of the etplus sktnum or fleatnum shall conform to standard drawings .
the configuration of reflective sheeting on the approach side of the srtnum endpiece shall consist of three diamond shapes each with side dimensions of four inches vertically stacked cornertocorner and placed in the center of the approach face .
section num num table num guardrail delineation post placement terminal type prismatic barrier marker post numbers begin reflector tabs and flexible markers w ith post number etplus or sktnum num num num num num srtnum or fleatnum num num num num flexible markers shall only be used for elevations num feet and above .
num method of measurement the limits of measurement for the various guardrail items are shown on the plans .
guardrail of the type shown on the project plans will be measured by the linear foot along the face of the rail element from center to center of end posts exclusive of tangent and flared guardrail terminals end anchors and guardrail transitions .
tangent and flared guardrail terminals will be measured by the unit each including all components and delineation required for a complete installation as shown on the plans and in the approved manufacturers drawing and installation manual .
guardrail end anchors will be measured by the unit each including delineation and all other components required for a complete installation as shown on the plans .
guardrail transitions will be measured by the unit each including delineation and all other components required for a complete installation as shown on the plans .
rub rail will be measured by the unit for each rail installed .
nested guardrail type num num or num installed as an appurtenance to new guardrail shall be measured by the linear foot of additional steel w beam attached to the guardrail w beam using guardrail hardware required for a complete installation as shown on the plans .
bolted anchors for guardrail will be measured by the unit for each post anchored as shown on the plans .
one unit will consist of the cut and fitted guardrail post brackets and hardware .
constructing the various types of guardrail guardrail transitions and end anchors from salvage will be measured by the linear foot or by the unit each using the limits of measurement specified for new construction .
reconstructing the various types of guardrail guardrail transitions section num num tangent and flared guardrail terminals and end anchors will be measured by the linear foot or by the unit each using the limits of measurement specified for new construction .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of guardrail measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the types of guardrail installation designated in the bidding schedule complete in place including all guardrail delineation excavation backfill and disposal of surplus material .
the accepted quantities of tangent and flared guardrail terminals measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including all components and delineation as required excavation backfill and disposal of surplus material .
the accepted quantities of guardrail end anchors measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including all guardrail components and delineation as required excavation backfill disposal of surplus material and installation of foundation tubes .
the accepted quantities of guardrail transitions to concrete barriers measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including guardrail posts blocks hardware terminal connection excavation backfill and disposal of surplus material .
concrete barrier that is constructed with a guardrail transition shall be measured and paid for in accordance with the requirements of section num for concrete barrier transition .
payment for furnishing and placing earthwork and surfacing material for pavement widening associated with new guardrail and at the flares of guardrail terminals will be measured and paid for under the respective contract items .
the accepted quantities of rub rail measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including rub rail back blockouts and hardware as required .
the accepted quantities of nested guardrail type num num or num attached to the guardrail w beam and measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place .
the accepted quantities of bolted guardrail anchors measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each and shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including steel brackets hardware excavation backfill removing and replacing surfacing cutting and fitting steel beam posts or timber posts drilling anchor bolt holes in steel posts timber posts and box culverts and disposal of surplus materials .
section num num the accepted quantities of construct guardrail guardrail transitions and end anchors from salvage or reconstruct guardrail guardrail transitions tangent and flared guardrail terminals and end anchors measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including all new guardrail delineation removal of existing delineation as necessary excavation backfill and disposal of surplus or unusable materials .
payment for reconstructing end anchors will include all costs for providing and installing new foundation tubes .
the contractor will be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection num for furnishing new posts blocks rail elements or hardware to replace components deemed by the engineer unsuitable for reuse or to supplement insufficient existing quantities for reconstructing the various types of guardrail or for constructing the various types of guardrail from salvage .
section num cattle guards num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing new cattle guards or reconstructing existing cattle guards at the locations shown on the project plans or designated by the engineer in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for class b concrete .
num steel reinforcing bars and structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num and section num respectively .
astm a num grade num steel may be used as an alternate to astm a num for the fabrication of cattle guard grill rails .
num fencing fence posts and braces shall conform to the requirements of sections num and num .
num backfill backfill material shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num wood section num num w ooden shims shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans .
num construction requirements excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
completed cattle guards shall be well drained .
cattle guards shall be castinplace or at the option of the contractor may be precast units .
a list of approved precast units may be found on the departments approved products list apl available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
the use of precast cattle guards shall be limited to roadway locations with maximum longitudinal grades of six percent .
precast units shall be installed to match the roadway centerline profile grade and the roadway crossslope .
cattle guards shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades established or shown on the project plans .
all fence and steel gates required shall be constructed as specified under section num or num as applicable .
painting of structural steel shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
structural steel shall be painted with one coat of primer paint no .
num in accordance with section num .
painting of fence posts and gates shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num or num as applicable .
existing cattle guards designated on the project plans for reconstruction shall be dismantled to the extent required and in such a manner as to preserve all materials or portions of the existing structure that are acceptable for use in the reconstructed structure .
all removed concrete shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of subsection numa .
cattle guards to be reconstructed shall be constructed as specified herein except that the materials required shall be salvaged to the extent possible from the existing cattle guards designated on the plans to be reconstructed or removed .
steel angles providing a bearing surface for each grille unit of a roadway cattle guard and wooden shims under railroad cattle guards shall be set to the required elevations with sufficient accuracy that no rocking under load of a grille unit or tread assembly can be observed and that no gap greater than num inch exists between any pair of bearing surfaces when the unit or assembly is not under load and is not spiked welded or otherwise held in place .
the fabrication and connections of grille units angle units and other section num num steel elements shall conform to the requirements of section num .
either hnum or hnum loading will be designated on the project plans .
num method of measurement cattle guard and reconstruct cattle guard will be measured as a unit for each structure .
cattle guards consisting of a different number of grille units different h loadings different widths or being new instead of reconstructed will be measured separately .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of cattle guards and reconstruct cattle guards measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including excavation structure backfill structural steel reinforcing steel grilles concrete painting wood shims and concrete slabs where required .
payment for fence or gates will be made as specified under section num or num except that posts and braces attached to the cattle guard shall be considered as included in the cost of the cattle guard .
section num dampproofing and waterproofing concrete surfaces num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and dampproofing concrete surfaces or waterproofing concrete structures and joints at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the requirements of the plans and these specifications .
num materials num general requirements the materials furnished by the contractor to dampproof or waterproof concrete structures as shown on the plans shall conform to the requirements of this section unless otherwise specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
all materials shall be delivered in the original packages bearing the manufacturers brand and label .
the manufacturers label andor the certificate of compliance shall state that the fabric has been saturated with asphalt .
fabrics saturated with coaltar pitch are not acceptable .
materials shall be delivered on the work site a sufficient time before section num num they are to be used to permit testing and analyzing if required by the engineer .
the fabric shall be stored in a dry place and the rolls shall not be stored on end .
num prime coats an asphalt primer conforming to the requirements of astm d num shall be used .
num mop coats an asphalt which conforms to the requirements of astm d num type iii shall be used for the mop coats .
num fabric the fabric shall be bituminized cotton fabric conforming to the requirements of astm d num .
the fabric shall be saturated with asphalt .
num construction requirements num general bituminous coats shall not be applied in wet weather nor when the ambient temperature is below num degrees f. concrete shall be dry and clean before the prime coat is applied .
if bituminous material is used for curing it may also serve as a priming coat except that additional primer may be necessary before application of the mop coat .
the material for mop coats shall be heated as necessary to aid application but not above num degrees f. the bitumen shall be heated in kettles equipped with armored thermometers and stirred frequently .
primer shall be allowed to cure properly before applying the mop coat .
the primer shall be applied without heating at the approximate rate of one gallon per num square feet of surface with a three or fourknot roofing brush .
if asphalt primer is too thick to allow easy brushing the material may be thinned by the addition of a small quantity of gasoline or naphtha .
w ork shall be so regulated that at the end of the day all fabric that has been applied will have received a mop coat .
concrete surfaces not to be dampproofed or waterproofed shall be protected from the spilling or otherwise marring of the surface with the bituminous materials .
num dampproofing section num num concrete surfaces to be dampproofed shall be given an asphalt primer and an asphalt mop coat .
each coat shall be applied uniformly fully covering the surface and shall be thoroughly worked into the surface .
after the primer has cured the mop coat shall be applied at the rate of approximately num pounds per num square feet of surface to obtain a thickness of approximately num inch for the dampproof coating .
w ithin the areas to be treated all expansion or construction joints that are not protected with metal seals and which will be covered with earth in the completed structure shall be protected with a single layer or strip of bituminized cotton fabric not less than num inches wide .
the fabric shall be laid evenly over the joints and in a fresh mopping of asphalt .
the fabric shall be pressed into place and shall be smooth and free of creases .
joints in the fabric shall lap num inches .
after placing the fabric shall be sealed with a mop coat .
sections dampproofed shall be protected against mechanical injury and high temperature as soon as possible after application and until final acceptance of the work .
num membrane waterproofing a surface preparation w aterproofing may be used in conjunction with slab protection sheet metal seals or other protective devices .
surfaces of concrete to be waterproofed shall be smooth and free from projections which might injure the waterproofing membrane .
the surfaces shall be cleaned of dust dirt grease and loose particles or any foreign substances and shall be dry prior to placing waterproofing .
the use of compressed air may be required in order to remove dust and loose dirt from corners and joints .
damp surfaces may be dried by covering with a layer of hot sand .
the sand shall remain in place one or two hours after which it shall be removed from enough surface to allow the work to proceed .
after the surfaces of concrete to be waterproofed have been thoroughly cleaned and prior to the first hot mop coat one coat of primer shall be applied .
the primer shall be thoroughly worked into the concrete to give a uniform coating .
b application of membrane two or threeply membrane waterproofing as specified on the project plans shall be applied after the primer has cured .
section num num twoply membrane waterproofing for the protection of footing construction joints or other designated areas shall consist of two layers of bituminized cotton fabric and three mop coats placed alternately over the concrete surface previously treated with one coat of primer .
threeply membrane waterproofing for the protection of decks and sides of structures or other designated areas shall consist of three layers of bituminized cotton fabric and four mop coats placed alternately over the concrete surface previously treated with one coat of primer .
the layers of the treated cotton fabric shall be laid so that all edges will lap at least two inches .
the line of lap shall in every case be broken with that of the preceding layer of membrane .
each strip shall be laid in a fresh hot mop coat and when the specified number of layers has been laid the entire surface shall be mopped .
if practicable the laying of the fabric shall begin at the lowest part of the surface to be waterproofed .
the surface shall be completely covered with a heavy mop coat before the strip of fabric is put down .
the mopping shall be so done that there will be no air bubbles pockets or spots where the surface shows through .
as soon as a strip of fabric has been laid it shall be pressed into the coat to eliminate air bubbles .
creases in the fabric shall be smoothed out carefully by pulling the fabric .
the top mopping shall be of such thickness and be so applied as to seal and cover the fabric completely .
w aterproofing shall be free from punctures pockets or folds .
special care shall be taken so that the fabric is completely sealed down at the laps .
the waterproofing membrane shall be continuous and unbroken .
at joints in the membrane the laps shall be at least num inches .
the fabric for making the lap shall be left unmopped until the joint is completed .
on horizontal surfaces not less than four gallons in each mop coat shall be used for each num square feet of surface and on vertical surfaces not less than five gallons in each mop coat shall be used for each num square feet of surface .
expansion and contraction joints shall be covered with membrane waterproofing as required by the plans .
sections waterproofed shall be protected against mechanical injury high temperature and chemical action as soon as possible after application and until final acceptance of the work .
num method of measurement the project plans will show the estimated quantity of surface area to be dampproofed andor waterproofed and the contractor shall assure itself section num num that this estimated quantity is substantially correct .
num basis of payment no direct payment will be made for dampproofing and w aterproofing concrete surfaces .
the cost of furnishing and applying all materials shall be considered as included in the contract price paid for concrete of the class treated .
section num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks and driveways num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing portland cement concrete curb curb and gutter ramp curb sidewalk sidewalk ramps driveways and valley gutters at the locations shown on the project plans in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete concrete shall be class b concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
num expansion joint filler expansion joint filler shall be numinch bituminous or nonbituminous preformed strips conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
num concrete curing compound curing compound shall be liquid membraneforming compound conforming to the requirements of aashto m num type i class a .
num detectable warning strip detectable warning strips shall consist of a prefabricated mat with truncated domes aligned in a square grid matrix on a flat substrate or other prefabricated materials meeting the requirements of the standard drawings .
detectable warning strips shall contrast visually with the sidewalk ramp and shall conform to the current requirements of the americans with disabilities act accessibility guidelines adaag .
detectable warning strips shall be prefabricated from durable material approved by the department .
all detectable warning strips installed within the project limits shall be the same type unless shown otherwise on plans or approved by the engineer .
section num num only those prefabricated detectable warning strips shown on the departments approved products list apl shall be used .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
num construction requirements the subgrade shall be constructed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades established or shown on the project plans .
prior to placing concrete curb curb and gutter driveway valley gutter sidewalk ramp or sidewalk the material on which they are to be placed shall be compacted to a depth of at least six inches to a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
all soft or unsuitable material shall be removed to a depth of not less than six inches below subgrade and replaced with material approved by the engineer .
single curb curb and gutter and sidewalk shall be constructed either by the use of conventional fixed forms or by slipform curb and sidewalk placing machines .
w eather and temperature limitations for the placement of concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
forms shall be maintained at all times in good condition as to accuracy of shape strength rigidity and smoothness of surface .
the depth of face forms for concrete curbs shall be equal to the full face height of the curb .
all other forms shall be set to form the full depth of all edges not formed by adjacent concrete .
forms unsatisfactory in any respect shall not be used .
forms shall be set in reasonably close conformity to the dimensions lines and grades shown on the project plans or established by the engineer and be securely staked in position .
clamps spreaders and braces shall be used where required to insure rigid forms .
w hen the roadway section slopes away from the gutter the slope of the gutter shall be formed to match the roadway cross slope .
the subgrade and forms shall be watered immediately in advance of placing concrete .
concrete shall be placed in the forms and thoroughly consolidated .
the concrete shall be consolidated by means of approved mechanical vibrators or by tamping or spading by hand .
the fresh concrete shall be struck off so the surface will be at the proper elevation when the concrete is consolidated .
concrete shall be section num num thoroughly worked so that the coarse aggregate is below the surface .
the surface shall then be finished to grade and crosssection with a float troweled smooth and then given a final fine brush finish .
the exposed edges shall be tooled to a numinch radius unless a larger radius is indicated on the plans .
w hen concrete placed in curb has set sufficiently so that it will not slump the front face form shall be removed .
the gutter front face and top of curb shall be troweled smooth and then given a final fine brush finish with brush strokes parallel to the lines of curb and gutter .
the exposed edges shall be tooled to a numinch radius .
expansion joints shall be constructed at tangent points of curb returns at structures and at a maximum of numfoot intervals .
expansion joints shall be constructed between sidewalks and driveways between sidewalks and abutting structures around poles posts boxes and other fixtures that protrude through the sidewalk .
expansion joints shall match as nearly as possible the joints in the adjacent pavement or existing concrete curb and sidewalk .
joint filler shall be placed vertically and extend full depth beginning num inch below the surface of the concrete being placed .
during the placing and tamping of concrete the filler shall be restrained in its proper position .
edges of the concrete at expansion joints shall be tooled to a num inch radius .
contraction joints weakenedplane joints shall be constructed at a maximum of numfoot intervals in curb and gutter and sidewalks and shall coincide with contraction joints in adjacent pavement or existing concrete curb and sidewalk .
a contraction joint shall be constructed along the center of driveway entrances num feet in width or greater .
longitudinal contraction joints shall be constructed in the center of sidewalk having a width greater than seven feet .
contraction joints shall either be formed or sawed .
formed contraction joints shall be constructed by parting the large aggregates in the fresh concrete with a straightedge to a depth of two inches .
the final joint finishing shall be accomplished with a jointer tool having a radius of num inch leaving a finished joint depth of a minimum of num inch .
sawed joints shall be sawed to a depth of two inches or onethird the thickness of the concrete whichever is greater .
scoring lines where required shall have a minimum depth of num inch and a radius of num inch .
w here longitudinal scoring lines are required they shall be parallel to or concentric with the lines of the work .
forms shall be thoroughly cleaned each time they are used and shall be coated with a light oil as required to prevent the concrete from adhering to them .
if slipform equipment is used to construct curb and gutter and sidewalk such equipment shall be designed specifically for the work .
section num num the results shall be equal to or better than that produced by the use of fixed forms .
if the results are not satisfactory to the engineer the use of the equipment shall be discontinued .
all applicable requirements of construction by use of fixed forms shall apply to the use of slipform equipment .
the slipform equipment shall be controlled as to line and grade by means of automatic sensing and control devices such that the machine automatically senses and follows either a taut guide line or other reference performing any necessary corrective maneuvers in order to establish the correct grade and alignment .
the contractor shall set the guide line from survey marks provided by the engineer .
immediately following the required finishing operations one or more applications of curing compound shall be applied to all exposed surfaces .
the curing compound shall be applied at the rate of not less than one gallon per num square feet of surface area and in such manner as to entirely cover and seal all exposed surfaces of concrete with a uniform film .
the surface of concrete sidewalk shall be tested with a numfoot straightedge .
any deviation in excess of num inch shall be corrected at no additional expense to the department .
the face top back and flow line of the curb and gutter shall be tested with a numfoot straightedge or curve template longitudinally along the surface .
any deviation in excess of num inch shall be corrected at no additional expense to the department .
no vehicular traffic will be allowed on driveways until the concrete has reached at least num percent of the required numday strength .
before acceptance of the work all curb and gutter and sidewalk shall be cleaned of all discolorations resulting from the contractors operations including but not limited to dirt stains bitumens and equipment tire marks .
cleaning may be by abrasive blast methods or by other methods approved by the engineer .
the top surface of detectable warning strips exclusive of the truncated domes shall be within num inch of the sidewalk ramp surface in accordance with the requirements of the adaag .
detectable warning strips shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers instructions and current industry practice .
in case of discrepancy the manufacturers instructions shall govern .
num method of measurement concrete single curb and curb and gutter will be measured by the linear section num num foot along the flow line .
lengths of depressed curb and depressed curb and gutter at driveway and sidewalk ramp locations will be included in the measurement .
lengths occupied by catch basins will be excluded from the measurement .
no measurement will be made for ramp curb .
concrete sidewalks driveways and valley gutter will be measured by the square foot of area constructed .
areas occupied by catch basins will be excluded from the measurement .
concrete sidewalk ramps of the type shown on the plans will be measured as a unit for each sidewalk ramp constructed including detectable warning strip .
the limits of measurement for the various sidewalk ramp types will be shown on the plans .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of concrete single curb curb and gutter valley gutter sidewalk and driveway measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot or square foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including furnishing and placing embankment material excavating removing unstable material backfilling and compacting .
the accepted quantities of sidewalk ramps measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including furnishing and placing embankment material excavating removing unsuitable material backfilling and compacting surface finishing and furnishing and installing the detectable warning strip .
no separate measurement or payment will be made for the ramp curb along the back edge or side of sidewalk ramps nor for the detectable warning strip the costs being considered as included in the price of contract items .
no separate payment will be made for the curb along the back edge of sidewalk connecting sidewalk ramps at an intersection the cost being considered as included in the price of contract items .
section num survey monuments num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and installing concrete monuments including cast iron frames and covers furnishing cast iron frames and covers or removing and resetting existing frames and covers at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete section num num concrete shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
the standard marker cap will be furnished by the department .
section line marker caps shall be furnished by the contractor and shall be stamped in accordance with manual of surveying instructions num published by the department of interior bureau of land management .
survey monuments shall be magnetically detectable .
num frames and covers frames and covers shall conform to the requirements of subsection num for gray iron castings .
the bearing face of the frame shall be machined so that the cover will lie flat in any position in the ring and have a uniform bearing throughout its entire circumference .
before leaving the foundry the frames and covers shall be thoroughly cleaned .
num construction requirements num survey monuments excavation for new monuments shall be the depths designated on the plans .
the monuments shall be backfilled with suitable material tamped into place to provide a stable and secure installation .
the concrete base cast iron frame bituminous mix and cover shall then be placed as detailed on the plans .
the frame and cover shall be installed in a manner similar to that required under subsection num .
num frames and covers new frames and covers shall be installed as specified under subsection num .
num reset frames and covers existing frames and covers to be reset shall be carefully removed and reset as specified under subsection num however at the contractors option and with approval of the engineer adjustable extension rings conforming to the requirements of subsection num may be used .
frames and covers broken or damaged in removing and resetting shall be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
num method of measurement survey monuments will be measured as a unit for each survey monument including frame and cover for each frame and cover or for each existing frame and cover removed and reset .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of survey monuments frame and cover for survey monument and reset frame and cover for survey monument section num num measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place including excavating and backfilling .
section num concrete barriers num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing portland cement concrete barriers at the locations shown on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials unless otherwise shown on the plans concrete shall be class s portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements of section num with a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch at num days .
reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
dowels shall be corrosion resistant coated dowel bars conforming to the requirements of aashto m num type a. grout for pressure grouting the joints of precast barrier shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
grout for the bedding of precast barrier shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
joint sealant barrier shall be latex sealing compound conforming to the requirements of astm c num applied as recommended in astm c num .
num construction requirements num general unless otherwise required by the project plans or special provisions concrete barrier shall be constructed by any of the following methods or combinations thereof at the contractors option a castinplace by slipform or extrusion b castinplace by fixed forms c precast concrete barriers shall present a smooth uniform appearance in their final position conforming to the horizontal and vertical lines shown on the project plans or ordered by the engineer .
section num num w hen concrete barriers are to be constructed on recently completed bridges the barriers shall be placed after falsework has been released and as long after superstructure construction as the progress of the work will permit unless otherwise ordered by the engineer .
concrete barriers and concrete barrier transitions which are constructed on bridge structures and retaining walls shall be constructed by castinplace fixedform methods .
precast or slipform methods will not be allowed .
w here concrete barrier is not placed on pavement the supporting material shall be shaped and finished in reasonably close conformity to the lines grades and dimensions established by the engineer or shown on the project plans .
the material shall be compacted to at least num percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with the requirements of the applicable test methods of the adot materials testing manual as directed and approved by the engineer .
all exposed surfaces shall be given a class ii finish in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
curing of concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
barrier markers shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num castinplace by slip form or extrusion a general concrete barriers constructed by using an extrusion machine or similar equipment shall be of well compacted dense concrete .
at the option of the contractor concrete may be made with materials continuously batched by volume and mixed in a continuous mixer in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num except that sampling testing and acceptance of the concrete will be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
the contractor may be required to furnish evidence of successful operation of the extrusion machine or other equipment .
slip form or extruded barrier will be considered not to require additional finishing if the surface meets the requirements of a class ii finish as described in subsection num and the alignment is satisfactory .
if the extruded barrier does not meet these requirements operations shall be stopped until adjustments are made to the equipment or the concrete mix that will result in an acceptable product .
barrier that can not be refinished to meet the specifications for a class ii finish shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
barrier that has unsatisfactory alignment and straightedge tolerance shall be penalized or replaced in accordance with these specifications .
section num num the concrete shall be vibrated rammed tamped or worked with suitable equipment until the concrete has been consolidated in order to eliminate voids such as honeycombed surfaces .
further the equipment shall be operated under sufficient uniform restraint to the forward motion to produce the required consolidation .
the concrete shall be of such consistency that after extrusion it will maintain the shape of the barrier without support .
the grade for the top of the concrete barrier shall be indicated by an offset guide line set by the contractor from survey marks established by the engineer .
the forming portion of the extrusion machine shall be readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine to conform to the predetermined grade line .
a grade line gauge or pointer shall be attached to the machine in such a manner that a continual comparison can be made between the barrier being placed and the established grade line as indicated by the offset guide line .
in lieu of the above method for maintaining the barrier grade the extrusion machine may be operated on rails or forms or on existing pavement .
b dimensional tolerances num the top of exposed faces of the barrier shall comply with the following tolerances to be accepted at num percent of the unit price bid per linear foot .
a w hen a numfoot long straightedge is placed on the top surface of the barrier it shall not vary by more than num inch from the straightedge .
b w hen a numfoot straightedge is placed along the face of the barrier it shall not vary by more than num inch from the straightedge .
c the horizontal alignment shall not deviate by more than that allowed in section num when placed adjacent to portland cement concrete pavement .
all other barrier dimensions shall not deviate by more than num inch from plan alignment .
num the top and exposed faces of the barrier shall comply with the following tolerances to be accepted at num percent of the unit price bid per linear foot .
a w hen a numfoot long straightedge is placed on the top surface of the barrier it shall not vary by more than num inch from the straightedge .
section num num b w hen a numfoot long straightedge is placed along the face of the barrier it shall not vary by more than num inch from the straightedge .
c the horizontal alignment shall not deviate by more than that allowed in section num when placed adjacent to portland cement concrete pavement .
all other barrier dimensions shall not deviate by more than num inch from plans alignment .
those portions of the barrier not in compliance with the minimum requirements specified herein to be accepted at num percent of the unit price shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
num castinplace by fixed forms concrete barrier castinplace with fixed forms shall be constructed and cured in accordance with the requirements of section num .
if new or like new metal or wood forms are used and it is apparent after the forms are stripped that special care has been taken to produce uniformly textured surfaces with pleasing appearance the engineer may waive the specified additional finishing to produce a class ii finish .
the barrier shall be cast in sections of the length shown on the project plans and the edges of the joints between sections shall be rounded to a numinch radius .
after the concrete has cured for seven days the joint shall be filled to a depth of at least one inch with joint sealant .
w hen a numfoot long straightedge is placed on the top and along the faces of the barrier the surface shall not vary more than num inch from the straightedge .
num precast precast concrete barrier shall be cast in accordance with the requirements of section num .
after precast barrier has been approved for use on the project no additional concrete finishing will be required .
should the finish of precast barrier be marred or damaged as a result of transporting or handling the engineer may reject it or allow refinishing .
if refinishing is allowed the resulting surface shall be of uniform texture and appearance and shall match the adjoining sections .
each section of barrier shall be set on a layer of fresh and plastic grout at least one inch deep so that grout is exuded for the full length on section num num both sides of the base when the section is set to the true line and grade .
after adjacent sections of barrier have been doweled and set firmly in final position the joint between them shall be filled with joint sealant to a depth of one inch up both sides but not across the top .
after the joint sealant has set firmly enough to withstand the grouting pressure grout shall be forced into the pressure grout hole until it flows from the top of the joint .
w hen a numfoot long straightedge is placed on the top and along the faces of the barrier the surface shall not vary more than num inch from the straightedge .
num method of measurement concrete barrier will be measured by the linear foot along the center line of its top surface .
the measurement of the total length of the concrete barrier will not include any part which is within a length as shown on the project plans as a guardrail transition as an impact attenuator or as part of the structure of a bridge and extending between the stations of the ends of the bridge wing walls on the same side of the roadway .
sections of concrete barrier that transition from one shape or type to another shape or type and concrete barrier for guardrail transition shall be measured by the unit each of concrete barrier transition that is not part of a structure .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of concrete barrier measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for any concrete barrier which is included as part of a bridge structure .
concrete barrier included as part of a bridge structure quantity will be paid for under the lump sum bridge item .
no measurement or direct payment will be made for barrier markers the cost being considered as included in the cost of the concrete barrier paid either by the linear foot or as part of a structure .
the accepted quantities of concrete barrier transition measured as provided above will be paid at the contract unit price per each which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including excavation backfill caissons structural concrete reinforcing steel anchors anchor assemblies and dowels .
guardrail attached to concrete barrier will be paid for in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
section num num section num rightofway markers num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and installing new rightofway markers including reference markers or removing and resetting existing rightofway markers at the locations shown on the project plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num concrete concrete shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
num steel steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for structural carbon steel .
num paint paint shall be of the types specified on the plans and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num construction requirements rightofway markers shall consist of a survey monument and a reference marker .
the survey monument shall be castinplace concrete with a standard marker cap .
the standard marker cap will be furnished by the department .
excavation for rightofway markers shall be to the dimensions shown on the plans .
concrete shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of section num and the standard marker set in the fresh concrete .
the rightofway markers and reference markers shall be set vertically in the ground .
the reference markers shall be painted and lettered as shown on the plans .
existing rightofway markers including reference markers designated for removal and resetting shall be carefully removed and reset at the new locations in the manner specified herein for rightofway markers .
if required the reset reference markers shall be painted as specified on the plans for new reference markers .
markers broken or damaged in removing and resetting shall be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
section num num num method of measurement rightofway markers will be measured as a unit for each marker including reference markers .
reset rightofway markers will be measured as a unit for each marker including reference marker removed and reset at the new location .
markers removed but not reset will not be included in the measurement .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of rightofway markers and reset rightofway markers measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place .
section num shotcrete num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and applying shotcrete on prepared surfaces at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
shotcrete shall be mortar or concrete conveyed through a hose and pneumatically applied using either the dry mix process or the wet mix process .
the dry mix process shall consist of thoroughly mixing a proportional combination of dry fine aggregate and portland cement conveying the mixture through a delivery hose to a special nozzle where water is added and mixed with the other materials immediately prior to its discharge from the nozzle .
the wet mix process shall consist of premixing by mechanical methods a proportional combination of portland cement aggregate and water required to produce mortar or concrete conveying the mortar or concrete through the delivery hose to the special nozzle where additional compressed air is added at the nozzle prior to its discharge .
num materials and equipment num portland cement and water portland cement and mixing water shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num aggregate a fine aggregate section num num fine aggregate shall conform to the requirements of subsection numb except that it shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num b coarse aggregate coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements of subsection numc except that it shall conform to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num admixtures admixtures may be used with the premixed mortar or the concrete and shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel bars or welded wire fabric shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num equipment equipment for use with the dry mix process shall be capable of metering the aggregatecement mixture into the delivery hose under close control and delivering a continuous smooth stream of uniformly mixed material at the proper velocity to the discharge nozzle .
the nozzle shall be equipped with a manually operated water ring for directing an even distribution of water through the fine aggregatecement mixture .
the water ring shall be capable of ready adjustment to vary the quantity of water .
equipment for use with the wet mix process shall be the pneumatic feed type however a positive displacement type may be used if permitted in writing by the engineer .
the pneumatic feed type shall be capable of discharging the premixed mortar accurately uniformly and continuously section num num through the delivery hose and to the gunning nozzle .
the nozzle shall be fitted with an air ring for injecting additional compressed air into the premixed material flow .
the size of the delivery hose shall be within the range of num to num inches .
num air supply the air compressor shall have ample capacity to furnish an adequate supply of clean dry air for maintaining sufficient nozzle velocity for all phases of the work while simultaneously operating a blow pipe for clearing away the rebound .
the air hose shall be equipped with a filter to prevent any oil or grease from contaminating the shotcrete .
a constant air pressure of not less than num pounds per square inch shall be maintained in the placing machine when using the dry mix process or at the nozzle when using the wet mix process and when the delivery hose length is num feet or less .
the pressure shall be increased at least five pounds per square inch for each additional num feet of hose or fraction thereof .
num construction requirements num proportioning and mixing a dry mix process dry mix material shall consist of one part portland cement to not more than four parts fine aggregate measured either by weight or by volume .
the fine aggregate shall contain not less than three percent nor more than six percent moisture by weight .
the cement and fine aggregate shall be thoroughly mixed before being charged into the delivery equipment .
if the contractor uses a drumtype mixer the mixing time shall be not less than one minute .
the mixed material shall be utilized promptly after mixing and any material that stands more than num minutes will be rejected and removed from the work site .
b wet mix process num premixed mortar premixed mortar shall consist of not less than num sacks of portland cement per cubic yard fine aggregate and water mixed to a desired consistency generally to a slump in the range of num to four inches .
the material may be mixed at a central mixing plant or at the project site .
if mixing is done at the project site the mixer shall be capable of thoroughly mixing the specified materials in sufficient quantity to maintain continuous placing of the mortar .
section num num num concrete unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the contractor shall determine the mix proportions and shall furnish concrete for pneumatic placement which contains a minimum of num pounds of portland cement per cubic yard of concrete and which attains a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch .
fine aggregate and coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the total mix shall contain by weight num to num percent coarse aggregate .
in no case shall the slump be greater than four inches .
if readymixed concrete is used it shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
num preparation of surfaces the surfaces on which shotcrete is to be placed shall be finely graded to the lines and grades shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
the surfaces shall be thoroughly compacted and shall be uniformly moistened so that water will not be drawn from the freshly placed shotcrete .
num forms and ground wires forms shall be of plywood sheathing or other suitable material and shall be true to line and grade and sufficiently rigid to resist deflection during placement of the shotcrete .
forms shall be constructed to permit the escape of air and rebound during the gunning operation .
ground or gauging wires shall be installed where necessary to establish the thicknesses surface planes and finish lines of the shotcrete .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement shall be as shown on the project plans and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num placement the velocity of the shotcrete as it leaves the nozzle shall be maintained uniform and at a rate approved by the engineer for the given job conditions .
the nozzle shall be held perpendicular to the working surface and at a proper distance generally between two and five feet to insure maximum compaction with minimum rebound of the shotcrete .
rebound or previously expended material in the shotcrete mix shall not be used in any portion of the work .
all rebound shall be removed prior to final set and before placement of the shotcrete on adjacent surfaces .
shotcrete shall not be applied during any precipitation which is of section num num sufficient intensity to cause the inplace shotcrete to run .
shotcrete shall not be applied during wind conditions that cause separation of the nozzle flow .
shotcrete shall not be applied when a descending ambient air temperature falls below num degrees f nor until an ascending air temperature rises above num degrees f. temperature shall be taken in the shade away from artificial heat .
num testing tests to determine the physical quality of the shotcrete will be performed by the engineer during the work as required .
the contractor shall prepare test panels and obtain cores as specified herein .
test panels at least num inches square and as thick as the structure being constructed but not less than three inches thick shall be prepared by gunning shotcrete mix into a frame which has been placed on a flat piece of plywood .
test panels shall be cured in the same manner as the production work as specified in subsection num .
the contractor shall obtain three cores from each test panel in accordance with arizona test method num .
the cores shall have a minimum diameter of three inches and a length to a diameter ratio ld of at least num .
the cores must be obtained under the observation of an adot representative .
the cut surfaces of the cores will be carefully examined for soundness and uniformity of the material and shall be free from laminations and sand pockets .
the three cores will be tested by the engineer for numday compressive strength in accordance with arizona test method num .
the cores shall have an average compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch unless otherwise specified on the plans .
num construction joints construction joints shall be tapered to a shallow edge form one inch thick over a width of one foot except where the joint will be subjected to compressive strength .
if such is the case square joints shall be constructed and special care taken to avoid or remove trapped rebound at the joint .
the entire joint shall be thoroughly cleaned and wetted prior to the application of additional shotcrete .
num finishing after the shotcrete has been placed as nearly as practicable to the required thickness and shape outlined by forms and ground wires the surface shall be checked with a straightedge and any low spots or depression shall be brought up to proper grade by placing additional shotcrete in such a manner that the finished surface shall be smooth section num num and uniform .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the surface of the shotcrete shall have a natural gun finish .
num curing the shotcrete surfaces shall be kept continuously moist for at least seven days beginning immediately after finishing by means of either a water spray or fog system capable of being applied continuously or by liquid membraneforming compound or by polyethylene sheeting conforming to the requirements specified in astm c num .
if polyethylene sheeting is used it shall be white opaque and adjoining sheets shall overlap at least num inches and the laps secured to provide an airtight and windproof joint .
if liquid membraneforming compound is used it shall be type i conforming to the requirements of astm c num and the application rate shall be one gallon per num square feet .
num method of measurement shotcrete will be measured by the square yard of surface areas placed to the required thickness .
no measurement will be made of unexposed surfaces such as support slabs at joints integral curb faces or cutoff walls .
num basis of payment payment for shotcrete will be made at the contract unit price per square yard complete in place including excavating backfilling fine grading and reinforcement .
section num bank protection num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing bank protection in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
bank protection shall be dumped riprap grouted riprap wire tied riprap riprap in wire baskets or gabions and other types of bank protection and shall be constructed at the locations and as shown on the project plans .
num materials num rock section num num a general rock shall be sound and durable free from clay or shale seams cracks or other structural defects .
the bulk ssd specific gravity of the rock shall be a minimum of num as determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num modified to specify that testing shall be performed on threeinch maximum to plus no .
num size material .
if required by the engineer the contractor shall break an adequate amount of rock down to threeinch maximum size particles for performance of the necessary testing .
rock used to construct dumped riprap shall be angular in shape .
rock used to construct other types of bank protection may be rounded stones or boulders .
rock shall have a least dimension not less than onethird of its greatest dimension and a gradation in reasonable conformity with that shown herein for the various types of bank protection .
control of the gradation will be by visual inspection .
w hen a source of rock is designated it shall be the contractors responsibility to negotiate for the material obtain the rightofway and pay all royalties and damages .
the acceptability of the rock will be determined by the engineer by visual inspection andor testing .
if testing is required suitable samples of rock shall be taken in the presence of the engineer at least num days in advance of its expected use .
the approval of some rock fragments from a particular quarry site shall not be construed as constituting the approval of all rock fragments taken from that quarry .
during construction of the bank protection the contractor shall provide two samples of rock for the intended use .
the size of each sample for dumped riprap and riprap slope mattress shall be at least five tons .
the size of each sample for grouted riprap wire tied riprap gabions and rail bank protection shall be at least num pounds .
one sample shall be provided at the construction site and may be a part of the finished bank protection .
the other sample shall be provided at the quarry .
these samples will be used as a frequent reference for judging the gradation of the rock supplied .
any difference of opinion between the engineer and the contractor shall be resolved by checking the gradation of two random samples of the rock .
material that is deemed unsatisfactory by the engineer shall be replaced with acceptable material at no additional cost to the department .
b grouted riprap gradation of the rock for grouted riprap shall be as specified in the special provisions or as shown on the project plans .
c wire tied riprap section num num rock for wire tied riprap shall be well graded with at least num percent exceeding the least dimension of the wire mesh opening .
the maximum size rock measured normal to the mat shall not exceed the mat thickness .
d dumped riprap gradation of the rock for dumped riprap shall be as shown on the project plans or as specified in the special provisions .
mechanical equipment a sorting site and labor needed to assist in checking gradation shall be provided by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
e gabions rock for gabions shall be well graded varying in size from four to eight inches .
f riprap slope mattress rock for slope mattress shall be well graded with num percent exceeding three inches .
the maximum dimension of a single rock shall not exceed the least dimension of the gabion .
broken concrete may be used upon approval of the engineer .
g rail bank protection rock used to construct rail bank protection shall be well graded varying in size from four to num inches .
num metal items a wire fabric w elded wire fabric shall be galvanized and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except that the minimum weight of the zinc coating shall be num ounces per square foot of actual surface .
w oven wire fabric shall be galvanized and shall conform to the requirements of astm a num except that the minimum weight of the zinc coating shall conform to the requirements of astm a num class num .
w ire fabric shall be of the diameter spacing pattern and dimensions shown on the plans .
the selvage on each sheet of mesh shall be galvanized steel wire with a minimum diameter num percent larger than that used in the body of the mesh .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
section num num b miscellaneous fittings and hardware miscellaneous fittings and hardware shall be of the type and size provided by the manufacturer of the major item to which they apply and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
c tie wires tie wires shall be of good commercial quality and the size shall be as shown on the project plans except that the minimum weight of the zinc coating shall conform to the requirements of astm a num class num .
at the option of the contractor approved wire fasteners may be used on gabions slope mattresses or wire fabric in lieu of tie wires .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
d steel cable steel cable shall be zinccoated steel structural wire rope conforming to the requirements of astm a num sevenwire strand class a for the diameter shown on the plans .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
e railroad rail railroad rails may be new or used .
if used rails are furnished they shall be free from rust and equal to at least num percent of the original section .
f soil anchor stakes soil anchor stakes shall be steel and of the length called for on the plans .
w hen not specified to be railroad rails the following items may be used crane rails with a weight of at least num pounds per linear foot twoinch diameter steel pipe conforming to the requirements of astm a num or numinch by numinch by numinch structural steel angles conforming to the requirements of astm a num .
used rails pipe or angles may be used provided the material is not rusted or damaged to the extent that the strength of the item is reduced to less than num percent of a new item of the same type and size .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
section num num num bedding material bedding material shall consist of granular material having a maximum dimension of two inches and shall be free of clay or organic material .
num grout grout shall consist of one part portland cement three parts fine aggregate and onefifth part hydrated lime by volume .
these materials shall be thoroughly dry mixed and sufficient water shall be added to provide a mixture of thick workable consistency .
portland cement fine aggregate and water shall conform to the requirements of section num .
hydrated lime shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type n. grout that has been mixed more than one hour shall not be used .
retempering of grout will not be permitted .
num bank protection fabric fabric shall be supplied in accordance with and conform to the material requirements of subsections num and num respectively .
special attention shall be given to the required survivability of the fabric .
the identification packaging handling and storage of the geotextile fabric shall be in accordance with astm d num .
fabric rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping for protection against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient to determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacture shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
rolls will be stored on the site or at another identified storage location in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof light colored opaque cover .
at no time shall the fabric be exposed to sunlight for a period exceeding num days .
num sacked concrete sacked concrete shall be utility concrete conforming to the requirements of section num except that the minimum cement content shall be num pounds per cubic yard the slump shall be from three to five inches and the aggregate shall conform to the following gradation when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num section num num sieve size percent passing num inch num num inch num no .
num num sacks for sacked concrete riprap shall be made of at least aashto m num class num burlap and shall be approximately num by num inches measured inside the seams when the sack is laid flat with an approximate capacity of num cubic feet .
sound reclaimed sacks may be used .
num construction requirements num general areas on which bank protection is to be constructed shall be cleared grubbed and excavated or backfilled in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate sections of division ii to produce a ground surface in reasonable conformance with the lines and grades shown on the project plans or established by the engineer .
placement through water will not be permitted unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
areas which are excavated for installation of rail bank protection shall be backfilled to original ground or to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
num bank protection fabric w hen fabric is required it shall be placed in the manner and at the locations shown on the project plans .
the surface to receive the fabric shall be free of obstructions depressions and debris .
the fabric shall be loosely laid and not placed in a stretched condition .
the strips shall be placed to provide a minimum num inches of overlap for each joint .
on horizontal joints the uphill strip shall overlap the downhill strip .
on vertical joints the upstream strip shall overlap the downstream strip .
the fabric shall be protected at all times during construction from extensive exposure to sunlight .
w hen the maximum size of the rock to be placed on fabric exceeds num inches the fabric shall be protected during the placement of the rock by a layer of bedding material .
the bedding material shall be spread uniformly on the fabric to a depth of four inches and shall be free of mounds dips or windrows .
compaction of the bedding material will not be required .
rock shall be carefully placed on the bedding material and fabric in such a manner as not to damage the fabric .
if in the opinion of the section num num engineer the fabric is damaged or displaced to the extent that it can not function as intended the contractor shall remove the rock regrade the area if necessary and replace the fabric .
num dumped riprap the rock shall be placed to its specified thickness in one operation and in a manner which will produce a reasonably well graded mass with a minimum amount of voids and with the larger rock evenly distributed throughout the mass .
no method of placing the rock that will cause segregation will be allowed .
hand placing or rearranging of individual rock may be necessary to obtain the specified results .
num wiretied riprap after installation of the lower portion of the wire mesh rock shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
after placement of the rock the upper portion of the wire mesh shall be placed laced and tied in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
num grouted riprap rock for grouted riprap shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the stones shall be thoroughly moistened and any excess of fines shall be sluiced to the underside of the stone blanket before grouting .
the grout may be delivered to the place of final deposit by any means that will insure uniformity and prevent segregation of the grout .
if penetration of grout is not obtained by gravity flow into the interstices the grout shall be spaded or rodded to completely fill the voids in the stone blanket .
pressure grouting shall not unseat the stones and during placing by this method the grout shall be spaded or rodded into the voids .
penetration of the grout shall be to the depth specified on the project plans .
w hen a rough surface is specified stone shall be brushed until from num to num percent of the depth of the maximum size stone is exposed .
for a smooth surface grout shall fill the interstices to within num inch of the surface .
grout shall not be placed when the descending air temperature falls below num degrees f nor until the ascending air temperature rises above num degrees f. temperatures shall be taken in the shade away from artificial heat .
curing of the grout shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num num subsection num .
at the option of the contractor shotcrete conforming to the requirements of section num may be furnished in lieu of grout .
num slope mattress riprap the mattress bed shall be excavated to the width line and grade as shown on the plans .
the mattress shall be founded on this bed and laid to the lines and dimensions required .
excavation for toe or cutoff walls shall be made to the neat lines of the wall .
mattresses shall be fabricated in such a manner that the sides ends lid and diaphragms can be assembled at the construction site into rectangular units of the specified sizes .
mattresses are to be of single unit construction the base ends and sides either to be woven into a single unit or one edge of these members connected to the base section of the unit in such a manner that strength and flexibility at the point of connection is at least equal to that of the mesh .
all perimeter edges of the mattresses are to be securely selvaged or bound so that the joints formed by tying the selvages have at least the same strength as the body of the mesh .
mattresses shall be placed to conform with the details shown on the project plans .
stone shall be placed in close contact within the unit so that maximum fill is obtained .
the units may be filled by machine with sufficient hand work to accomplish the requirements of this specification .
broken concrete shall not be used in slope mattresses .
before the mattress units are filled the longitudinal and lateral edge surfaces of adjoining units shall be tightly connected by means of wire ties placed every four inches or by a spiral tie having a complete loop every four inches .
the lid edges of each unit shall be connected in a similar manner to adjacent units .
the slope mattress shall be anchored as shown on the project plans .
each anchor stake shall be fastened to the cover mesh with a tie wire .
num gabions the gabion bed shall be excavated to the width line and grade as shown on the plans .
the gabions shall be founded on this bed and laid to the lines and dimensions required .
excavation for toe or cutoff walls shall be made to the neat lines of the wall .
section num num gabions shall be fabricated in such a manner that the sides ends lid and diaphragms can be assembled at the construction site into rectangular units of the specified sizes .
gabions are to be of single unit construction the base ends and sides either to be woven into a single unit or one edge of these members connected to the base section of the unit in such a manner that strength and flexibility at the point of connection is at least equal to that of the mesh .
w here the length of the gabion exceeds its horizontal width the gabion is to be equally divided by diaphragms of the same mesh and diameter as the body of the gabions into cells whose length does not exceed the horizontal width .
the gabion shall be furnished with the necessary diaphragms secured in proper position on the base section in such a manner that no additional tying at this juncture will be necessary .
all perimeter edges of gabions are to be securely selvaged or bound so that the joints formed by tying the selvages have at least the same strength as the body of the mesh .
gabions shall be placed to conform with the project plan details .
stone shall be placed in close contact in the unit so that maximum fill is obtained .
the units may be filled by machine with sufficient hand work to accomplish requirements of this specification .
the exposed face or faces shall be handplaced using selected stones to prevent bulging of the gabion cell and to improve appearance .
each cell shall be filled in three lifts .
two connecting tie wires shall be placed as shown on the project plans between each lift in each cell .
care shall be taken to protect the vertical panels and diaphragms from being bent during filling operations .
the last lift of stone in each cell shall be level with the top of the gabion in order to properly close the lid and provide an even surface for the next course .
all gabion units shall be tied together each to its neighbor along all contacting edges in order to form a continuous connecting structure .
empty gabions stacked on filled gabions shall be laced to the filled gabion at the front side and back .
num sacked concrete riprap the sacks shall be filled with concrete loosely packed so as to leave room for folding or tying at the top .
approximately one cubic foot of concrete shall be placed in each sack .
immediately after filling the sacks shall be placed according to the details shown on the project plans and lightly trampled to cause them to conform with the earth face and with adjacent sacks in place .
section num num the first two courses shall provide a foundation of double thickness .
the first foundation course shall consist of a double row of stretchers laid level and adjacent to each other in a neatly trimmed trench .
the trench shall be cut back into the slope a sufficient distance to enable proper subsequent placement of the riprap .
the second foundation course shall consist of a row of headers placed directly above the double row of stretchers .
the third and remaining courses shall consist of a double row of stretchers and shall be placed in such a manner that joints in succeeding courses are staggered .
all dirt and debris shall be removed from the top of the sacks before the next course is laid thereon .
stretchers shall be placed so that the folded ends will not be adjacent .
headers shall be placed with the folds toward the earth face .
not more than four vertical courses of sacks shall be placed in any tier until initial set has taken place in the first course of any such tier .
w hen there will not be proper bearing or bond for the concrete because of delays in placing succeeding layers of sacks a small trench shall be excavated back of the row of sacks already in place and the trench shall be filled with fresh concrete before the next layer of sacks is laid .
the size of the trench and the concrete used for this purpose shall be approved by the engineer .
the engineer may require header courses at any level to provide additional stability to the riprap .
sacked concrete riprap shall be cured by being covered with a blanket of wet earth or by being sprinkled with a fine spray of water every two hours during the daytime for a period of four days .
num rail bank protection excavation where required for rock fill shall be performed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades established or shown on the plans .
rails shall be driven at the locations and to the minimum penetrations shown on the plans .
driving equipment shall be capable of developing sufficient energy to drive the rails to the specified minimum penetration and be approved by the engineer .
if hard material is encountered during driving before minimum penetration is reached and it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that additional attempts at driving would result in damage to the rails the engineer may order additional work to be performed such as jetting or drilling in order that minimum penetration may be obtained or the engineer may order the minimum penetration to be reduced as required by the conditions encountered .
w ire fabric shall be securely fastened to the rails placed in the trenches and laid on the slopes .
the rock backfill shall then be carefully placed so as not to displace the wire fabric or rails .
the wire fabric shall entirely enclose the rock backfill .
section num num the completed rock fill shall be backfilled as necessary and the waste material disposed of as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement riprap except gabions and sacked concrete will be measured by the cubic yard of protection constructed by computing the surface area measured parallel to the protection surface and the total thickness of the riprap measured normal to the protection surface .
riprap gabions will be measured by the cubic yard by computing the volume of the rockfilled wire baskets used .
riprap sacked concrete will be measured by the cubic yard of concrete placed in the completed work .
the measurement will be based on mixer volumes .
rail bank protection will be measured by the linear foot .
measurement will be made from top of rail to top of rail longest rail where rails of two or more lengths are used and the distance measured will be from end rail to end rail .
w here two parallel rows of vertical rails are used the measurement for payment will be the average of the distance along the two rows .
rail bank protection will be measured along the bank protection control line from end rail to end rail .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of riprap and rail bank protection measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard or linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place including excavation preparing the ground area furnishing and installing the rock filter fabric bedding material metal items concrete sacks and grout and backfilling as required .
materials labor and equipment necessary to perform additional work such as jetting or drilling as specified under subsection num will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
section num walls and miscellaneous structures num description the work under this section consists of furnishing all materials and constructing walls and miscellaneous structures at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
num materials section num num concrete shall be class s and of the compressive strength shown on the project plans .
concrete and reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of sections num and num respectively .
masonry materials shall conform to the requirements specified on the project plans .
num construction requirements rustication color coating or other wall treatments shall be in accordance with the details shown on the project plans or as specified in the special provisions .
excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num method of measurement measurement of this work will be made by the square foot of wall constructed and will be measured along the front face of the wall from the top of footing to the top of wall cap .
num basis of payment payment for this work will be made at the contract price per square foot which price shall be full compensation for the item complete including necessary excavation footings backfilling rustication and color coating as described herein and on the project plans .
section num temporary silt fence num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing installing maintaining and removing a geotextile barrierfence designed to remove suspended particles from the water passing through it .
the temporary silt fence shall be installed in accordance with the details and at the locations as shown on the project plans .
the installation shall be in accordance with the requirements of these specifications except as otherwise directed or approved by the engineer .
the quantity of temporary silt fence to be installed will be affected by the actual conditions which occur during the construction of the project .
num materials num geotextile fabric the silt fence geotextile fabric shall be supplied in accordance with the section num num material requirements of sections num and num .
this specification provides criteria for wire supported geotextile silt fence as well as a self supporting geotextile silt fence .
num fabric packaging handling and storage the identification packaging handling and storage of the geotextile fabric shall be in accordance with astm d num .
fabric rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping for protection against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled or tagged to provide product identification sufficient to determine the product type manufacturer quantity lot number roll number date of manufacture shipping date and the project number and name to which it is assigned .
rolls will be stored on the site or at another identified storage location in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof light colored opaque cover .
num posts posts shall be a minimum of three feet plus the burial depth in length and may be made of either wood or steel .
soft wood posts shall be at least three inches in diameter or nominal twoinch by fourinch and straight enough to provide a fence without noticeable misalignment .
if oak posts are used the size may be reduced to num by num inches with a minus tolerance of num inch provided that the cross sectional area is a minimum of num square inches .
steel posts shall have a minimum weight of num pounds per foot and have projections for fastening the wire and fabric to the fence .
num wire support fence w ire support fence shall be a minimum of num inches high and shall be num gauge steel wire mesh .
num fasteners for wooden posts w ire staples shall be no .
num gauge and shall have a crown at least numinch wide and legs at least numinch long .
staples shall be evenly spaced with at least five per post .
nails shall be num gauge one inch long with numinch button heads .
nails shall be evenly spaced with at least four per post .
num construction requirements num silt fence installation the contractor shall install a temporary silt fence as shown on the plans and at other locations as directed or approved by the engineer .
section num num fence construction shall be adequate to handle the stress from sediment loading .
geotextile at the bottom of the fence shall be buried a minimum of six inches in a trench so that no flow can pass under the barrier .
the trench shall be backfilled and the soil compacted over the geotextile .
fence height shall be as specified by the engineer but in no case shall exceed num inches above ground surface .
num post installation posts shall be set a minimum of num inches into the ground and spaced a maximum of six feet apart .
w here an numinch post depth is impossible to achieve the posts should be adequately secured to prevent overturning of the fence due to sediment loading and ponding pressure .
num wire support fence w hen wire support fence is used the wire mesh shall be fastened securely to the upstream side of the post .
the wire shall extend into the trench a minimum of two inches and extend a minimum of num inches above the original ground surface .
num geotextile fabric post attachment the geotextile fabric shall be attached on the upstream side of the posts by wire cord button head nails pockets staples or other acceptable means .
the geotextile fabric shall be installed in such a manner that eight to ten inches of fabric is left at the bottom to be buried .
the fabric shall be installed in the trench such that six inches of fabric is against the side of the trench and two to four inches of fabric is across the bottom of the trench in the upstream direction .
the trench shall then be backfilled and compacted so that no flow can pass under the barrier .
a minimum overlap of num inches shall be provided at all splice joints with posts at the ends of each fabric roll .
at the time of installation the fabric will be rejected if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation storage or installation .
num maintenance requirements num silt fence maintenance the contractor shall be responsible to maintain the integrity of silt fences as long as necessary to contain sediment runoff in accordance with subsection num or as directed by the engineer .
num sediment deposit removal sediment deposits shall be removed when the deposit reaches section num num approximately onehalf the height of the silt fence .
the engineer may also direct the contractor to install an additional silt fence .
num fence removal the silt fence shall remain in place until the engineer directs that it be removed .
upon removal the contractor shall remove and dispose of any excess silt accumulations grade the area to leave a generally smooth appearance and plant vegetation in the areas specified in the contract documents .
the fence materials will remain the property of the contractor and may be used at other locations provided the materials are in a condition acceptable to the engineer .
num method of measurement temporary silt fence will be measured per linear foot .
no allowance will be made for extra material used in overlapping at splice joints .
removal of sediment will be measured by the cubic yard .
num basis of payment the accepted quantity of temporary silt fence measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place including all labor materials and equipment connected with placing the temporary silt fence as shown on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
no payment will be made for rejected temporary silt fence or for patching due to contamination or damage by the contractor .
the removal of sediment will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard including the removal and disposal of silt accumulations as provided for in the special provisions and the erosion control plan for the project .
section num embankment curb num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing portland cement concrete embankment curbs at the locations shown on the project plans or otherwise designated in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials portland cement water and admixtures shall conform to the requirements of section num for class b concrete except that the numday compressive strength requirement shall be eliminated .
section num num fine aggregate and coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the designated size of coarse aggregate shall be no .
num no .
num or no .
num .
at the option of the contractor aggregate conforming to the requirements for aggregate base class num as shown in table num may be furnished .
the contractor may add additional fine aggregate to the aggregate for the curb in order to facilitate finishing .
fine aggregate for this purpose shall be nonplastic and shall conform to the following grading requirements sieve size passing percent no .
num num no .
num num fine aggregate added for this purpose shall not exceed num percent of the total aggregate for the concrete curb .
liquid membraneforming compound shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num type i class a .
num construction requirements the contractor shall be responsible for furnishing the various ingredients and for proportioning and mixing them however approval of the proposed materials and proportioning and mixing shall be obtained prior to any concrete operations .
no field tests will be required on the concrete mixture .
the requirements for mixing and placing concrete in cold weather shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
there is no maximum temperature limitation on the concrete mixture immediately before placement .
embankment curb shall be constructed either by the use of conventional fixed forms or by slipform curb placing machines .
the surface on which the curbs are to be placed shall be cleaned of all loose dirt and debris prior to placing .
the work shall be performed so as not to mar the roadway surface .
if slipform equipment is used to construct embankment curb such equipment shall be designed specifically for the work .
the slipform machine shall be capable of producing curb equal to or better than that produced by the use of fixed forms .
if the curb produced by such machines is not acceptable the use of such machines shall be terminated .
curbs shall present a neat appearance .
the finish normally associated with the use of slipform curb placing machines including the use of moveable forms will be considered as acceptable for the finishing of section num num concrete embankment curb .
w hen bituminous material is being applied to the adjacent roadway curbs shall be protected so that they are not spattered or discolored .
embankment curb shall be cured by the application of liquid membraneforming compound .
the time at which it is to be applied and the rate of application shall be approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement embankment curb will be measured by the linear foot of curb placed .
lengths occupied by spillway inlets will be excluded from the measurement .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of embankment curb measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot complete in place .
section num embankment spillways embankment downdrains inlets and outlets num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials and constructing embankment spillways embankment downdrains inlets and outlets at the locations designated on the project plans and in accordance with the details shown on the plans and the requirements of these specifications .
num materials certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
concrete shall be class b portland cement concrete conforming to the requirements of section num .
w elded wire fabric and wire ties shall conform to the requirements of section num .
steel bars for reinforcing anchor stakes and trash racks shall conform to the requirements of section num .
miscellaneous structural steel shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num .
corrugated metal pipe shall conform to the requirements of section num and shall be fabricated with circumferential corrugations .
section num num preformed bituminous joint filler shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num construction requirements num general embankment slopes and existing ground at outlets shall be excavated in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
backfill shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of subsection num for embankment .
num concrete concrete spillways inlets and outlets shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
reinforcing with wire mesh or steel bars where shown on the plans shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
concrete surfaces shall be protected from discoloration .
preformed bituminous joint material shall be placed around timber guardrail posts imbedded in concrete .
num metal each separate downdrain installation shall be assembled from one type of pipe only .
steel and aluminum shall not be used in the same installation .
corrugated metal pipe utilized in construction of downdrains shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num .
num method of measurement num embankment spillways and embankment downdrains embankment spillways and embankment downdrains will be measured by the linear foot along the slope at the center line of the spillway and along the metal downdrain parallel to the center line of the pipe .
num inlets and outlets inlets and outlets will be measured as a unit for each installation of the type specified .
section num num trash racks will not be measured for separate payment but will be considered as included in the price bid for inlets .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of embankment spillways embankment downdrains inlets and outlets measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price complete in place including excavating and backfilling .
section num turnout construction num description the work under this section consists of all necessary surface preparation and the placing spreading shaping and finishing of base material asphaltic concrete asphaltic concrete friction course or bituminous treatments as appropriate for turnouts which are not shown on the project plans or on typical sections but which generally conform to and are essentially limited by the details shown on the plans .
num blank num construction requirements all materials shall be placed spread shaped compacted and finished in accordance with the construction requirements of the specifications for the specific material .
num method of measurement measurement will be made by the square yard and each turnout will be measured to the nearest square yard however when surface preparation or a material application is required more than once in the same area measurement for payment will be made only once of any such area .
num basis of payment payment will be made at the contract unit price per square yard which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as described and specified herein .
payment for furnishing the various materials will be made under the respective contract items .
no payment will be made for turnouts which are shown on the project plans or on typical sections from which dimensions can be taken or can readily be determined .
section num num section num concrete gore paving num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing aggregate base joint filler and portland cement concrete and constructing gore pavement at the locations and in accordance with the detailed requirements shown on the plans and in the specifications .
num materials num portland cement concrete portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num for class s concrete .
num aggregate base aggregate base shall conform to the requirements of subsection num for any of the classes specified therein .
num joint filler joint filler shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num curing compound curing shall be accomplished by any of the methods specified in subsection numg except that any method that may permanently discolor concrete shall not be used .
num construction requirements w here material is to be placed on the existing ground surface or surface or existing subgrade to bring it up to the surface on which the aggregate base material is to be placed the work shall be in conformance with the requirements of subsection num .
aggregate base shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of subsection num except that the final surface need not be fine graded or finished with a leveling device .
finish on the concrete slab shall be a transverse coarse broom finish .
concrete shall be placed and consolidated in accordance with the requirements of subsection numd .
num method of measurement quantities of concrete gore paving will be measured by the square yard and will be calculated on the basis of the dimensions shown on the project plans .
section num num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of concrete gore paving measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the price shall include full compensation for the work complete in place including furnishing and placing all needed aggregate base portland cement concrete joint filler and curing compound and all incidental excavation except such excavation of roadway material as is to be paid for as part of the construction of the roadway subgrade on which the aggregate base is to be placed .
section num num blank section num utility concrete for miscellaneous construction num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials mixing and placing portland cement concrete for post foundations and anchors for barrier fences line fences chain link fences and miscellaneous signs concrete foundations for depth gauges at fords concrete for rightofway markers and survey monuments concrete rings at ground surface for irrigation valves and gates concrete fill at the base of electrical pull boxes and for similar uses as specified on the project plans or in the special provisions .
num materials portland cement water admixture fine aggregate and coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the coarse aggregate size designation shall be chosen by the contractor and be approved by the engineer and shall conform to the size designation and gradation requirements of aashto m num .
num construction requirements the engineer will inspect and approve the facilities materials and methods for producing the concrete to insure that concrete of the quality suitable for use in the work will be obtained .
mixing and placing of the concrete shall conform to the requirements of recognized practice .
concrete may be mixed in mobile mixers upon approval of the engineer .
mixing and placing concrete in cold weather shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
there is no maximum temperature limitation for the concrete mixture immediately prior to placement .
section num num the minimum cement content per cubic yard of concrete shall be num pounds .
if approved by the engineer the contractor may substitute commercially available sacks of redimix concrete suitable for the intended purpose .
should such substitution be approved the cement content specified herein and the requirements of subsection num shall not apply all exposed concrete shall be finished to a smooth surface .
num method of measurement no measurement will be made of the concrete used .
num basis of payment no direct payment will be made for furnishing and placing utility concrete .
the cost will be considered as included in the price bid for the item of work in which the concrete is incorporated .
section num num blank section num construction surveying and layout num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing all materials personnel and equipment necessary to perform all surveying staking establishment of all pit boundaries laying out of haul roads and verification of the accuracy of all existing control points which have been provided by the department .
the control point verification process shall include locating and making ties to all section line rightofway and roadway monuments in the vicinity of the proposed work .
included in this work shall be all calculations required for the satisfactory completion of projects including grade and drain overlay safety landscape rest areas structures surfacing projects or combinations thereof in conformance with the plans and these specifications .
the work shall include establishing and marking asbuilt elevations on bridges and culverts .
the work shall be done under the direction of a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor employed by the contractor .
the crew chief shall be nsps certified level iii nicet certified level iii or a registered land surveyorintraining .
a minimum of num percent of the survey crew shall be either nsps certified level ii or nicet certified level ii .
w hen construction of new rightofway monuments is included with the project the department will establish all initial rightofway monuments prior to construction and forward a rightofway staking plan to the contractor .
prior to completion of the construction project as directed section num num by the engineer the department will supply install and stamp the final rightofway markers .
all other existing cadastral corners such as section corners quarter corners intersecting street centerline monuments and property corners that are destroyed by the contractor shall be reestablished by a registered land surveyor employed by the contractor .
measurement of all pay quantity items will be the responsibility of the department .
w hen utility adjustments are a part of the contract the contractor shall perform all layout work and set all control points stakes and references necessary for carrying out all such adjustments .
the contractor shall not employ or engage the services of any person or persons in the employ of the arizona department of transportation for the performance of any of the work as described herein .
num materials personnel and equipment materials and equipment shall include but shall not necessarily be limited to vehicles for transporting personnel and equipment properly adjusted and accurate survey equipment straightedges stakes flagging and all other devices necessary for checking marking establishing and maintaining lines grades and layout to perform the work called for in the contract .
the contractor shall furnish competent personnel to perform the survey work and layout .
the contractor shall furnish all traffic control including flagging for survey and staking operations the cost being considered to be included in contract bid item num construction surveying and layout .
traffic control devices and procedures for construction surveying shall be in accordance with the requirements of the mutcd and associated adot supplement .
the department will furnish field books to be used by the contractor for recording survey data and field notes .
these books shall be available for inspection by the department at any time and shall become the property of the department upon completion of the work .
num construction requirements num general prior to beginning any survey operations the contractor shall furnish to the engineer for approval a written outline detailing the method of staking marking of stakes grade control for various courses of materials referencing structure control pavement markings and any other procedures and controls necessary for survey completion .
a part of this outline shall also be a schedule which will show the sequencing of the survey and layout work throughout the course of the contract section num num listing a percentage of completion for each month .
section num chapter num of the adot construction manual shall be used by the contractor as a guide in the preparation of this outline .
the adot construction manual is available on the departments website through the construction group .
the department will provide either traverse or control points for establishing an accurate construction centerline and will establish bench marks adjacent to this line for the proper layout of the work as described herein .
control points will be located on centerline at the beginning and ending of the project and at all points of curve p.c .
points of tangent p.t .
tangents to spiral t.s .
spirals to tangent s.t .
and angle points .
on long tangents additional points will be provided for continuity of line .
traverse points when provided will be as follows for horizontal control the department will run a traverse from which construction centerline can be established .
the control points delineated by iron pins marks in concrete or similar devices will be located to minimize the likelihood of their destruction during construction activities .
coordinates of these points andor ties to construction centerline will be provided .
for vertical control the department will establish bench marks for the entire length of the project at horizontal intervals not to exceed num feet .
traverse or control points set by the engineer will be identified in the field to the contractor .
the contractor shall verify the accuracy of the traverse or control points established by the engineer prior to use .
the contractor shall as part of the control point verification process locate and make ties to any section line rightofway and roadway monuments which will be affected by the proposed work .
after verification of these points the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of the results of the verification .
the established initial rightofway monuments shall be protected in place and reestablished by the contractor at no additional cost to the department if disturbed .
for locating and establishing ties to section line rightofway and roadway monuments the contractor shall follow the standards listed in subsection numb .
throughout the work the contractor shall set all stakes including centerline stakes offset stakes reference point stakes slope stakes pavement lines curb lines and grade stakes stakes for sewers roadway drainage pipe under drains clearing paved gutter guardrail fence survey monuments and culverts blue tops for subgrade subbase section num num and base courses control points for bridges bridge piers abutments footings pile cutoff pile layout pier caps bridge seats bridge beams girder profiles and screed elevations supplemental bench marks permanent asbuilt elevation marks and all other horizontal or vertical controls necessary for complete and accurate layout and construction of the work .
regardless of the staking method construction stakes shall be marked in such a manner that all construction personnel can easily identify the stake location elevation and other appropriate information .
the coordinates of any new control points established by the contractor during the course of the work shall be given to the engineer within five working days of control point establishment .
if errors are discovered during the verification process and control points do not agree with the geometrics shown in the plans the contractor shall promptly notify the engineer in writing and explain the problem in detail .
the engineer will advise the contractor within five working days of any corrective actions which may be deemed necessary .
directed changes to the work shall be reimbursed under subsection num and additional contract time may be considered for any delays .
the contractor shall be responsible for the proper layout and accuracy of all property markers which are required by the project plans .
structure sites shall be accurately profiled and crosssectioned and structure control points shall be set and checked to assure the proper construction or installation of each structure .
profiles shall be approved by the engineer prior to constructing or installing each structure .
all profile survey data shall be entered in furnished field books and preserved as a permanent project record .
the contractor shall exercise care in the preservation of stakes references and bench marks and shall reset them when any are damaged lost displaced or removed .
on all projects the centerline layout for the final surface course shall be established by instrument survey by the contractor and shall serve as marks for permanent traffic centerline striping .
on projects requiring contractor striping the contractor shall set points at intervals of not greater than numfeet for each traffic lane at the beginning and ending of each yellow stripe and at the beginning and ending of gores and tapers .
the contractor shall also provide control points on the roadway satisfactory to the engineer corresponding to the locations of all transition points for all lines of striping including the beginnings ends breaks and changes in the striping including all tapers in the striping and pavement edges .
a minimum of two weeks prior to any paving activities the contractor the contractors surveyors the pavement marking subcontractor and section num num the engineer shall meet to discuss the survey control for the applications of all temporary and permanent striping .
at this meeting the contractor shall provide a written plan satisfactory to the engineer to provide survey control and layout of the temporary and permanent striping in a timely manner .
on projects that include nopassing zones the contractor shall also coordinate the survey layout of such zones with the adot no passing zone crew .
the contractor shall contact the adot no passing zone crew at the phone number provided on the project plans at least five working days before placement of the related pavement marking .
on projects where traffic is being carried through the work zone pavements shall be marked for traffic centerline delineation before the end of each work shift .
temporary pavement markings shall conform with the requirements set forth under subsection num of these specifications and any subsequent modifications thereto .
any discrepancies in grade alignment earthwork quantities locations or dimensions detected by the contractor shall immediately be brought to the attention of the engineer .
no changes in the project plans will be allowed without the approval of the engineer .
requests for verification of earthwork quantities shall be in accordance with subsection num .
the department reserves the right to make inspections and random checks of any portion of the staking and layout work .
if in the engineers opinion the work is not being performed in a manner that will assure proper controls and accuracy the engineer will order any or all of the staking and layout work redone at no additional cost to the department .
if any portion of the contractors staking and layout work is ordered redone resulting in additional rechecking by the department the department shall be reimbursed for all costs for such additional checking .
the amount of such costs will be deducted from the contractors monthly estimate .
inspection of the contractors layout by the engineer and the acceptance of all or any part of it shall not relieve the contractor of its responsibility to secure the proper dimensions grades and elevations of the several parts of the work .
num resetting monuments a general the contractor shall be responsible to maintain all existing monumentation including section line rightofway and roadway monumentation .
monumentation disturbed during construction shall be reestablished by the contractor and recorded at the appropriate county recorders office at no additional cost to the department .
section num num b monumentation standards section corner quarter corner and property corner monuments shall be reestablished following the procedures in the manual of surveying instructions num published by the u.s. department of the interior bureau of land management and all applicable statutes and requirements specified in the current arizona state board of technical registrations arizona boundary survey minimum standards .
the contractor shall also follow the adot rightofw ay standards when re establishing rightofway monuments .
c procedures section line rightofway and roadway monumentation reestablished by the contractor shall bear the registration number of the land surveyor in responsible charge of the location .
monuments used to define section lines shall be stamped in accordance with manual of surveying instructions num published by the department of interior bureau of land management .
roadway monumentation shall be stamped in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate municipal jurisdiction .
rightofway monuments shall be stamped in accordance with the adot rightofw ay standards .
monuments that are reestablished shall be recorded at the appropriate county recorders office and a copy of the corner recordation documentation shall be submitted to the engineer within five working days of recordation .
num office survey work the contractor shall be compensated for office work associated with project survey under the following circumstances a w hen the project plans fail to provide sufficient information to lay out the project or any part thereof .
b w hen the contractor performs office survey work based on erroneous plans information which results in the duplication of work .
c if the department should change any plans information for which the contractor has already performed office work which results in the duplication of that work .
the contractor shall not be due compensation for any office survey work a w hen information provided in the plans is sufficiently complete to allow any additional information necessary for section num num the complete layout of the project to be routinely calculated .
b w hen the contractor fails to inform the engineer of discovered plan errors prior to the performance of any extra office survey work .
c that is included in any other existing pay item .
the contractor shall inform the engineer in a timely manner of any omissions ambiguities or errors which the contractor feels may result in extra office survey work so as not to delay the project or create any unnecessary calculations .
all office survey work shall be documented by the contractor and verified by the engineer for compensation .
documentation shall consist of at least a detailed office diary specifically addressing the work involved in the alleged problem area .
the contractor may be required to provide the calculations charts graphs drawings or any other physical evidence which will verify the extra work .
num survey manager the contractor shall be compensated for a survey manager when deemed necessary for extra work ordered by the engineer .
the use of a survey manager along with all survey manager duties required as a result of the additional work must be authorized in advance by the engineer .
the survey manager shall be a registered land surveyor in the state of arizona .
num method of measurement construction surveying and layout will be measured as a single complete unit of work .
one two and threeperson survey parties survey managers and office survey technicians will be measured by the hour to the nearest half hour .
num basis of payment payment for construction surveying and layout will be by the lump sum and will be made as follows the approved schedule showing the sequencing and percentage of the survey and layout work as submitted under subsection num shall be the basis on which monthly progress payments shall be made .
this schedule shall be subject to periodic review at the request of either party if the survey and layout work lags or accelerates .
if necessary the schedule will be revised to reflect changes in survey and layout progress .
w hen approved the revised schedule will become the basis of payment .
section num num if additional staking and layout are required as a result of additional work ordered by the engineer such work will be paid under item numoneperson survey party item num tw operson survey party item num threeperson survey party item num survey manager and item num office survey technician .
payment will be made at the respective predetermined unit prices specified in the special provisions .
should such additional work require the contractor to pay travel and subsistence costs for the survey party or survey parties utilized payment for travel and subsistence will be made under the provisions of subsection num except that no markup will be allowed for profit and overhead .
the engineer will be the sole judge as to whether the additional work shall be performed by the contractor or by department forces .
the amount per hour for a oneperson twoperson or threeperson survey party includes the cost of all work necessary to complete the extra work .
traffic control and flagging necessary because of the additional staking and layout required as a result of extra work ordered by the engineer or additional work resulting from contract expansion and ordered by the engineer shall conform to the requirements of sectionnum maintenance and protection of traffic .
no payment will be made for the resetting of stakes references bench marks and other survey control .
the amount per hour for a survey manager and an office survey technician shall include all necessary office supplies and equipment such as calculators and computers .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer requests for payment for additional survey work performed shall be submitted prior to the end of the monthly estimate billing period during which the work is performed .
section num engineers field office num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing a separate field office for the use by the departments engineering consultant engineer within the limits of the project .
the field office shall consist of a temporary building or trailer providing a minimum of num square feet of enclosed space and shall be provided with adequate lighting ventilation and means of ingress and egress suitable to the intended use .
the office shall be equipped with heating and cooling equipment section num num capable of maintaining an ambient air temperature of num five degrees f a potable water supply and a separate enclosed sanitary facility with flush toilet and lavatory conforming with applicable sanitary codes .
the office shall be furnished with three office desks with chairs a drafting table with stool and two multistation telephones with separate lines .
the engineer will designate the location of the office .
the office shall remain on the project site for up to num calendar days following completion and acceptance of the work by the department or the construction phase of the work where landscape establishment is involved .
the office shall be fully equipped with all utilities in service and shall be acceptable to the engineer prior to commencement of any construction activity .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the office and all facilities and equipment therein in good working condition .
utility costs shall be the responsibility of the contractor as well as any fees for permits sanitary water electrical or gas hookups installation charges etc .
the cost of long distance telephone calls made by the engineer will be paid for by the engineer .
upon completion of the project and following removal of the office and any appurtenant structures utilities surfacing etc .
the affected areas shall be either restored to their former condition or improved as may be specified on the project plans .
num blank num blank num method of measurement this work will be measured for payment as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment payment for this work will be made at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the item complete including all labor materials equipment all utility hookup charges maintenance and all monthly utility charges except for long distance telephone charges made by the engineer as herein described and specified .
partial payments will be made in accordance with the following provisions w hen five percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for engineers field office will be paid .
section num num w hen num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for engineers field office will be paid .
the adjustment provisions in section num and the retention of funds provisions in section num shall not apply to this item .
section num engineers field laboratory num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing a separate field laboratory for the use of the departments materials inspection and testing personnel within the limits of the project .
the field laboratory shall consist of a temporary building or trailer providing a minimum of num square feet of enclosed space and shall be provided with adequate lighting ventilation and means of ingress and egress suitable to the intended use .
the building or trailer shall be so supported as to be sufficiently stable so that the required testing procedures can be performed .
the laboratory shall be equipped with heating and cooling equipment capable of maintaining an ambient air temperature of num to num degrees f a potable water supply and a separate enclosed sanitary facility with flush toilet and lavatory conforming to applicable sanitary codes .
the laboratory shall be furnished with an office desk with chair a drafting table with stool and a telephone for the use of the department .
it shall be furnished with a work bench three feet wide by num feet long by num inches high with base cabinets and drawers for equipment storage and with three numvolt numamp outlets above the bench and with a service sink and water supply for testing purposes .
the engineer will designate the location of the laboratory .
the laboratory equipped as stated above shall remain on the site for a period not to exceed num calendar days following completion of the project .
the office shall be fully equipped with all utilities in service and shall be acceptable to the engineer prior to commencement of any work involving materials testing .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the laboratory and all facilities and equipment therein in good working condition .
utility costs shall be the responsibility of the contractor as well as any fees for permits sanitary water electrical or gas hookups installation charges etc .
the cost of long distance telephone calls made by the engineer will be paid for by the engineer .
upon completion of the work and following removal of the laboratory and any appurtenant structures utilities surfacing etc .
the affected areas shall be either restored to their former condition or improved as may be specified on the project plans .
section num num num blank num blank num method of measurement this work will be measured for payment by the lump sum as a single complete unit of work .
num basis of payment payment for this work will be made at the contract lump sum price which shall be full compensation for the item complete including all labor materials equipment all utility hookup charges maintenance and all monthly utilities charges except for long distance telephone charges made by the engineer as herein described and specified .
partial payments under this item will be made in accordance with the following provisions sixty percent of the amount bid for engineers field laboratory will be paid with the first payment estimate after the laboratory is accepted by the engineer .
the remaining forty percent will be paid in approximately equal monthly payments based on the expected use of the laboratory .
the adjustment provisions in section num and the retention of funds provisions on section num shall not apply to this item .
section num groundin rumble strip num description the work under this item shall include furnishing all tools equipment and labor necessary to install groundin rumble strips of the size and at the locations specified on the project plans or as directed by the engineer .
num construction requirements rumble strips shall be constructed by mechanically milling or grinding grooves into new or existing asphalt concrete payment .
the grooves shall be constructed with a cylindrical configuration in the direction of the traffic flow and shall be placed in accordance with the details shown on the project plans .
gaps in continuous rumble strips not shown on the plans will be designated by the engineer .
the grooves shall be constructed with equipment specifically designed section num num to remove such material by means of grinding to a controlled line and grade .
the equipment used shall be capable of removing the existing asphaltic concrete to the dimensions and tolerances specified on the plans .
the removals shall be accomplished in a manner which does not scar the surface of the adjacent pavement .
grooves shall not be constructed in new asphaltic concrete pavements for a minimum of three days after placement or num days after placement of new asphaltic concrete pavements with asphaltrubber .
construction of the grooves may be allowed in less time if the contractor can demonstrate that the pavements are sufficiently cured .
the contractor shall place a continuous control line as a guide for installation .
the milling machine shall also be equipped with an approved guide that is clearly visible to the operator so that proper alignment of the grooves will be obtained .
lateral deviation of the milled rumble strips shall not exceed one inch in any num foot interval .
immediately upon completion of the groundin rumble strip installation the pavement and grooves will be cleaned of all milling debris .
the contractor shall dispose of the milled material in a manner approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement groundin rumble strips will be measured by the linear foot along the pavement edge line at the locations shown in the project plans and in accordance with the specifications .
breaks in the continuous rumble strip for numfoot skips intersections ramps and other features will not be included in the measurement .
num basis of payment the accepted quantities of groundin rumble strips measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot which price shall be full compensation for the work complete in place as shown on the project plans and as specified herein .
section num num section num material sources num description the work under this section shall consist of the procuring of borrow subbase and base materials mineral aggregates for concrete structures and mineral aggregates for surfacing materials specified for use from sources either designated on the project plans or in the special provisions or from other sources .
num general the contractor shall determine for itself the type of equipment and work required to produce a material meeting the specifications .
unless otherwise specified pits and quarries shall be so excavated that water will not collect and stand therein .
sites from which material has been removed shall upon completion of the work be left in a neat and presentable condition .
w here practicable borrow pits gravel pits and quarry sites shall be located so that they will not be visible from the highway .
the contractor shall provide an environmental analysis as specified in subsection num for any contractorfurnished source proposed for use .
environmental analyses prepared for contractorfurnished sources and approved by the department later than january num num will be acceptable .
a list of sources known by the department to have approved environmental analyses will be kept on file at the adot materials group mail drop numr num n. numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
the contractor may propose the use of these sources as a contractorfurnished source without the requirement of submitting a new environmental analysis provided that all other requirements of this section have been met .
it shall be the responsibility of prospective bidders to conduct any necessary onsite investigations andor explorations and to satisfy themselves that the quantity andor quality of material exists in the sources listed above .
no representation regarding quality or quantity of materials is made by the department .
num definitions all material sources shall fall into one of the following two categories departmentfurnished source contractorfurnished source a departmentfurnished source shall be defined as a material source for which the department has prospected taken samples tested section num num prepared an environmental analysis secured the rights for its use including ingress and egress and which may be available for the contractors use on a specific project .
a contractorfurnished source shall be defined as any source other than a departmentfurnished source and shall include commercial operations as defined below .
a commercial operation shall be defined as a material source at which the owner or producer has been located for at least the preceding num months prior to award of contract and routinely engaged during regular business hours on a consistent basis in the processing and selling of sand rock ready mixed portland cement concrete asphaltic concrete and other similar products to all parties .
the company shall have an arizona retail sales tax license .
the contractor shall furnish documentation to the engineer that the source is an active commercial operation .
this documentation may include evidence of sales or other data acceptable to the engineer .
a commercial source whenever referenced in the specifications shall be considered to be a commercial operation as defined herein .
should the contractor elect to set up a concrete or asphalt batch plant within or adjacent to a commercial operation for the exclusive supply of contract items the contractors operation shall not be considered part of the commercial operation .
num material sources in flood plains the use of material sources situated in the numyear flood plain of any stream or watercourse and located within one mile upstream and two miles downstream of any highway structure or surfaced roadway crossing shall be limited as follows a existing commercial operations as defined in subsection num shall not be utilized as a source of borrow .
b no new source or existing noncommercial source will be approved for any materials except as specified in the following subparagraph c. c surplus material from agencyadministered flood control management projects may be used as borrow material only if the contractor submits written evidence to the engineer that the flood control agency project was fully designed and funded prior to the date of advertisement for bids on the department project .
d material sources located on native american indian reservations will be considered for use based on an individual analysis .
the analysis shall include a review of applicable land use plans flood plain management plans environmental plans applicable laws and regulations section num num pertaining to indian reservations and an engineering analysis of the effects on any highway facility or structure .
the contractor shall obtain from the native american tribal council all permits licenses and approvals and present to the department for review .
the department will review each request on a case by case basis .
the location of any new material source or existing noncommercial material source proposed for use on the project shall be reviewed by the appropriate agency having flood plain management jurisdiction for the area in which the proposed source is located .
the contractor shall obtain a letter from the agency addressed to the engineer certifying that the location of the proposed source conforms to the requirements of the specifications .
contractors seeking a flood plain material source are cautioned that section num of the clean w ater act may prevent use of the source unless an appropriate permit is first obtained from the u.s. army corps of engineers .
if a flood plain source is being considered for use the contractor is advised to contact environmental planning services of adot to insure that the source will be obtainable within the required time frame .
num departmentfurnished sources num general the use of a departmentfurnished source is not mandatory .
num information available the approximate location the kind of material the name and address of the owner the amount of royalty charges and other relevant information will be available for review from the materials group num n. numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
the available information should be considered at most as only a starting point for those prospective bidders choosing to use the source .
it shall be the responsibility of prospective bidders to conduct any necessary onsite investigations andor explorations and to satisfy themselves that the quantity andor quality of material exists in the source in the event their bids are predicated upon the use of the source .
w hether a source will in fact yield material of sufficient quantity or quality to meet the specific requirements may not have been determined .
section num num prospective bidders are advised that an agency having jurisdiction over the source such as the forest service bureau of land management bureau of reclamation the state land department etc .
or the owner as a condition to the use of the source may have imposed certain obligations .
the contractor who uses such a source shall assume full contractual responsibility for any and all of these obligations imposed either by the agency having jurisdiction or by the owner .
specific requirements may or may not be available and prospective bidders considering such a source are urged to make themselves fully aware of any and all requirements .
it shall be the responsibility of the bidder to ensure that the environmental analysis complies with existing laws rules and regulations .
num usage of materials except as hereinafter provided materials removed from departmentfurnished sources shall be used only for the specific project and purpose for which the source was obtained .
should the contractor desire to remove and use material other than that specified for use prior approval by means of a supplemental agreement shall be obtained .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with evidence that the owner of the source has agreed to such use .
the department reserves the right to disapprove any request when it is considered to be in the best interest of the department to conserve such material for future use .
if the department approves the removal and use of such material the quantity of the material removed and the quantity of any waste material resulting from its removal will be deducted from the estimated quantity of material shown to be available .
num royalty charges the amount of the royalty charges and the name and address of the party to whom royalties are to be paid will be available from the materials group num n. numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
prior to the time of final payment the contractor shall furnish the engineer with evidence such as an endorsed canceled check that all royalty charges have been paid .
in the event that royalty charges have not been paid the department reserves the right to make such payment and to deduct the amount of such payment from monies due the contractor .
the final billing and payment for material extracted from sources under the jurisdiction of the state land department will include a small administrative charge based on the total amount of royalties due for materials removed .
section num num upon receipt of the final billing from the department of transportation the contractor shall mail a check payable to the state land department addressed as follows arizona department of transportation field reports services num south numth avenue phoenix arizona num num performance bonds if departmentfurnished sources are under the jurisdiction of either the state land department or the bureau of land management the contractor shall secure a performance bond .
a fully executed copy of the bond shall be furnished the engineer along with evidence that a fully executed copy has been sent to the state land department or the bureau of land management .
the form of the performance bond will be included in the proposal pamphlet .
for pits under the jurisdiction of the bureau of land management the surety shall be a company listed under surety companies acceptable on federal bonds .
this list is published annually as of july num in the federal register .
performance bonds shall be conditioned upon the compliance with the requirements of the state land department and the bureau of land management and the requirements of the specifications for the clearing of pit sites the removal of material and the cleaning up of pit sites .
copies of fully executed performance bonds shall be mailed as follows state land commission bureau of land management state land department manager land office num w est adams street num valley bank center phoenix arizona num phoenix arizona num num sampling and testing the results of any sampling and testing accomplished by the department will be available from the materials group num n. numst avenue phoenix arizona num .
num contractorfurnished source num approval requirements a general the contractor shall promptly advise the engineer as to the source that it proposes to use .
section num num the contractor acknowledges that all the conditions set forth in this subsection must be met before the source may be used .
other than sampling and testing the requirements of this subsection shall be completed prior to initiation of any activities which disturb the existing conditions at the proposed source .
the contractor further acknowledges that no additional compensation will be made on account of any delays in preparing or modifying the environmental analysis obtaining approval for the use of a contractorfurnished source or the failure to obtain approval of a contractorfurnished source .
an extension of contract time may be granted only in accordance with subsections num or numbnum .
b general requirements for approval the use of a contractorfurnished source will require written approval by the engineer .
no approval will be given until the contractor has complied with the following conditions num the contractor has submitted an environmental analysis of the source proposed for use and the department has reviewed the analysis and satisfied itself that the use of such source will not have an adverse social economic or environmental impact .
the requirements of this condition shall be completed prior to initiation of any activities which substantially disturb the existing conditions at the proposed source .
num except for commercial operations the contractor has furnished the engineer with evidence that he has secured the rights to the source including ingress and egress .
num the department has determined that the material from the proposed contractorfurnished source not only meets the requirements but is also compatible with the established project design criteria developed by the adot materials group and based on the soil support value of the embankment and except for commercial operations the sampling and testing herein specified has been satisfactorily completed .
num for a contractorfurnished source which is not a commercial operation as defined in subsection num the contractor shall notify the arizona department of agriculture in accordance with the arizona native plant law at least num days prior to any clearing operations of less than num acres on private land num days prior to clearing operations of num or more acres on private land and num days prior to any clearing of state land regardless of size .
if the engineer is convinced that the contractor has made every effort to comply with the provisions of the arizona native section num num plant law in contacting the department of agriculture the engineer will increase the number of contract days by the amount of time required for action by the department of agriculture .
the increase will not exceed num contract days and will be concurrent with any increase allowed for the preparation of the environmental analysis .
c historical and cultural resources if the department determines that the proposed use will have major adverse impact on cultural or historic resources the department will not allow the use of the source .
num testing requirements the contractor shall furnish equipment and personnel and shall obtain representative samples of the material under the supervision of the engineer .
at the option of the contractor the material shall be tested by either the department or by a testing laboratory approved by the department .
if testing is performed by a testing laboratory the contractor shall arrange for the samples to be delivered to the testing laboratory .
tests shall be performed using appropriate test procedures referred to in the sections of the specifications in which the specific material requirements are described .
the contractor shall make the arrangements necessary to see that the testing laboratory submits the results of the tests to adot materials group .
the contractor shall submit to adot materials group sufficient material from the samples taken so that adot materials group may test the materials and verify the results .
the cost of all sampling and testing including the cost of supervision by the engineer shall be borne by the contractor until the testing has been satisfactorily completed .
exploratory sampling and testing activities conducted prior to the departments approval shall be limited to the minimum amount of vegetation removal and surface disturbance required to obtain representative samples .
the contractor shall not produce material mobilize crushing equipment or clear a worksite prior to approval of the environmental analysis .
the use of material from commercial operations will require written approval by the engineer .
no approval shall be assumed nor will it be made until the department has determined that the material not only meets the specified requirements but is also compatible with the established project design criteria developed by adot materials group and based on the soil support value of the embankment materials and the structural coefficients of the base and surfacing materials .
section num num every effort will be made by the department to advise the contractor as quickly as possible that the source it proposes to use has been either approved or disapproved .
the contract time will not be adjusted because of any time required by either the contractor or the department to sample and test the material and to determine the quality of the material .
num blank num special access if there is a departmentfurnished source the points at which special access to a controlled access highway may be allowed will generally have been considered and if appropriate will be shown on the project plans .
such access shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in the special provisions and on the project plans .
the contractor may make a request to the engineer to approve special access to a controlled access highway if num special access is not shown on the project plans num the contractor elects not to furnish material from the departmentfurnished source or num there is no departmentfurnished source .
the request by the contractor shall be accompanied by an environmental analysis and by documents which specify the points of access the acquisition of rightofway the manner in which access will be attained the traffic control plan and crossovers along with all other appropriate data which will allow the engineer to evaluate its request .
if the request is approved a supplemental agreement shall be entered into .
all costs associated with the special access requested by the contractor shall be borne by the contractor including but not limited to cattle guards fences gates and restoration work .
w hen access is not being utilized gates shall be closed and locked .
upon completion of all operations the area within the rightofway which has been disturbed shall be restored to the condition existing prior to the contractors operations .
the decision by the engineer to deny a request by the contractor will be considered to be final .
num operations at source num general requirements section num num the requirements of subsection num shall not apply to commercial operations .
in departmentfurnished sources the contractor shall conduct its operations in such a manner as to preserve available materials in excess of project requirements .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in advance of operations at the source .
notice shall be given before and after clearing and stripping and before and after cleaning up .
num clearing and stripping before beginning stripping the contractor shall clear and grub the source as necessary to prevent the contamination of materials to be used in the work .
clearing and grubbing shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num except that the resulting surface need not be leveled and vegetable matter need not be separated from any overburden which the engineer determines to be unsuitable for any future use and which is to be wasted .
in the disposal of all tree trunks stumps brush limbs roots vegetation and other debris removed the contractor shall comply with the requirements of title num public health and safety chapter num article num air pollution of the arizona revised statutes and with the rules and regulations for air pollution control article num adopted by the arizona department of environmental quality pursuant to the authority granted by the statutes .
burning will be permitted only after the contractor has obtained a permit from the arizona department of environmental quality and from any other federal state county or city agency that may be involved .
w hen stripping is required overburden shall be removed to the extent necessary to remove all undesirable materials and shall at all times be kept stripped at least five feet beyond the working face of the area being excavated .
num extraction of materials materials shall be removed from the source in a workmanlike manner .
in order to produce acceptable material in the amount and gradation required it may be necessary for the contractor to do any or all of the following along with any other similar operations usually associated with the extraction processing and production of the particular material being produced move materials from one area to another .
perform additional screening .
remove wash and waste material .
blend materials .
section num num revise crushing methods .
remove deleterious materials such as clay balls roots and sticks .
if the engineer determines that the material in a source is stratified all material except borrow shall be removed for the full depth in such a manner as to produce a uniform blend of the material .
placing the material from different areas and depths into a surge pile and removing material from the surge pile by cutting through the pile will be acceptable provided that a uniformly blended material is obtained .
material sources located in drainage channels such as washes river beds etc .
may experience seasonal variations in the depth of ground water .
in order to produce the quantity of material estimated to be available in departmentfurnished sources the contractor may be required to work below the water table .
num fences and cattle guards w here the haul roads to material sources cross existing fence lines in areas where there is livestock of any kind temporary cattle guards shall be installed by the contractor at each crossing .
the livestock operator or owner shall be contacted prior to the beginning of any operations and effective measures shall be taken and means provided by the contractor to prevent livestock from straying .
in operations where conditions will exist that are dangerous to livestock of any kind temporary cattle guards and fence shall be installed around the pit area by the contractor to protect livestock .
temporary cattle guards and fence installed by the contractor shall be removed and existing fence disturbed shall be replaced or reconstructed and all fence shall be left in as good condition as it was prior to the beginning of work .
num cleaning up the requirements of this subsection shall apply to contractorfurnished sources to the extent that they are required by the environmental analysis and by the owner .
the requirements of subsection num shall not apply to commercial operations .
all overburden and other undesirable materials removed and all piles of waste materials resulting from operations in departmentfurnished sources shall be deposited within the excavated area of the source and the material shall be leveled as directed .
in the event that the departmentfurnished source contains material needed for future use the placement of such materials within the excavated area shall be as directed .
all debris shall be removed and disposed of and if directed all open test holes shall be filled .
the sides of departmentfurnished section num num sources shall be sloped and smoothed so that livestock can enter and leave the excavated area safely .
unless otherwise specified all haul roads constructed to departmentfurnished sources shall be obliterated and as far as practicable the ground left in as good condition as it was prior to hauling .
num method of measurement and basis of payment except as may be otherwise specifically provided for in this section or elsewhere no measurement or direct payment will be made for any costs involved in the procuring of materials .
such costs shall be considered as included in the cost of contract items .
section num paint num requirements a general all paints furnished shall be readymixed at the manufacturers plant except for aluminum paint and zinc paint which shall be mixed at the project site or fabricator just prior to application .
all paints shall be standard paint products of the manufacturer with published product data sheets and shall comply in all details with the paint specifications as listed herein .
readymixed paint shall be homogeneous free of contaminants and shall be of a consistency suitable for the use for which it is specified .
the pigment shall be finely ground and properly dispersed in the vehicle according to the requirements for the type of paint and this dispersion shall be such that the pigment does not settle appreciably does not cake or thicken in the paint container and does not become granular jelled or curdled .
any settlement of pigment in the paint shall be easily dispersed with a paddle so as to produce a smooth uniform paint of the proper consistency .
the manufacturer shall include in the paint the necessary additives for control of sagging leveling drying drier absorption and skinning .
paint shall be furnished in new unopened airtight containers which are clearly labeled with the exact title of the paint federal specification number when applicable name and address of the manufacturer product code date of paint manufacture and the lot or batch number .
the containers shall meet u.s. department of transportation hazardous materials shipping regulations .
precautions concerning the handling and the application of the paint shall be shown on the label of the paint containers .
w hen painting structural steel the supplier or manufacturer of the primer intermediate coat and topcoat of paint shall be the same and the paint coats shall be compatible with each other forming a complete paint system .
section num num the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certificate of compliance for each lot or batch of paint supplied in accordance with subsection num prior to its use .
product data sheets listing the paint constituents and their proportions as well as materials safety data sheets msds are required for each paint material supplied prior to its use .
all applicable governmental environmental regulations shall be adhered to during cleanup and for the disposal of unused paint .
b threepaint coating system all threepaint coating systems as specified in subsection num shall be readymixed at the manufacturers plant .
only approved paint systems will be allowed for use on structural steel .
paint systems approved in accordance with subsection numb are shown on the departments approved products list apl .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
paint supplied by an approved manufacturer with a different product code from that which was previously evaluated and approved will require evaluation to determine if it is acceptable .
it is the responsibility of the manufacturer to submit the necessary samples for paint system evaluation and approval .
approved paint systems will be removed from the list if it is determined through longterm performance testing or by their performance in the field that they are unacceptable .
c aluminum and zinc paints aluminum and zinc paints shall be mixed at the project site or fabricator just prior to application .
for safety purposes aluminum paint shall be mixed only as needed and any unused paint shall be safely discarded and shall not be stored .
d acrylic emulsion paint paints approved in accordance with subsection numd are shown on the departments approved products list apl .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
for paints supplied which are not shown on the approved products list a certificate of analysis showing conformance to subsection num for each lot or batch of paint supplied shall be submitted to the engineer in accordance with subsection num prior to its use .
num paints section num num lead lead compounds soluble barium compounds or hexavalent chromium compounds shall not be used as raw materials in the paint formulas specified under this section .
lead lead compounds soluble barium compounds or hexavalent chromium compounds shall not be added to any paint formulas specified under this section .
the use of halogenated solvents is not permitted .
raw materials used in the paint formulas shall conform to the specifications designated by astm or by federal or military specifications listed herein except as otherwise specified herein .
subsequent amendments to the specifications quoted shall apply to all raw materials and finished products .
no or equal substitutions for any specified material shall be made without the written consent of the engineer .
a threepaint system shall be waterborne and each paint shall be readymixed by the manufacturer .
the volatile organic content of the mixed paint shall not exceed num pounds per gallon .
zinc paint shall be in accordance with subsection num .
aluminum paint shall be waterborne and shall be mixed in accordance with subsection num .
all paints will be sampled and tested in accordance with subsection num .
num threepaint coating system a general a threepaint coating system shall include a primer paint number num intermediate coat paint number num and topcoat paint number num from the same system .
a threepaint coating system will be tested as a complete system in accordance with subsection numb .
each individual paint shall conform to all of the chemical and physical characteristics and properties as declared on the manufacturers product data sheet .
in addition the paint color shall be as specified in the project plans and the consistency shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall use the checking and calibration procedures found in astm d num and verify the paint consistency with the engineer prior to each application .
each coating is intended for spray application .
limited application can be made by brushing or rolling if approved by the engineer .
b paint number num primer section num num this paint shall be used on blast cleaned steel surfaces for the first coat of a threepaint coating which must include paint number num and paint number num from the same system .
c paint number num intermediate coat this paint for intermediate coats shall be used on primed steel surfaces as the second coat of a threepaint coating system which must include paint number num and paint number num from the same system .
the paint shall be appropriately tinted to contrast with the prime coat .
d paint number num topcoat paint for topcoats shall be used as the third coat of a threepaint coating system which must include paint number num and paint number num from the same system .
for topcoats the gloss shall also be as specified on the project plans .
the available colors for topcoats shall provide visual matches to the colors given in the federal standard no .
num .
the colors shall be available in highgloss enamels if required .
w hen specified a twopart aluminum paint conforming to subsection num shall be applied as the topcoat .
the two parts shall be mixed in accordance with the manufacturers label directions prior to use .
num zinc paint a general this paint shall be a zincdust zincoxide primer conforming to the requirements of federal specification ttpnumg type iii zinc dust zinc oxide phenolic resin primer modified to conform to the requirements num through num below and as otherwise specified herein .
the volatile organic compound or solvent portion of the vehicle shall conform to the following requirements by volume num solvents with an olefinic or cycloolefinic type of unsaturation shall not exceed five percent .
num the total of aromatic compounds with eight or more carbon atoms in the molecule except ethylbenzene shall not exceed eight percent .
num the total of ethylbenzene toluene and branchedchain ketones shall not exceed num percent .
section num num num a solvent which may be classified into more than one of the above groups shall be considered a member of the group having the lowest allowable concentration .
num the total of num num and num shall not exceed num percent .
num the volatile solvents shall contain no benzene or halogenated compounds .
num all paints shall be completely miscible with mineral spirits conforming to grade ii of federal specification tttnum .
num mineral spirits conforming to grade ii of federal specification tttnum shall be the preferred thinner for all paints specified in this subsection .
if necessary other paint thinners conforming to the requirements of num through num above may be used .
if modified colors are required pigments which do not contain lead lead compounds soluble barium compounds or hexavalent chromium compounds shall be used in amounts not exceeding ten percent of the total pigment weight and replacing an equal weight of zinc oxide .
this specification covers a readytomix or semiprepared primer for use on or repair of galvanized metal surfaces .
the primer ingredients shall be furnished in two separate containers one consisting of a liquid zinc oxidevehicle and the other of zinc dust which is to be added to the zinc oxidevehicle just prior to use .
w hen the entire amount of zinc dust from one container is mixed with all of the zinc oxidevehicle from another container a primer conforming to all the requirements of this specification shall result .
the mixed primer shall normally be of a gray color characteristic of the composition unless otherwise specified .
b proportions one gallon of zinc dust zinc oxide primer meeting this specification will have the following characteristics when the minimum figures are met and the pigment is a mixture of num percent zinc dust and num percent zinc oxide constituent composition by composition by volume gallons w eight pounds zinc dust num num zinc oxide num num total pigment num num nonvolatile vehicle num num total solids num num volatile thinner and drier num num total primer gallon num num c qualitative requirements section num num the mixed primer shall meet the following qualitative requirements characteristics min .
max .
test method pigment percent by weight of primer num num astm d num w ater percent by weight of primer num astm d num coarse particles and skins percent by weight of pigment num astm d num consistency krebsstormer shearing rate num r.p.m .
num num astm d num time to set to touch hours num num astm d num time to dry hours num astm d num w eight per gallon pounds num astm d num voc of mixed primer lbsgal .
num astm d num d pigment the pigment composition in the mixed primer except when colors other than gray are specified shall be in accordance with the following ingredients percent by weight min .
max .
zinc dust astm d num type i num num zinc oxide astm d num american process lead free num num upon analysis the zinc dust shall show not less than num percent metallic zinc by weight .
the pigment extracted from the zinc oxidevehicle and ignited shall show on analysis not less than num percent zinc oxide by weight .
the total pigment zinc dust plus zinc oxide in the mixed primer shall contain a minimum of num percent metallic zinc and a minimum of num percent zinc oxide by weight .
the sum of the percentage by weight of metallic zinc and zinc oxide in the total pigment of the mixed primer shall be not less than num .
e vehicle the vehicle shall consist of num percent phenolic resin spar varnish suitable for grinding with zinc oxide and shall have an oiltoresin ratio of approximately num to num by weight .
the resin shall be num percent paraphenyl phenolformaldehyde resin of the fortifying type meeting the requirements of federal specification ttrnum .
the vegetable oils shall consist of equal parts by volume of tung oil meeting the requirements of federal specification tttnum and linseed oil conforming to federal specification ttlnum .
section num num the volatile solvent used shall be any solvent system complying with subsection numa and applicable air pollution regulations by weight per gallon subsection numc .
antiskinning agents may be present .
the vehicle shall contain not less than num percent solids by weight when tested according to federal standard no .
num method num .
num aluminum paint this paint is a twopart waterborne leafing aluminum paint formulated for use on properly prepared metal surfaces exposed to the air .
aluminum paint shall conform to california d.o.t .
specification formula pw bnum or as otherwise specified herein .
this paint may be utilized for the finish coat when the aluminum color is specified on the plans .
aluminum paint must be compatible with the underlying paint coats .
the quantity of aluminum paint mixed during any one day shall be limited to the quantity to be used during that day .
the paint shall be mixed in accordance with the manufacturers label directions prior to use .
for safety purposes aluminum paint shall be mixed only as needed and any unused paint shall be safely discarded and shall not be stored .
a composition this paint shall be supplied with num pounds of the specified aluminum paste to one gallon of vehicle .
b pigment a ingredients w ater dispersible aluminum paste num b characteristics nonvolatile content percent astm d num num minimum c vehicle a ingredients by w eight acrylic latex num num numtrimethylpentanediolnummonoisobutyrate num ammonium hydroxide num num defoamer num num section num num num preserva it ve num thickener num approx .
num premix nummethoxyethoxyethanol num requ ri ements b characte ir s it cs density grams per milliliter astm dnum num to num nonvolatile content percent astm dnum b num num viscosity centipoises astm dnum test method a num rpm num spindle num num highshear viscosity astm dnum num to nump cone shear rate num num s num num to num num num ph num hydro paste num silberline num maincote hgnumd rohm and haas num foamaster ap henkel num proxel gxl ici americas num acrysol rmnumw rohm and haas d mixed paint a characteristics requirements nonvolatile content volume percent calculated using maximum mix water num num drying time num m wet film astm dnum  maximum o t ouch hours t t se num maximum dry t hrough hours e mixing procedures add num gallons of potable water to the aluminum paste and mix to a smooth lumpfree consistency .
slowly stir in the vehicle .
mix well but avoid incorporating air into the paint .
strain the mixed paint through a double layer of cheesecloth prior to use .
the paint must be mixed fresh each day .
do not store mixed paint .
do not place mixed paint in sealed containers .
f application the mixed paint shall be applied to a total dry film thickness of at least num mils .
this coating is intended for spray application however limited application can be made by brush .
paint should not be applied when the ambient or surface temperature is above num f or below num f or when the relative humidity exceeds num percent .
g cleanup section num num use tap water for cleanup .
ten percent ammonia acetone or other suitable solvent may be used to remove dried paint from spray guns and other equipment .
all applicable governmental pollution regulations shall be adhered to during cleanup and for the disposal of unused paint .
num acrylic emulsion paint acrylic emulsion paint shall be waterborne and conform to the requirements of federal specification ttpnum paint acrylic emulsion exterior .
acrylic emulsion paint will be tested in accordance with subsection numd .
this paint may be tinted by using universal or all purpose concentrates .
the color of the final coat of paint shall be as indicated on the project plans .
if no color is specified on the plans the paint color shall approximate that of paint color chip no .
num as specified by federal test standard number num when applied to either a concrete test specimen measuring twofoot by twofoot or to the surface of the concrete structure to be painted .
the engineer will determine color acceptance by visual inspection .
num sampling and testing a general any lot or batch of paint may at any time be sampled at random and tested for conformance to any of the chemical and physical characteristics and properties as declared by the manufacturer on the respective product data sheet .
also complete threepaint coating system samples may be required at any time for followup evaluation using the performance test method employed in the original evaluation for approval of the system .
b threepaint coating system paint coatings in subsection num will be tested as a complete threepaint coating system .
paint systems shall have an evaluation rating of num or greater as described below after being weathered in accordance with the requirements of astm d num and astm g num in the quv accelerated w eathering tester fluorescent uvcondensation apparatus .
paint systems will be tested as follows num .
paint coatings will be applied to cold rolled steel panels astm d num type num astm a num .
the paint will be thinned to num num ku consistency using demineralized water .
three coats each approximately num mils thickness are applied to each of four section num num panels according to astm d num .
the fourth coated panel from each set will be inscribed with an x cut to the steel substrate and extending across the entire coated area .
num .
the exposure cycle used with the weathering tester shall be d num h uvnum degree c followed by num h connum degree c. one panel from each set of four shall be removed at num hours and another at num hours .
the last two panels shall be removed at num hours .
num .
paint systems will be evaluated on the basis of six measures of degradation which may be found to occur under the conditions of exposure .
for each measure a rating scale of from one to five points will be applied .
a rating of one point indicates the poorest performance and five points indicate the best performance .
the rating from each measure is multiplied by a weighting factor which represents the relative importance of that measure .
the product is a score for that measure .
the sum of the scores for all measures is the overall score for the system .
all paint systems shall have an overall score of num or higher .
a crackingflaking three astm standard test methods are used to provide a measure of the degree of degradation in this area astm d num astm d num and astm d num .
the definitions and illustrations contained in these methods are used in combination for the rating scale .
a weighting factor of three will be applied to the results of these tests .
b blisteringflaking two astm methods are combined for this rating scale astm d num and astm d num .
a weighting factor of three will be applied to the results of these tests .
c corrosion a rating scale is derived from astm d num for evaluating the degree of rusting .
a weighting factor of three will be applied to the results of this test .
d chalkingerosion two astm methods are combined for this rating scale astm d num and astm d num .
a weighting factor of three will be applied to the results of these tests .
e adhesion the tape test is based on astm d num and the rating scale is from the classification of adhesion test results under test method b .
a weighting factor of five will be applied to the results of this test .
f flexibility this is a modified version of astm d num using a num inch mandrel .
the degree of cracking observed after bending is used for the rating .
a section num num weighting factor of five will be applied to the results of this test .
paint may also be tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona department of transportation testing procedures astm and federal test method standard number num .
c aluminum and zinc paint aluminum and zinc paint vehicles may be tested in accordance with the requirements of astm d num astm d num astm e num and federal test method no .
num .
d acrylic emulsion paint acrylic emulsion paints will be tested in accordance with the following procedure num resistance to accelerated w eathering the paint will be applied to concrete mortar panels and weathered in a quv accelerated weathering tester according to astm g num for num hours utilizing uvbnum lamps and the exposure cycle as specified in subsection num of federal specification ttpnum .
the paint weathered in this manner shall show no appreciable change in color or appearance due to fading chalking or material reaction .
num ttpnum requirements all performance requirements listed in section num of federal specification ttpnum will be met as specified when tested according to the applicable test methods as specified in section num of federal specification ttpnum .
num adhesion the acrylic emulsion paint will be applied to a concrete test specimen or to the final concrete surface and subjected to one or both of the methods of adhesion testing described below after a minimum period of num days of sunlight after application .
adhesion will be measured in accordance with the requirements of astm d num .
w hen test method a is used a rating of numa will be required .
w hen test method b is used a rating of numb will be required .
num testing random inspection testing of the completed paint finish will be performed by the engineer according to the above performance requirements .
noncompliance with these test results will require remedial action which may include substitution of the paint supplied section num num modification to the application plan removal and repainting of the non compliance sections or other action as deemed appropriate by the engineer .
section num reinforcing steel num general requirements reinforcing steel shall be furnished in the sizes shapes and lengths shown on the plans and in conformance with the requirements of this section .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
w hen reinforcing steel is delivered to the site of the work the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a copy of all shipping documents .
each shipping document shall show the sizes lengths and weights of the reinforcing steel separately for each structure .
num reinforcing bars except when used for wire ties or spirals steel bars used as reinforcement in concrete shall be deformed and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num .
w here shown on the plans the bars shall be grade num .
w here grade num is not specified on the plans grade num shall be used if immediately available .
if grade num is not immediately available grade num may be used exclusively or in combination with grade num provided that the conditions under which the grades are used in combination are acceptable to the engineer and further provided that there is no additional cost to the department .
num wire steel wire used as spirals or ties for reinforcement in concrete shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
num welded wire fabric w elded wire fabric used as reinforcement in concrete and mortar shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
num epoxy coated reinforcing bars num steel steel reinforcing bars shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
section num num num epoxy for coating a list of powdered epoxy resins which have passed prequalification tests as described in aashto m num epoxy coated reinforcing bars and which may be used if the material is applied and cured in the same manner as that used to coat the test bars in the original powder prequalification test may be found on the departments approved products list .
copies of the most current version are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
prequalification testing may be performed by the national bureau of standards state laboratories or qualified private independent laboratories .
the powdered epoxy resin selected by the contractor and furnished by the manufacturer shall be of the same material and quality as the resins listed on the approved products list .
the approved powders are based on specific reinforcing steel preparation and powder application and curing methods and these identical methods shall be followed during fabrication .
the coating manufacturer shall supply the purchaser with a certificate of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num which properly identifies the batch andor lot number material quantity of batch date of manufacture name and address of manufacturer and a statement that the material is the same composition as the initial sample prequalified for use .
the certificate shall also state that production bars and prequalification bars have been identically prepared and applied with epoxy powders .
patching or repair material compatible with the coating and inert in concrete shall be made available by the epoxy coating manufacturer .
this material shall be suitable for repairs made by the contractor of areas of the coating damaged during fabrication andor handling in the field .
num application of coating the coating applicators facilities shall be subject to approval by the department .
applications for approval of facilities shall be made to the department by the coating applicator .
the surface to be coated shall be blast cleaned in accordance with the requirements of the steel structures painting councilsurface preparation specification no .
num sspcspnum near w hite blast cleaning .
the powdered epoxy resin coating shall be applied to the cleaned surface as soon as possible after cleaning and before visible oxidation section num num occurs .
in no case shall more than eight hours elapse between cleaning and coating .
the protective epoxy coatings shall be applied by the electrostatic spray method or the electrostatic fluidized bed method in accordance with the recommendations of the coating manufacturer .
the epoxy coating may be applied before or after fabrication of the reinforcing .
the epoxy coating shall be applied as a smooth uniform coat .
after curing the coating thickness shall be ten two mils .
coating thickness shall be controlled by taking measurements on a representative number of bars from each production lot .
coating thickness measurements shall be conducted by the method outlined in astm g num .
the coating shall be checked visually after cure for continuity .
it shall be free from holes voids contamination cracks and damaged areas .
the coating shall not have more than two holidays pinholes not visible to the naked eye in any linear foot of the coated item .
a holiday detector shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to check the coating for holidays .
the flexibility of the coating shall be evaluated on a representative number of bars selected from each production lot .
the coated bar shall be bent num degrees after rebound around a sixinch diameter mandrel .
the bend shall be done at a uniform rate and may take up to one minute to complete .
the test specimens shall be at thermal equilibrium between num and num degrees f at the time of testing .
no cracking of the coating shall be visible to the naked eye on the outside radius of the bent bar .
the contractor shall furnish a certificate of compliance from the coating applicator in accordance with the requirements of subsection num with each shipment of coated steel .
the certificate of compliance shall num verify that the coated items and coating material have been tested in accordance with the requirements of these specifications num state the actual test results for each requirement num state that the test results comply with the requirements and num state that the entire lot is in a fullycured condition .
the coating applicator shall be responsible for performing quality control and tests .
this will include inspection for compliance with the requirements of coating thickness continuity of coating and coating cure and the testing required under flexibility of coating in accordance with the requirements of this subsection .
the department reserves the right to have its authorized representative observe the preparation coating and testing of the reinforcement bars .
the representative shall have free access to the plant and any work done when access has been denied will be automatically rejected .
section num num if the representative elects lengths of coated bars may be taken from the production run on a random basis for test evaluation and check purposes by the department .
num shop repair epoxy coated reinforcement bars which do not meet the requirements for coating thickness continuity of coating coating cure or flexibility of coating shall not be repaired .
reinforcement bars with these defects shall be replaced or alternately stripped of epoxy coating recleaned and recoated in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
coating breaks due to fabrication and handling shall be repaired with patching material if the defective area exceeds two percent of the surface area of the bar in a onefoot length and the damaged spot is larger than num by num inch .
the repair of coating breaks shall be limited to bars on which the total of the defective coating areas does not exceed five percent of the surface area of the reinforcement bar .
bars with greater than five percent damage shall be replaced or alternately stripped of epoxy coating recleaned and recoated in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
section num structural metals num general requirements certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num structural steel structural carbon steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num .
high strength lowalloy structural columbium vanadium steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
high strength lowalloy structural steel up to four inches thick with num pounds per square inch minimumyield point shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num .
num steel structural rivets steel structural rivets shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num .
section num num num bolts nuts and washers high strength structural steel bolts and washers shall conform to the requirements of section num .
bolts and nuts other than high strength steel bolts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade a. nonheaded anchor bolts either straight or swaged to be used for structural anchorage shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num .
num steel forgings carbon steel forgings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num class c. num castings carbon steel castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num grade num .
gray iron castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm a num class numb .
malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
drainage structure castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
the weight of aluminum covers shall not be less than num pounds .
num cast bronze and copperalloy plates cast bronze bearing and expansion plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm b num copper alloy uns no .
c num .
rolled copperalloy bearing and expansion plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num astm b num copper alloy uns no .
c num and no .
c num .
num steel tubes steel tubes lowcarbon tapered for structural use shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade a .
num steel pipe steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade b type e or s except hydrostatic testing will not be required .
section num num section num bituminous materials num general requirements bituminous materials shall conform when tested in accordance with the tests hereinafter enumerated to the following requirements as applicable for the types and grades designated and used .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num sampling of bituminous material sampling of bituminous material shall conform to the requirements of aashto t num .
samples shall be taken by the contractor and witnessed by the engineer .
the point of sampling and the number of samples will be specified by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide convenient facilities for obtaining accurate samples of bituminous material .
num bituminous material requirements num asphalt cement asphalt cement shall be a performance grade pg asphalt binder conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
the pressure aging temperature shall be as specified below pg asphalt binder pressure aging temperature pg numxx or pg numxx num c pg numxx pg numxx or pg numxx num c if pg num tr asphalt binder is used it shall conform to the requirements of table numa .
a minimum of seven working days prior to the start of asphaltic concrete production the contractor shall provide the engineer a onegallon sample of the proposed asphalt binder and a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num showing complete asphalt binder testing .
laboratoryprepared samples will not be acceptable .
asphaltic concrete production shall not begin until the engineer determines the acceptability of the proposed asphalt binder .
if during asphaltic concrete production it is determined by testing that asphalt cement fails to meet the requirements for the specified grade the asphaltic concrete represented by the corresponding test results shall be evaluated for acceptance .
should the asphaltic concrete be allowed to remain in place the contract unit price for asphalt cement will be adjusted by the percentage shown in table num .
should the section num num asphalt cement be in reject status the contractor may within num days of receiving notice of the reject status of the asphalt cement supply an engineering analysis of the expected performance of the asphaltic concrete in which the asphalt cement is incorporated .
the engineering analysis shall detail any proposed corrective action and the anticipated effect of such corrective action on the performance .
w ithin three working days the engineer will determine whether or not to accept the contractors proposal .
if the proposal is rejected the asphaltic concrete shall be removed and replaced with asphaltic concrete meeting the requirements of the applicable specifications at no additional expense to the department .
if the contractors proposal is accepted the asphaltic concrete shall remain in place at the applicable percent of contract unit price allowed and any necessary corrective action shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
num liquid asphalt liquid asphalt shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num cutback asphalt medium curing type .
adjustments in the contract unit price in accordance with the requirements of table num will be made for quantities of material represented by the corresponding test results .
num emulsified asphalt emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of table num for anionic rapid set rsnum rsnum anionic slow set ssnum cationic rapid set crsnum crsnum and cationic slow set cssnum .
polymerized cationic rapid set crsnump emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of table numa .
polymerized high float hfenump and hfenump emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of table numb .
emulsified asphalts shall be homogeneous .
if emulsified asphalt has separated it shall be thoroughly mixed to insure homogeneity .
if emulsified asphalt has separated due to freezing it shall not be used .
emulsified asphalt shall not be used after num days from delivery .
the contract unit price will be adjusted to the nearest cent for quantities of emulsified asphalt which do not meet the specified minimum percent residue .
the adjusted contract unit price will be determined by the following contract unit price x percent residue specified minimum from testing residue percent unit price contract adjusted section num num num emulsified asphalt special type emulsified asphalt special type shall consist of type ssnum or cssnum diluted with water to provide an asphalt content not less than num percent .
the material may be diluted in the field .
num recycling agents recycling agents shall conform to the requirements of table num .
num emulsified recycling agents emulsified recycling agents shall conform to the requirements of table num .
the contract unit price will be adjusted to the nearest cent for quantities of emulsified recycling agent which do not meet the specified minimum percent residue .
the adjusted contract unit price will be determined by the following num other requirements other requirements for bituminous materials shall conform to the requirements of table num .
contract unit price x percent residue specified minimum from testing residue percent unit price contract adjusted section num num table num asphalt binder adjustment table test property aashto test method test result percent of contract unit price allowed dynamic shear of original binder gsin  kpa t num num num num num num num num num num dynamic shear of rtfo binder gsin  kpa t num num num num num num num num num num dynamic shear of pav binder gsin  kpa t num num num num num num num num num num num num creep stiffness of pav binder s mpa t num num num num num num num num num num num num mvalue at num sec .
t num num num num num num num num num num num reject status the pay adjustment applies if allowed to remain in place .
notes specified properties in aashto m num for flash point viscosity at num c and mass loss are not considered performance related .
specification deficiencies for these properties shall be cause for a work stoppage until specification properties are met but will not be cause for a pay adjustment .
should the bituminous material be deficient on more than one property the pay adjustment will be the greatest reduction to the contract unit price specified considering individual test results .
the information presented in this table does not apply to asphalt cement used for tack coats .
section num num table numa pg num tr asphalt binder test property test method requirement test result percent of contract unit price allowed solubility in trichloroethylene minimum astm d num num softening point c minimum aashto t num num num num num num num num num elastic recovery num c minimum aashto t num num num num num num num num num phase angle  num c num radsec degrees maximum aashto t num num num num num num num num num num reject status the pay adjustment applies if allowed to remain in place .
notes pg num tr asphalt binder shall contain a minimum of num percent crumb rubber and a minimum of two percent sbs styrenebutadienestyrene polymer .
pg num tr asphalt binder shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num and in addition shall meet the requirements specified above .
table num will also apply for pg num tr asphalt binder .
should the bituminous material be deficient on more than one of the properties listed in tables num and numa the pay adjustment will be the greatest reduction to the contract unit price specified considering individual test results .
the pressure aging temperature for pg num tr asphalt binder shall be num c .
the crumb rubber shall be derived from processing whole scrap tires or shredded tire materials .
the tires from which the crumb rubber is produced shall be taken from automobiles trucks or other equipment owned and operated in the united states .
the processing shall not produce as a waste product casings or other round tire material that can hold water when stored or disposed of above ground .
section num num table num mc liquid asphalt pay adjustment table grade kinematic viscosity aashto t num centistokes deviations percent of contract unit price allowed num num num num num or num num num num or num num less than num or greater than num num num num num num num num num num num or num num num num num num or num num num less than num or greater than num num num num num num num num or num num num num or num num less than num or greater than num num num num num num num num num num num or num num num num or num num less than num or greater than num num num num num num num reject status the pay adjustment applies if allowed to remain in place .
note since volatile solvents utilized in the manufacture of mc liquid asphalt may volatilize in varying amounts during normal transporting handling and storage operations whenever such liquid asphalts are used for prime coats or curing seals deviations from the maximum specification limits greater than those listed may be permitted when justified .
in such cases when material is allowed to remain in place num of the contract unit price is allowed .
section num num table num emulsified asphalts tests on test requirement emulsion method rsnum crsnum rsnum crsnum ssnum cssnum num viscosity saybolt furol seconds range num f num f t num num num num num num num settlement num days maximum t num num num num num num num sieve retained on no .
num maximum t num num num num num num particle charge t num pos .
pos .
pos .
num demulsiability num ml num n calcium chloride minimum t num num num classification uncoated particles minimum ariz. num num residue num residue minimum num num num num num num num notes num t num is aashto num distilled water will be used instead of the two percent sodium oleate solution .
num if the particle charge test result is inconclusive material having a maximum ph value of num will be acceptable .
num residue will be obtained in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num and shall conform to all the requirements of aashto m num for pg num except that for crsnum the dynamic shear gsin  on the original residue shall be a minimum of num kpa and a maximum of num kpa .
num residue by evaporation may be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num however in case of dispute aashto t num will be used .
section num num table numa polymerized cationic rapid set crsnump emulsified asphalt num tests on emulsion test method requirement viscosity saybolt furol seconds num c num f range aashto t num num storage stability num hours maximum aashto t num num demulsibilty num ml of num dss minimum aashto t num num particle charge test aashto t num positive sieve test retained on num m no .
num maximum aashto t num num residue from distillation to num c num f minimum aashto t num num oil distillate to num c num f volume of emulsion maximum aashto t num num tests on residue from distillation penetration num c num f num grams num seconds range in num mm aashto t num num ductility num c num f num mmminute cm minimum aashto t num num elastic recovery by means of ductilometer num c num f minimum aashto t num num num the introduction of polymer must occur before emulsification .
section num num table numb polymerized high float emulsified asphalt num requirement tests on emulsion test method hfenump hfenump viscosity saybolt furol seconds num c num f range aashto t num num num sieve test retained on num m no .
num maximum aashto num num num num storage stability num hours maximum aashto t num num num residue from distillation to num c num f minimum aashto t num num num oil distillate to num c num f volume of emulsion maximum aashto t num num num tests on residue from distillation penetration num c num f num grams num seconds range in num mm aashto t num num num float test at num c num f seconds minimum aashto t num num num ductility num c num f num cmminute cm minimum aashto t num num na elastic recovery by means of ductilometer num c num f minimum aashto t num num num num the introduction of polymer must occur before emulsification .
num distilled water will be used instead of two percent sodium oleate solution .
section num num table num recycling agents tests on requirement recycling ranum ranum ranum ranum agent test method min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
viscosity num f centistokes aashto t num num num num num num num num num flash point cleveland open cup num num num num f minimum aashto t num saturate by weight astm d num num num num num test on residue num num num num num w eight change viscosity ratio num num num num num notes num residue will be obtained in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
num viscosity ratio viscosity of residue at num f centistokes viscosity of recycling agent at num f centistokes section num num table num emulsified recycling agents tests on emulsified recycling agent aashto test method except as requirement shown eranum eranum eranum eranum viscosity saybolt furol num f seconds range t num num num num num num num num num miscibility t num passes passes passes passes sieve test maximum t num num num num num num particle charge t num positive positive positive positive residue num residue minimum num num num num num notes num distilled water will be used instead of the two percent sodium oleate solution .
num residue will be obtained in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num and shall conform to all requirements specified in table num .
num residue by evaporation may be determined in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num however in case of dispute aashto t num will be used .
section num num table num other requirements grade of asphalt specification designation range of temperatures for application by spraying f not applicable for plant mixing range of aggregate temperatures for plant mixing f basis of conversion average gallons per ton at num f paving asphalt pg numxx pg numxx pg numxx pg numxx pg numxx num num num num num pg num tr num num num liquid asphalt mcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num emulsified asphalt rsnum crsnum rsnum crsnum num num num num num num num num num crsnump num num num ssnum cssnum num num num num hfenump hfenump emulsified asphalt special type num num num recycling agent ranum ranum ranum ranum num emulsified recycling agent eranum eranum eranum eranum num num num num or as directed by the engineer .
section num num section num portland cement concrete num general requirements portland cement concrete shall consist of a mixture of hydraulic cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate and water .
it may also contain airentraining admixtures chemical admixtures and a supplementary cementitious material .
the contractor shall determine the mix proportions and shall furnish concrete which conforms to the requirements of these specifications .
all concrete shall be sufficiently workable at the slump proposed by the contractor within the specified range to allow proper placement of the concrete without harmful segregation bleeding or incomplete consolidation .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to proportion mix place finish and cure the concrete properly in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num materials num hydraulic cement hydraulic cement shall consist of either portland cement or portlandpozzolan cement .
portland cement shall conform to the requirements of astm c num for type ii iii or v. however at the option of the manufacturer processing additions may be used in the manufacture of the cement provided such processing additions have been shown to meet the requirements of astm c num and the total amount of such material used does not exceed one percent of the weight of the portland cement clinker .
portlandpozzolan cement shall conform to the requirements of astm c num for type ip ms .
hydraulic cement shall not contain more than num percent total alkali .
the word alkali as used in these specifications shall be taken as the sum of sodium oxide and potassium oxide calculated as sodium oxide .
certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
cement of different types or brands shall not be intermingled or used in the same batch .
the contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against dampness .
cement which for any reason has become partially set or which contains caked lumps shall not be used .
section num num the use of either sacked cement or bulk cement is permissible .
the use of fractional bags of sacked cement will not be permitted unless the contractor elects to weigh the cement into each batch .
num water the water used shall be free from injurious amounts of oil acid alkali clay vegetable matter silt or other harmful matter .
w ater shall contain not more than num parts per million of chlorides as cl and not more than num parts per million of sulfates as so num .
w ater shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
potable water obtained from public utility distribution lines will be acceptable .
num aggregates a general requirements w hen concrete is to be placed at elevations above num feet the fine and coarse aggregate shall be subject to five cycles of the sodium sulfate soundness test in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
the total loss shall not exceed num percent by weight of the aggregate as a result of the test .
tests for soundness may be waived when aggregates from the same source have been approved and the approved test results apply to the current production from that source .
w hen aggregates show potential for alkali silica reaction asr as indicated by expansions of num or greater at num days after casting when tested in accordance with astm c num sufficient mitigation for the expansion shall be determined in accordance with astm c num .
mill tailings or material from mine dumps shall not be used in the production of fine or coarse aggregate .
the handling and storage of concrete aggregate shall be such as to minimize segregation or the intermixing and contamination with foreign materials .
the engineer may require that aggregates be stored separately .
different sizes of aggregate shall be separated by bulkheads or stored in separate stockpiles sufficiently removed from each other to prevent the material from becoming intermixed .
w hen aggregates are stored on the ground the sites for the stockpiles shall be clear of all vegetation and level .
the bottom onefoot layer of aggregate shall not be disturbed or used .
the handling and storage of concrete aggregate for class p concrete at the job site shall be such as to minimize segregation .
stockpiles shall be neat and regular in form and shall occupy as small an area as possible .
stockpiles shall be constructed by first distributing the aggregate over the entire base and then building upward in successive section num num layers not more than five feet in depth .
aggregate shall not be dumped or spilled over the side of the pile .
w hen a conveyor is used to stockpile aggregate it shall be equipped with an adequate rock tremie or rock ladder to reduce segregation and it shall be moved continuously across the stockpile .
the distance the material drops from the tremie shall not exceed num feet .
aggregate shall be distributed over the stockpile so that the formation of conical piles higher than num feet is prevented .
contamination of concrete aggregate for class p concrete by contact with the ground at the job site shall be positively prevented .
the contractor shall take the necessary measures to prevent such contamination .
such preventive measures shall include but not necessarily be limited to placing aggregate on hardened surfaces consisting of portland cement concrete asphaltic concrete or cement treated material .
the contractor shall maintain at least two full days worth of production of fine and coarse aggregate stockpiled at the batch plant for class p concrete prior to starting and throughout the duration of portland cement concrete paving operations .
this requirement is waived for the last two days of production .
the following test methods will be used to evaluate the quality of aggregates for concrete sampling arizona test method num reducing field samples to testing size aashto t num potential for alkali silica reaction asr astm c num c num clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num lightweight particles aashto t num see note organic impurities aashto t num aggregate gradation arizona test method num soundness sodium sulfate aashto t num mortar strength aashto t numsee note sand equivalent aashto t num l.a. abrasion aashto t num fractured coarse aggregate particles arizona test method num note aashto t num and t num are modified as specified in subsections num b and c. b fine aggregate fine aggregate shall be a natural sand or other approved inert material with similar characteristics composed of clean hard strong durable uncoated particles .
the aggregate shall be washed and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with the following exceptions section num num the amount of deleterious substances in the washed fine aggregate shall not exceed the following limits by dry weight when tested in accordance with the following test methods clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num num lightweight particles aashto t num except that the percent of lightweight particles shall be reported to the nearest num .
num num max .
coal and lignite only material that is brownishblack or black shall be considered coal or lignite .
the total amount of all deleterious substances listed in the table above shall not exceed num percent by dry weight .
fine aggregate shall meet the following gradation requirements when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
sieve size percent passing num in .
num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num fine aggregate shall have a sand equivalent value of not less than num .
fine aggregates shall be subjected to testing under aashto t num for organic impurities .
aggregates producing a color darker than the standard color shall be rejected unless the material passes the mortar strength specified in the following paragraph fine aggregate shall be made into mortar and subjected to testing under aashto t num except that the mortar shall develop a compressive strength at seven and num days of not less than num percent of that developed by a mortar prepared in the same manner with the same type ii cement and graded ottawa sand having a fineness modulus of num num .
c coarse aggregate coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed stone gravel crushed gravel or other approved inert material of similar characteristics including cinders when specified having hard strong and durable pieces free of clay and other deleterious substances .
the aggregate shall be washed .
the aggregate gradation when tested in accordance with arizona test method num shall conform to the appropriate size designation of aashto m num except as shown below .
section num num the amount of deleterious substances in the washed coarse aggregate shall not exceed the following limits by dry weight when tested in accordance with the following test methods except as noted clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num num lightweight particles aashto t num except that the percent of lightweight particles shall be reported to the nearest num .
num num max .
coal and lignite material passing no .
num sieve arizona test method num num only material that is brownishblack or black shall be considered coal or lignite .
the total amount of all deleterious substances listed in the table above shall not exceed num percent by dry weight .
the percent of wear of coarse aggregate at num revolutions when tested in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num shall not exceed num .
num admixtures a general requirements the contractor shall furnish certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num for each type of admixture furnished .
calcium chloride as a separate admixture shall not be acceptable .
all concrete admixtures shall be stored in suitable containers in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
all liquid admixtures shall be protected from freezing .
liquid admixtures that have frozen shall not be used .
admixtures shall be uniform in properties throughout their use in the work .
if more than one admixture is used the admixtures shall be compatible with each other so that the desired effects of all admixtures used will be realized .
b airentraining admixtures airentraining admixtures shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
section num num only those airentraining admixtures shown on the departments approved products list apl shall be used .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
airentraining admixtures having a chloride concentration of num parts per million one percent by mass of the admixture or less as determined in accordance with arizona test method num are acceptable unless otherwise specified .
c chemical admixtures chemical admixtures shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
only those chemical admixtures shown on the departments approved products list apl shall be used .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
chemical admixtures having a chloride concentration of num parts per million one percent by mass of the admixture or less as determined in accordance with arizona test method num are acceptable unless otherwise specified .
d supplementary cementitious material fly ash natural pozzolan and silica fume supplementary cementitious materials shall be approved prior to their use in accordance with materials policy and procedure directive certification and acceptance of hydraulic cement fly ash natural pozzolan and silica fume .
fly ash and natural pozzolan shall conform to the requirements of astm c num for class c f or n mineral admixture except that the loss on ignition shall not exceed num percent .
silica fume shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
w hen a supplementary cementitious material with a calcium oxide content greater than num percent is used or when the special provisions specify sulfate resistant concrete the cement intended to be used shall be tested for sulfate expansion in accordance with astm c num and astm c num .
for moderate sulfate resistance the maximum expansion shall be num percent at six months .
for high sulfate resistance the maximum expansion shall be num percent at six months and num percent at one year .
w hen class c fly ash is used the cement intended to be used shall be tested for sulfate expansion in accordance with astm c num and section num num astm c num and shall have a maximum expansion of num percent at six months and num percent at one year .
num concrete curing materials liquid membrane forming compound shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
type num compound with either a class a or class b vehicle shall be used for concrete pavement bridge decks and approach slabs .
type numd compound with either a class a or class b vehicle shall be used for other concrete items .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num design of mixtures num design criteria portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements specified in table numa for each of the classes listed therein .
table numa class of concrete minimum numday compressive strength required psi see note num hydraulic cement content lbs per cu yd minimum maximum see notes num num num maximum watercement ratio slump range inches b num num num none num num see note num num num num num num s or e num and greater num num num see note num p num num num none num num h high performance concrete as specified in project special provisions .
section num num table numa continued note num testing for compressive strength of cylinders for all classes of concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
note num a supplementary cementitious material fly ash natural pozzolan or silica fume conforming to the requirements of subsection numd may be used at the option of the contractor only when portland cement is used .
the use of a supplementary cementitious material is not allowed for replacement of cement when portlandpozzolan cement type ip ms is used .
a maximum of num percent of the required weight of portland cement may be replaced with fly ash or natural pozzolan .
a maximum of num percent of the required weight of portland cement may be replaced with silica fume or a maximum of num percent silica fume may be added to the required weight of portland cement .
w hen supplementary cementitious material is used as a replacement for portland cement the replacement shall be made on a num pound to num pound basis .
if performance enhancement of the concrete such as the mitigation of an alkali silica reaction or for increased sulfate resistance is necessary additional quantities of fly ash or natural pozzolan may be incorporated into the concrete without a corresponding portland cement replacement if approved by the engineer .
note num the hydraulic cement content shall be as shown unless otherwise specified .
note num concrete to be placed under water tremie concrete shall conform to the requirements for the class and strength required except the minimum hydraulic cement content shall be increased by num pounds per cubic yard of concrete .
note num unless otherwise shown on the plans .
note num the proposed slump shall be chosen by the contractor .
concrete at the proposed slump shall be sufficiently workable to allow proper placement without harmful segregation bleeding or incomplete consolidation .
airentraining admixtures will be required for all classes of concrete placed at an elevation of num feet or above .
the amount of entrained air in the concrete mixture shall not be less than four percent nor more than seven percent by volume .
however no airentrainment will be required for minor precast structures precast pipe and precast prestressed structural members supporting a concrete deck slab or impervious overlay .
also no airentrainment will be required for any precast items constructed using the dry pack or noslump method .
section num num for elevations below num feet airentraining admixtures may be used at the option of the contractor .
if airentraining admixtures are used the amount of entrained air in the concrete shall not exceed seven percent by volume .
concrete that fails to conform to the entrained air content requirements listed above for the respective elevation as determined by the engineer shall be rejected prior to placement .
unless specifically required waterreducing admixtures may be used at the option of the contractor .
the coarse aggregate size designation for class s class b and class e concrete shall be chosen by the contractor and approved by the engineer and shall conform to the size designation and grading requirements of aashto m num .
in choosing the size designation the maximum size of coarse aggregate shall not be larger than one fifth of the narrowest dimension between sides of adjacent forms or two thirds of the minimum clear spacing between reinforcing bars or one third the depth of the slab whichever is least .
if two or more stockpiles are utilized to manufacture an aashto m num size designation at the time of proportioning for mixing the aggregate from each stockpile shall be measured by weight and proportioned so that the resulting mixture of coarse aggregate meets the requirements for the chosen size designation .
the percent of fractured coarse aggregate particles shall be at least num when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
coarse aggregate for class p concrete used to construct portland cement concrete pavement without load transfer dowels shall be separated into two stockpiles .
at the time of proportioning for mixing the aggregate from each stockpile shall be measured by weight and proportioned so that the resulting mixture of coarse aggregate meets the requirements for size designation no .
num as specified in aashto m num .
the percent of fractured coarse aggregate particles for this coarse aggregate composite shall be at least num when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
coarse aggregate for class p concrete used to construct portland cement concrete pavement with load transfer dowels and adjacent shoulders shall meet the requirements for size designation no .
num as specified in aashto m num .
the percent of fractured coarse aggregate particles shall be at least num when tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
coarse aggregate for class p concrete placed in pavement ramp tapers not exceeding a width of num feet and in pavement gore areas may be size designation no .
num as specified in aashto m num .
the use of size designation no .
num coarse aggregate may be used in concrete placed in other inaccessible pavement areas when approved in writing by the engineer .
section num num num design procedures at least two weeks prior to the appropriate concreting operation the contractor shall furnish a mix design for each class of concrete and each strength of class s and class e concrete for review and approval .
more than one mix design for each class of concrete and each strength of class s and class e concrete may be submitted for approval provided specific items and locations of intended uses accompany the mix design .
the contractor shall substantiate each mix design by furnishing test data and providing all details of the mixtures proposed for use .
the mix design shall be prepared under the direct supervision of and signed by a registered professional engineer a nicet level iii or higher certified technician in the concrete subfield or an aci certified concrete laboratory testing technician grade ii .
individuals preparing and submitting mix designs shall have experience in the development of mix designs and mix design testing .
the complete solid volume mix designs submitted for approval shall include all weights and volumes of all ingredients .
the brand type and source of hydraulic cement and admixtures the coarse aggregate size number designation source of aggregates the specific gravities of all ingredients the proposed slump the watercement ratio a product code to identify the mix design and the intended use of each mix design shall be an integral part of each mix design .
the use of new and previously used mix designs and the requirements for trial batches will be as required by the materials policy and procedure directive submittal and approval of portland cement concrete mix designs .
changes in approved mix designs may be made by the contractor with the approval of the engineer .
in no case shall the approval of a mix design relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the results obtained by the use of such approved mix design .
a new mix design shall be submitted for approval any time the test results of an approved mix design indicate that the concrete does not meet the required compressive strength .
w hen approved by the engineer concrete from trial batches may be used in the work at locations where concrete of a lower strength is required and such concrete will meet the requirements of the class of concrete at that location .
the basis of payment for such concrete shall be that which applies to the concrete required at that location .
num concrete production num general requirements section num num the contractor may obtain concrete for each class of concrete and for each strength of class s and class e concrete from a source approved by the engineer in lieu of establishing a batch plant at the project site .
for each class of concrete and each strength of class s and class e concrete except for class p concrete produced in a batch plant at the site and used exclusively for class p work the contractor shall furnish a delivery ticket for each batch of concrete .
the minimum information to be shown on each delivery ticket shall be the date time batched truck identification number name or identification of batch plant name of contractor name and location of project the quantity of concrete the batch weights or mix design product code the amount of permissible additional water to meet the design watercement ratio and the number of revolutions that the concrete has been mixed at mixing speed in a truck mixer .
an authorized representative of the contractor shall be responsible for each delivery ticket and shall sign each delivery ticket accepting the contractors responsibility for the concrete .
the representative shall immediately furnish the delivery ticket to the engineer .
num proportioning a hydraulic cement a separate scale shall be used to weigh the hydraulic cement .
a load indicating device positioned so as to be easily visible to the engineer and accurate to num percent of scale capacity shall be provided to weigh all hydraulic cement .
the batching accuracy shall be within num percent of the required weight .
loadindicating devices for the scale or a load cell providing a digital printed readout will be required when weighing all hydraulic cement .
the cement shall be conveyed by means of an enclosed conveying system and the weighing hopper shall be equipped with one or more vibrators as required to ensure the complete discharge of all cement from the hopper after each batch is weighed .
b water w ater shall be measured by volume or by weight .
measurement by volume will be by metering .
scales shall be accurate within num percent of scale capacity .
volumetric measuring devices shall have an accuracy of num percent .
the batching devices shall be capable of routinely batching water within num percent .
c aggregates all aggregates shall be proportioned by weight .
section num num suitable scales shall be provided by the contractor to weigh each size of aggregate .
load indicating devices for the scales shall be positioned so as to be easily visible to the engineer and accurate to num percent of scale capacity .
the batching accuracy shall be within two percent of the target weight .
the weighing equipment shall be arranged so as to permit the convenient removal of excess material from the weighing hopper and the equipment shall be arranged to enable the operator to have convenient access to all controls .
the scales and load indicating devices shall be so graduated and equipped that the weights of materials can be accurately determined .
necessary efforts shall be made to obtain and preserve uniform moisture content in the coarse and fine aggregates .
the moisture content shall not vary more than three percent during any days concrete production .
the estimated percent of free moisture in each of the coarse and fine aggregates shall be determined by the contractor using acceptable test methods .
the moisture content of the aggregate shall be such that no free drainage of water from the aggregate will be visible during transportation from the stockpile to the point of mixing .
aggregate containing excess moisture shall be stockpiled prior to use until it is sufficiently dry to meet the above requirement .
in the event that either the coarse or fine aggregate has a moisture absorption rate of more than num percent the materials shall be thoroughly prewetted and allowed to drain in advance of use until the moisture content is stable .
d admixtures the equipment and the procedures used to measure admixtures and dispense them into the concrete batch shall be approved by the engineer prior to use .
dry admixtures shall be measured by weight with a separate scale .
a load indicating device for the scale shall be positioned so as to be easily visible to the engineer and accurate to within num percent of the amount being weighed .
paste or liquid admixtures shall be measured either by weight or by volume .
only mechanical dispensing equipment shall be used for adding admixtures .
dosage rates shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations or approved rates or as determined from field trial batches .
dispensers for admixtures shall have sufficient capacity to measure at one time the full quantity required for each batch .
admixtures shall be added in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and in a manner such that the admixture is incorporated uniformly in the concrete mixture .
the amount of liquid admixtures shall not vary from the required amount by more than num percent .
equipment for measurement shall be designed for convenient confirmation of measurement accuracy .
if more than one liquid section num num admixture is used each admixture shall be dispensed by separate equipment unless otherwise permitted in writing by the engineer .
w hen a supplementary cementitious material such as fly ash natural pozzolan or silica fume is specified in the mix design it may be weighed cumulatively with the hydraulic cement on the same scale .
if the same scale is used the hydraulic cement shall be weighed first then the supplementary cementitious material .
if the same scale is not used a separate scale with a loadindicating device positioned so as to be easily visible to the engineer and accurate to num percent of scale capacity shall be provided to weigh the supplementary cementitious material .
w hen the quantity of hydraulic cement exceeds num percent of the full capacity of the scale the batching accuracy of mixtures containing supplementary cementitious material shall be such that the quantity of the hydraulic cement and the cumulative quantity of the hydraulic cement plus the supplementary cementitious material is within num percent of the sum of their designated batch weights .
supplementary cementitious material shall be conveyed by means of an enclosed conveying system and the weighing hopper shall be equipped with one or more vibrators as required to ensure the complete discharge of the supplementary cementitious material from the hopper after each batch is weighed .
num mixing a general requirements the concrete may be mixed in a stationary mixer either at a central mixing plant or at the site or it may be mixed in a truck mixer either at a central mixing plant or at the site .
concrete may be mixed in a mobile mixer at the site for class s class b and class e concrete provided written permission of the engineer is granted .
each mixer shall meet the specified requirements for type and size and shall have attached in a prominent place a manufacturers plate showing the gross volume of the mixer and the recommended speeds of the mixer for mixing and for agitating .
each batch plant shall be equipped to control the time when the water enters the mixer during the mixing cycle .
batch and mixing time shall be from the time hydraulic cement is combined with water .
mixers shall be cleaned at suitable intervals .
w ater used for cleaning the mixer shall be discharged prior to further batching .
equipment having components made of aluminum or magnesium alloys which would have contact with plastic concrete during mixing and transporting shall not be used .
section num num all concrete shall be homogeneous and thoroughly mixed and there shall be no lumps or evidence of undispersed cement .
b mixing in a stationary mixer the volume of concrete mixed per batch shall not exceed the capacity of the mixer as shown on the manufacturers plate .
no spillage of concrete will be allowed during the process of mixing .
w hile mixing the mixer shall be operated at the speed shown on the manufacturers plate as the mixing speed .
the mixing time shall not be less than num seconds per batch on class p concrete and the mixing time shall be increased if directed by the engineer .
the mixing time shall be not less than num seconds for one cubic yard and shall be increased num seconds for each additional cubic yard or fraction thereof for class s class b and class e concrete .
the mixers shall have an automatic timing device which locks the discharge equipment until the required mixing time has been completed .
the mixer shall be operating at mixing speed at the time that all ingredients enter the mixer to ensure the immediate beginning of the mixing cycle .
mixing time shall end when the discharge chute opens .
the contents of the mixer shall be completely discharged before the succeeding batch is placed in the mixer .
any concrete discharged before the mixing time is completed shall be disposed of by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
stationary mixers shall be equipped with automatic batch meters for counting the batches for class p concrete .
the contractor shall furnish the batch count daily to the engineer .
mixed concrete shall be transported in truck mixers truck agitators or in nonagitating trucks having special bodies .
w hen truck mixers or truck agitators are used the concrete shall be continuously agitated from the time of loading until the time of discharge .
agitation shall be by rotation of the drum at the speed shown on the manufacturers plate as agitating speed .
the truck mixer or truck agitator shall be loaded and operated within a capacity not to exceed num percent of the gross volume of the drum .
the rate of discharge shall be controlled by the speed of rotation of the drum in the discharge direction with the discharge gate fully opened .
discharge from the truck mixer or truck agitator shall be completed within num minutes from the time batched unless otherwise noted in the mix design and approved by the engineer .
section num num bodies of nonagitating trucks shall be smooth mortartight metal containers and shall be capable of discharging the concrete at a satisfactory controlled rate without segregation .
if discharge of concrete is accomplished by tilting the body the surface of the load shall be retarded by a suitable baffle .
covers shall be provided when needed for protection .
discharge from nonagitating trucks shall be completed within num minutes from the time concrete is batched .
concrete hauled in opentop vehicles shall be protected against rain .
w hen the ambient temperature exceeds num degrees f the concrete shall be covered if it will be exposed to the sun for more than num minutes .
c mixing in truck mixers truckmixed concrete shall be mixed entirely in the truck mixer and shall be mixed at the batch plant or at the site .
truck mixers shall be operated within a capacity not to exceed num percent of the gross volume of the drum and at speeds shown on the manufacturers plate as mixing and agitating speeds .
each batch of concrete shall be mixed for not less than num nor more than num revolutions of the drum at mixing speed after all materials have been loaded into the drum except that when approved by the engineer the maximum of num revolutions may be increased .
any revolving of the drum beyond the maximum number of revolutions shall be at the agitating speed .
mixing shall begin within num minutes after the cement has been combined with either the aggregate or water .
the truck mixer shall be equipped with an electrically or mechanically activated revolution counter by which the number of drum revolutions may be verified .
the counter shall accurately register the number of revolutions .
it shall be mounted on the truck mixer or just inside the truck cab so that it may be safely and conveniently read from beside the truck .
the revolution counter shall be reset to zero after all materials have been loaded into the drum .
discharge from the truck mixer shall be completed within num minutes from the time batched unless otherwise noted in the mix design and approved by the engineer .
if additional mixing water is required to maintain the mix design watercement ratio the concrete shall be mixed by a minimum of num revolutions of the drum at mixing speed after the water has been added prior to discharge of any concrete for placement .
any additional mixing water and required mixing revolutions shall be recorded on the delivery ticket specified in subsection num .
this additional mixing may be in excess of the maximum revolutions previously specified .
section num num d mixing in mobile mixers concrete mixing in mobile mixers for class s class b and class e concrete shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
num consistency the contractor shall furnish class p concrete having a slump within the range specified in table numa .
the contractor shall furnish class s class b and class e concrete having the slump shown on the approved mix designs with a permissible variation of one inch however the permissible variation will be two inches when an approved high range water reducing chemical admixture astm c num type f or type g conforming to the requirements of subsection num is used .
concrete that fails to conform to the consistency requirements will be rejected .
w hen concrete is pumped samples for consistency will be taken both as the concrete leaves the mixer and at the pump hose discharge .
if the engineer determines that there is a good correlation between the results of consistency tests on samples obtained from the mixer and from the pump hose the engineer may discontinue sampling from one of the sources however the engineer may take periodic samples from both sources to verify the correlation of test results .
num weather limitations num general requirements under rainy conditions placing of concrete shall be stopped before the quantity of surface water is sufficient to cause a flow or wash of the concrete surface or have a detrimental effect on the finished concrete and acceptance parameters .
placing of concrete shall immediately cease if the hauling vehicles or any equipment or pedestrian traffic tracks mud on the prepared base or changes the allowable subgrade dimensional tolerances for class p concrete and slabs placed on subgrade for class s class b and class e concrete .
num hot weather concreting the temperature of the concrete mixture immediately before placement shall not exceed num degrees f. section num num forms subgrade and reinforcing steel shall be sprinkled with cool water just prior to placement of concrete .
mix water may be cooled by refrigeration liquid nitrogen or wellcrushed ice of a size that will melt completely during the mixing operation .
crushed ice may be substituted for part of the mix water on a pound for pound basis .
num cold weather concreting the temperature of the mixed concrete immediately before placing shall not be less than num degrees f. concrete shall not be placed on or against icecoated forms reinforcing steel structural steel conduits or construction joints nor on or against snow ice or frozen earth materials .
concrete operations shall be discontinued when a descending air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat falls below num degrees f nor shall concrete operations be resumed until an ascending air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat reaches num degrees f unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
mixing and placing concrete shall continue no later in any day than that time which will allow sufficient time to place and protect the concrete already poured before the air temperature drops to num degrees f. concrete operations may be allowed although the air temperature at any time during the cure period in the shade and away from artificial heat is below the limit permitted above .
w here concrete operations are thus allowed the contractor shall use equipment to heat the aggregates or water or both prior to mixing .
if aggregates are heated the minimum temperature shall be num degrees f and the aggregates shall have no chunks of ice or frozen aggregate present .
equipment used to heat the aggregates shall be such that consistent temperatures are obtained throughout the aggregate within each batch and from one batch to another .
w ater shall not be heated in excess of num degrees f unless the water is mixed with the aggregate prior to the addition of cement to the batch .
w hen concreting operations are allowed when the air temperature falls below the limits permitted in the shade and away from artificial heat the contractor shall provide adequate insulation or heat or both to protect the concrete after placement .
this protection shall be to the extent required to maintain a concrete surface temperature of not less than num degrees f for a period of num hours after placement and at not less than num degrees f for an additional num hours .
w hen artificial heating is required the heating units shall not locally heat or dry the surface of the concrete .
a written outline of the proposed protection method shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
section num num the placing of concrete will not be permitted until the engineer is satisfied that all the necessary protection equipment and materials are on hand at the site and in satisfactory working condition .
concrete requiring cold weather protection shall have such protection removed at the end of the required period in a manner that will permit a gradual drop in the concrete temperature .
num curing concrete num curing castinplace concrete a general requirements all castinplace concrete shall be cured by one or by a combination of more than one of the methods specified herein and curing shall begin immediately after completion of machine or hand finishing of the fresh concrete .
curing shall be continued for a period of at least seven days after placing if either type ii portland cement or portland pozzolan cement has been used or for at least three days if type iii portland cement has been used .
surfaces requiring a class ii finish shall not be cured by the liquidmembrane forming compound method until after the finishing operations are completed .
no traffic hauling storing of material or other work shall be allowed on any concrete surface during the required curing periods .
b water curing method all surfaces not covered by reasonably waterproof forms shall be kept damp by applying water with a nozzle that so atomizes the flow of the water that a fog mist and not a spray is formed until the surface of the concrete is covered with a curing medium or sprinkling of the surface is permitted .
the moisture from the nozzle shall not be applied under pressure directly upon the concrete and shall not be allowed to accumulate on the concrete in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or wash the surface .
if a curing medium is used the concrete shall be kept continuously wet by sprinkling with water for the entire curing period .
burlap rugs carpets or earth or sand blankets may be used as a curing medium to retain the moisture during the curing period .
application of the curing medium shall not begin until such time that placement can be made without marring the surfaces of the concrete .
if a curing medium is not used the entire surface of the concrete shall be kept damp by the application of water with an atomizing nozzle as section num num specified above until the concrete has set after which the entire surface of the concrete shall be sprinkled continuously with water for the entire curing period .
in no case shall curing be interrupted by more than one hour during the curing period .
c liquidmembrane forming compound method all surfaces not covered by reasonably waterproof forms shall be cured by the liquidmembrane forming compound method .
the curing compound shall be applied to the concrete immediately following the surface finishing operation in one or more applications totaling a rate of not less than one gallon per num square feet .
the curing compound shall form a continuous unbroken surface .
if the membrane film is broken during the curing period the broken area shall be given a new application of compound at a rate sufficient to assure uniform coverage .
in no case shall curing be interrupted by more than one hour during the curing period .
d forms in place method formed surfaces of concrete may be cured by retaining the forms in place .
the forms shall remain in place for the entire curing period .
all joints in the forms and the joints between the end of forms and concrete shall be kept moisturetight during the curing period .
cracks in the forms and cracks between the forms and the concrete shall be resealed by methods approved by the engineer .
e curing bridge decks approach slabs and anchor slabs the top surface of bridge decks approach slabs and anchor slabs shall be cured by the liquidmembrane forming compound method and by the water curing method .
the curing compound shall be applied progressively immediately following the surface finishing operation .
liquidmembrane forming compound shall be applied at a rate of one gallon per num square feet .
the curing compound shall form a continuous unbroken surface .
w ater curing shall be applied not later than four hours after the completion of the surface finishing operations and shall be applied as specified herein .
section num num the top surface of bridge decks approach slabs and anchor slabs that will be covered with a special riding surface or waterproofing membrane shall be cured by the water curing method only .
w ater curing shall be applied progressively immediately following the surface finishing operation as specified herein .
num curing precast concrete a general requirements the contractor may cure precast concrete in accordance with the requirements specified above for curing castinplace concrete or if it elects the curing of precast concrete may be performed by external heating .
this may be accomplished by the use of lowpressure steam or radiant heat with moisture .
if curing of the concrete is accomplished by lowpressure steam or radiant heat with moisture curing will be considered completed after termination of steam or radiant heat curing .
rapid temperature changes in the concrete shall be avoided during the cooling period .
if curing of the concrete is accomplished by the water curing method the liquidmembrane forming compound method or the formsinplace method such curing shall be continued for a period of at least seven days after placement of the concrete .
the curing time may be reduced to a minimum of three days when a type iii portland cement has been used .
b lowpressure steam curing after placement of the concrete precast items shall be held for a minimum twohour presteaming period .
if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f steam shall be applied during the presteaming period to hold the air surrounding the precast item at a temperature between num and num degrees f. to prevent moisture loss on exposed surfaces during the presteaming period precast items shall be covered as soon as possible after casting or the exposed surfaces shall be kept wet by fog spray or wet blankets .
enclosures for steam curing shall allow free circulation of steam about the member and shall be constructed to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss .
the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers will be permitted provided they are kept in good repair and secured in such a manner to prevent the loss of steam and moisture .
steam at the jets shall be low pressure and in a saturated condition .
steam jets shall not impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
during application of the steam the ambient air temperature rise within the enclosure shall not exceed num degrees f per hour .
the average curing temperature throughout the enclosure shall not exceed section num num num degrees f and shall be maintained at a constant level for a sufficient length of time so as to ensure the development of the required compressive strength by the age of num days in concrete items which are not be prestressed .
for items which are to be prestressed the constant temperature shall be maintained for sufficient time necessary to develop the concrete compressive strength required for prestressing .
the ambient curing temperature shall not exceed num degrees f at any point .
control cylinders shall be covered to prevent moisture loss and shall be placed in a location where temperature is representative of the average temperature of the enclosure .
temperature recording devices that will provide an accurate continuous permanent record of the ambient curing temperature shall be provided .
a minimum of two temperature recording devices or one for every num feet of continuous bed length will be required for checking temperature .
in the event the side forms are removed before the precast unit has attained the required release compressive strength the curing method shall be continuous in maintaining the temperature and moisture level as described above within the enclosure as nearly as practical .
there shall not be a delay in recovering the girder or prestress member .
c radiant heat with moisture radiant heat shall be applied by means of pipes circulating steam hot oil or hot water or by heating elements or electric blankets on the forms .
pipes blankets or elements shall not be in contact with the concrete surfaces .
moisture shall be applied in such a manner as to keep the top surface of the precast unit continuously moist during the curing period by fogging or spraying .
moisture shall be maintained by a cover of burlap or cotton matting and further covered by a waterproof tarpaulin with an insulating cover .
temperature limits and the use of recording thermometers shall be the same as curing with lowpressure steam .
application of the heat cycle may be accelerated to meet climatic conditions upon the approval of the engineer .
a temperature sensing device shall be placed two num inches from the heated form .
num acceptance sampling and testing num general rejection of concrete will occur due to improper temperature slump andor air content for the concrete mixture delivered to the site .
the engineer may allow failed concrete mixture already placed to remain in place subject to acceptance by compressive strength or may require its removal .
section num num rejection of concrete will also occur due to insufficient compressive strength .
concrete compressive strength requirements consists of the specified strength which the concrete shall attain before various loads or stresses are applied and a minimum strength at num days .
acceptance and penalties for placed concrete which meets the above mixture requirements or is allowed to remain in place shall be determined by the results of the numday compressive strength and additionally in the case of class p concrete on the measured thickness of concrete pavement in place according to section num .
sampling and testing for compressive strength will be performed on all classes of concrete furnished including each strength specified on the project plans for class s or class e concrete .
num sampling and testing of concrete a sample of concrete for determination of temperature slump and air content when required as well as for fabrication of test cylinders for compressive strength determination at num days will be taken at random at the specified sampling frequency for each type of concrete .
samples of concrete shall be of sufficient size to perform all the required tests and fabricate the necessary test cylinders .
the samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num except as follows num concrete for class s class b or class e shall be sampled only once during discharge in the middle portion of the batch .
at the discretion of the engineer a sample may be obtained at the beginning of the discharge if in the engineers opinion the properties of the concrete do not appear to be within the specification limits for slump or temperature .
num concrete for class p shall be sampled immediately before going into the paver or forms or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
if concrete is pumped to facilitate placement at the discretion of the engineer samples may be taken from the truck and pump hose discharge to determine that the compressive strength specifications are met in the structure and to correlate temperature slump and air content results .
if the correlation is satisfactory and meets with the approval of the engineer sampling may continue from the most convenient location with occasional retesting for correlation .
rejection of concrete due to improper temperature or slump may occur at either the truck or pump hose discharge however rejection of concrete due to improper air content will only occur due to a failing test for a sample obtained at the final point of discharge .
section num num temperature of the concrete mixture will be determined in accordance with astm c num .
slump of the concrete mixture will be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
air content of the concrete mixture will be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
all compressive strength test cylinders will be made cured handled protected and transported in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
testing for compressive strength of cylinders shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
for class s concrete with a compressive strength requirement less than num psi or class b concrete a strength test will consist of the average strength of two test cylinders .
however if the compressive strengths of the two test cylinders differ by more than num percent from the average of the two the strength test result shall be the cylinder with the highest compressive strength .
for class s concrete with a compressive strength requirement equal to or greater than num psi or class p concrete the compressive strength of each sample shall be determined by averaging the results of the three test cylinders fabricated as specified in subsection num .
however if the compressive strength of any one of the three test cylinders differs by more than num percent from the average of the three its result shall be discarded and the compressive strength shall be the average of the remaining two cylinders .
should the individual compressive strength of any two of the three test cylinders differ by more than num percent from the average of the three the results of both will be discarded and the compressive strength shall be the strength of the remaining cylinder .
num sampling frequency for castinplace concrete a class s and class b concrete for class s concrete with a compressive strength requirement less than num psi or class b concrete a sample of concrete for the required tests as specified in subsection num will be taken on a daily basis for each num cubic yards or fraction thereof of continuously placed concrete from each batch plant .
for class s concrete with a compressive strength requirement equal to or greater than num psi a sample of concrete for the required tests as specified in subsection num will be taken on a daily basis for each num cubic yards or fraction thereof of continuously placed concrete from each batch plant .
for class s or class b concrete placed at elevations of num feet or above air content testing shall be performed for each num cubic yards placed regardless of the compressive strength requirement .
an additional sample or samples for any of the required tests may be taken at an interval of less than the sampling frequency specified above at the discretion of the engineer on any batch or load of concrete .
a sample for the required tests on daily placements of num cubic yards or less may be taken at the discretion of the engineer .
b class e concrete section num num class e concrete shall be sampled and tested for compressive strength by the sublot .
a sublot will be num cubic yards or an accumulation of quantities of a specified strength of concrete to total num cubic yards .
a sample will be obtained for each portion of concrete between num and num cubic yards inclusive for each specified strength of concrete .
for each specified concrete strength the quantity of concrete represented by four samples will be defined as a lot .
however for a continuous pour of greater than num cubic yards of a specified strength of concrete the total amount of concrete in that pour will be considered to be a lot and four samples will be taken at randomly selected locations as directed by the engineer .
the engineer may exclude certain locations from random sampling should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
three test cylinders shall be fabricated from each sample and tested for num day compressive strength in accordance with subsection num .
class e concrete shall be sampled and tested for temperature and slump for each num cubic yards .
for concrete placed at an elevation of num feet or above a sample will be taken for each num cubic yards for testing of air content .
for quantities of concrete less than num cubic yards the sampling and testing frequency for temperature slump and air content may be reduced with the concurrence of the engineer .
additional samples for any of the required tests may be taken at the discretion of the engineer .
c class p concrete class p concrete shall be sampled and tested for compressive strength by the lot .
a lot shall be considered to be one shifts production however a new lot shall begin when the mix design is changed .
for partial shifts due to weather or other reasons more than one days production may be included in a lot .
w hen such partial shifts occur the contractor and the engineer will jointly determine the lot limits .
five samples shall be obtained from each lot at random locations as directed by the engineer .
the engineer may exclude certain locations from random sampling should the engineer determine that the location of the work precludes normal construction operations .
three test cylinders shall be fabricated from each sample and tested for numday compressive strength in accordance with subsection num .
class p concrete shall be sampled and tested for temperature slump and air content if applicable a minimum of five times per lot .
the frequency may be reduced for partial shifts with the concurrence of the engineer .
additional samples for any of the required tests may be taken at the discretion of the engineer .
num sampling frequency for precast concrete a sample of concrete for the required tests as specified in subsection num will be taken for either each precast concrete section num num member or for each days production at the discretion of the engineer when the method of measurement is by the unit .
an additional sample or samples for any of the required tests may be taken at the discretion of the engineer .
the engineer will determine the quantity of concrete represented by each sample of concrete for any test performed .
w hen a sample of concrete for the required compressive strength test is taken to represent a single days production and not each precast member the degree of acceptance for all precast concrete members in that days production will be established by the results of such compressive strength test .
num testing for minor precast concrete structures a strength test on each precast unit produced will consist of the average rebound number as determined from readings taken on the precast unit with a rebound hammer .
the average rebound number will be determined in accordance with the requirements of astm c num .
the compressive strength of the concrete will be determined from the average rebound number and the calibration chart established for the specific rebound hammer being used .
the calibration chart will be established from rebound readings taken on concrete test cylinders fabricated at the precast plant and the actual compressive strength of the cylinders .
the test cylinders will be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of aashto t num .
testing for compressive strength of cylinders shall be in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
num acceptance for compressive strength a class p concrete class p concrete will be accepted for compressive strength in accordance with the provisions of section num .
all concrete failing to meet the compressive strength requirement or otherwise rejected in accordance with section num or subsection num shall be replaced with concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications .
if the contractor chooses to contest the compressive strength results of any sample for purposes of acceptability or improving a negative pay factor the contractor may elect to rely on the results of compressive strengths of cores .
three cores shall be obtained at no additional cost to the department at the approximate location where the contested test cylinders were obtained .
such cores shall be obtained and tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
cores must be obtained under the observation of an adot representative and delivered to the engineer in time to allow complete testing within num days of placement .
the contractor may elect to have a representative present during section num num testing .
compressive strength shall be the average of the results of the three cores .
however if the compressive strength of any one of the three cores differs by more than num percent from the average of the three its result shall be discarded and the compressive strength shall be the average of the remaining two cores .
should the individual compressive strength of any two of the three cores differ by more than num percent from the average of the three the results of both shall be discarded and the compressive strength shall be the result of the remaining core .
results of the core testing will be binding on both the contractor and the department and will replace the results of the test cylinders for that sample .
b class s and class b concrete class s and class b concrete will be accepted for compressive strength and paid for in accordance with the following table .
concrete will be paid for by the linear foot or by the cubic yard complete in place except that an adjustment in the contract unit price to the nearest cent will be made for the quantity of concrete represented by numday compressive strength test results less than the specified requirement .
concrete failing to meet at least num percent of the numday compressive strength for specified strengths of num pounds per square inch and below num percent for a specified strength of num pounds per square adjustment in contract unit price for compressive strength of class s and class b concrete num psi and below num psi num psi and above percent of specified numday compressive strength attained to the nearest one percent percent reduction in contract unit price see note num percent of specified numday compressive strength attained to the nearest one percent percent reduction in contract unit price see note num percent of specified numday compressive strength attained to the nearest one percent percent reduction in contract unit price see note num num or more num num or more num num or more num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num num see note num less than num num see note num less than num num see note num note num for items measured and paid for by the cubic yard the reduction shall not exceed num per cubic yard .
note num if allowed to remain in place .
section num num inch or num percent for specified strengths of num pounds per square inch and above or any concrete failing to meet the other requirements of subsection num will be rejected and removed in accordance with the provisions of subsection num at no additional cost to the department unless the contractor can submit evidence that will indicate to the engineer that the strength and quality of the concrete is such that the concrete should be considered acceptable and be allowed to remain in place .
if such evidence consists of cores the contractor shall obtain three cores from the concrete represented by the failing cylinder strength test .
the cores shall be obtained at no additional cost to the department under the observation of an adot representative and delivered to the engineer in time to allow complete testing of such cores within num days after the placement of the concrete .
all cores shall be obtained and tested in accordance with the requirements of arizona test method num .
the contractor may elect to have a representative present during testing .
the concrete represented by the cores will be considered for acceptance in accordance with the requirements of the table above .
if the average compressive strength does not meet the specified requirement all concrete so represented shall be removed at no additional cost to the department unless permitted to remain in place by the engineer .
results of the core testing will be binding on both the contractor and the department and will replace the results of the test cylinders for that sample .
c class e concrete class e concrete will be accepted for compressive strength in accordance with the provisions of section num .
all concrete failing to meet the compressive strength requirement or otherwise rejected in accordance with section num or subsection num shall be replaced with concrete meeting the requirements of these specifications .
if the contractor chooses to contest the compressive strength results of any sample for purposes of acceptability or improving a deficiency in compressive strength the contractor may elect to rely on the results of compressive strengths of cores .
three cores shall be obtained at no additional cost to the department at the approximate location where the contested test cylinders were obtained .
such cores shall be obtained and tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
cores must be obtained under the observation of an adot representative and delivered to the engineer in time to allow complete testing within num days of placement .
the contractor may elect to have a representative present during testing .
compressive strength shall be the average of the results of the three cores .
however if the compressive strength of any one of the three cores differs by more than num percent from the average of the three its result shall be discarded and the compressive strength shall be the average of the remaining two cores .
should the individual compressive strength of any two of the three cores differ by more than num percent from the average of the section num num three the results of both shall be discarded and the compressive strength shall be the result of the remaining core .
results of the core testing will be binding on both the contractor and the department and will replace the results of the test cylinders for that sample .
num method of measurement and basis of payment the method of measurement and basis of payment will be made as specified herein and under the provisions specified in the various sections of the specifications covering construction requiring the use of concrete .
section num retroreflective sheeting num general requirements retroreflective sheeting shall consist of a retroreflective system having a smooth outer surface .
the sheeting shall have a precoated adhesive on the back side protected by an easily removable liner except for self supporting products having a class v backing such as rollup signs and some types of traffic cone collars .
sheeting shall conform to criteria listed in astm d num for the applicable type and class unless otherwise specified .
all references herein to astm d num shall refer to astm d num .
only those retroreflective sheeting inks and film products that are currently shown in the departments approved products list apl shall be used .
copies of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
a certificate of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
the certificate of compliance shall identify the retroreflective sheeting type backing class make of sheeting inks and film intended for use in all manufactured devices including signs channeling devices mileposts object markers guard rail markers delineators and reference markers .
the engineer may accept all materials based on the certification or may require the contractor to furnish additional information or laboratory test results .
additionally the engineer may perform measurements on materials to determine their compliance with these specifications .
signs and other devices that have sheeting inks or films that do not meet these requirements shall be rejected and shall be replaced at no additional cost to the department .
num material types the type of sheeting to be used in any given application will be called out on the project plans .
type vi is a flexible sheeting material suitable for use with rollup signs .
for applications where more than section num num one sheeting type is allowed the contractor may use a higher grade of sheeting than specified at no additional cost to the department .
materials used for a particular application shall be of the same astm type manufacturer and product for all signs of the same type in the project .
opaque films used with sheeting shall be acrylic type films .
directapplied and demountable black characters shall be non reflective .
num visual appearance luminance and color requirements except as specified herein the color of the sheeting ink or film shall conform to the adot manual of approved signs the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd and the plans .
all warning signs with yellow backgrounds shall use fluorescent yellow sheeting .
all work zone signs with orange backgrounds shall use fluorescent retroreflective orange sheeting except that nonreflective sign materials may be used for temporary work zone signs where the signs will be clearly visible under available natural light .
all sheeting inks and film used shall be uniformly colored so there is no visual variation in their appearance on the same sign or from sign to sign of the same colors .
standard colors specified for sheeting processing inks and films shall as applicable match visually and be within the color tolerance limits required by highway tolerance charts issued by the federal highway administration .
additionally for the retroreflective sheeting unless otherwise noted the luminance factor daytime luminance and color specification limits daytime shall conform to the applicable requirements of astm d num .
in addition to the luminance and color requirements fluorescent orange sheeting shall have the capacity to effectively fluoresce outdoors under low light conditions .
for all applications requiring fluorescent orange sheeting the contractor shall provide a letter to the engineer from the manufacturer certifying that the sheeting to be used is fluorescent .
num coefficient of retroreflection the coefficient of retroreflection shall meet the minimum requirements of astm d num for the type of retroreflective sheeting specified .
section num num all black opaque films shall have a maximum coefficient of retroreflection of num or less at an observation angle of num degrees and entrance angle of num degrees .
num color processing transparent and opaque inks used for post or prescreen printing of signs shall be of a type and quality specified by the sheeting manufacturer and shall conform to the applicable requirements of the mutcd and the federal highway administration for traffic signs .
the inks shall be applied in a manner and with equipment that is consistent with the ink manufacturers recommendations .
additionally the signs produced shall have a uniform legend of consistent stroke width and sharply defined edges without blemishes that would negatively impact appearance color or required retroreflectivity .
for sheeting applications using black ink the maximum coefficient of retroreflection shall be num or less at an observation angle of num degrees and entrance angle of num degrees .
num adhesive reflective sheeting and film adhesives shall be either class i or ii as specified in astm d num and as modified herein .
pressure sensitive adhesive shall be an aggressive tack type that requires no heat solvent or other preapplication preparation of the sheeting or film for its adhesion to clean aluminum plywood or reflective sheeting surfaces .
pretreatment of plastic surfaces shall be done as recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
heatactivated adhesives shall allow positioning under normal working conditions and temperatures without damage to the materials or application surface .
this type of adhesive shall be activated by applying heat in excess of num degrees f to the material using a heat vacuum process .
no pretreatment of the heat activated adhesive shall be necessary .
the adhesive shall form a tight weatherproof durable bond that shall endure under all weather conditions for the required time of durability for that material .
during this period the material shall remain bonded to its surface without discoloration cracking crazing peeling blistering dimensional change or alignment change .
num weather testing for the evaluation of sign sheeting products the department has adopted a desert environment num degree southfacing outdoor acceleration test method .
sheeting will be tested for the time periods specified in subsection num .
the departments test method will be section num num considered to produce a two to one timeacceleration ratio for equivalent vertical exposure .
num durability requirements sheeting stability will be determined using a durability rating which shall be equal to twice the testing periods listed below .
sheeting must be warranted by the manufacturer against the defects listed below for a period equal to the specified durability rating for each type of sheeting product .
only those sheeting products which provide the specified warranty will be acceptable .
type iv viii ix x and xi sheeting shall be weathertested as specified above for a period of num months .
orange colored sheeting used for construction zone signing barricades and channeling devices shall be weathertested for a period of num months .
all other sheeting shall be weathertested for a period of num months .
in all cases the related inks and films shall be tested along with the respective sheeting and shall be subject to the same durability requirements as the sheeting .
type iv viii ix x and xi sheeting related inks and films shall have a minimum ten year durability rating .
all orange sign sheeting shall have a minimum durability rating of three years .
all other sheeting films and inks shall have a minimum durability rating of five years .
after weather testing for the periods specified above sheeting and related inks and films shall show no significant degradation or reduced performance .
unacceptable degrees of degradation and reduced performance are as listed below num bubbles wrinkles cracks or breaks on any portion of the applied materials greater than three inches in length that result in a negative appearance or concerns of additional degradation .
num significant shrinkage that causes the material to curl or to pull away from the background .
num significant delaminating of any material or layer sheeting to substrate sheeting to sheeting sheeting to film ink to sheeting film to sheeting or film to film .
num significant visible discoloration including clouding or chalking .
num a loss of transparency of any transparent sheeting ink or film .
num a loss in opaqueness of any opaque ink or film .
section num num num significant cracking blistering ripping flaking curling or chipping of any sheeting ink or film .
num a loss of nighttime retroreflectivity as observed at night under normal conditions or as defined and measured with a portable retroreflectometer at an observation angle of num degrees and entrance angle of num degrees .
the measured coefficient of retroreflection shall be consistent with what would be expected of the type of material being measured normal manufacturing variations the time that the material has been in the field and fhw a requirements .
those sheeting products which have been evaluated for the time periods specified above using the departments own testing and evaluation program and that have been shown to meet the durability requirements listed herein are included on the approved products list .
manufacturers guarantees or warranties on all traffic sign material shall be transferred to the department upon completion and acceptance of the project in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num application the sheeting inks clear coats if required and films shall be applied as specified by the manufacturer .
the applied sheeting or film shall not have bubbles wrinkles or foreign materials beneath the reflective sheeting ink or film .
section num prismatic reflectors num general requirements the contractor shall furnish a certificate of compliance in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
the certificate shall state that the reflectors comply in all respects with the following requirements the retroreflectors shall consist of a plastic face herein referred to as the lens and an opaque back fused to the lens under heat and pressure around the entire perimeter to form a homogeneous unit permanently sealed against dust water and water vapor .
the retroreflector shall be clear crystal in color .
the lens shall consist of a smooth front surface free from projections or indentations other than for identification and a rear surface bearing a prismatic configuration such that it will effect total internal reflection of light .
the manufacturers trademark shall be molded legibly into the face of the lens .
section num num the specific intensity of each acrylic retroreflector shall be equal to or exceed the minimum values in table num with measurements made with retroreflectors spinning .
num delineator and object marker retroreflectors the retroreflectors shall be either white yellow green or red as specified and shall be ready for mounting .
the lens shall have a retroreflective area of not less than num square inches .
retroreflection shall be provided by the lens prismatic optical elements .
the following test shall be used to determine if a retroreflector is adequately sealed against dust water or air .
submerge num samples in water bath at room temperature .
subject the submerged samples to a vacuum of five inches gauge for five minutes .
restore atmospheric pressure and leave samples submerged for five minutes then remove and examine the samples for water intake .
failure of three or more units shall be cause for rejection of the entire lot .
the delineator or object marker device shall consist of an acrylic plastic retroreflector unit mounted in a housing fabricated of numinch numhnum or similar aluminum or of cold rolled hot dip galvanized steel having a thickness of num inches .
housing dimensions including assembly and post mounting hardware will be as shown on the plans or as specified in the contract .
attachment hardware shall permit easy removal with the proper tools but that removal is not possible without the use of such tools .
the housing shall be protected against corrosion as recommended by the manufacturer .
num cutout letters symbols and accessory retroreflectors the retroreflectors shall be clear and transparent mounted as an integral part of the character .
five retroreflectors shall be submitted for test .
failure of one or more units shall constitute failure of the lot .
the sealed prismatic retroreflector units shall be tested for dust and water intrusion as follows submerge five retroreflectors in a water bath at room temperature .
subject the submerged units to a vacuum of five inches gauge water for five minutes then examine them for water intake .
failure of one or more units shall constitute failure of the lot .
section num num three reflectors shall be tested for four hours in a circulating air oven at num five degrees f. the test specimens shall be placed in a horizontal position on a grid or perforated shelf permitting free air circulation .
at the conclusion of the test the retroreflectors shall be removed from the oven and permitted to cool in air to room temperature .
the units after exposure to heat and air cooling shall show no significant change in shape and general appearance when compared with unexposed control standards .
failure of one or more units shall constitute failure of the lot .
the assembled cutout letter symbol or accessory shall withstand the combined corrosion test set forth in astm b num .
no failures permitted .
table num candelas per footcandle per square inch minimum specific intensity per unit area sia reflector units observation angle entrance angle delineators object markers cutout letters symbols access .
degrees degrees w hite yellow green red colorless num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num crystal clear or colorless section num asphaltrubber material num description the work under this section shall consist of furnishing proportioning and mixing all the ingredients necessary to produce an asphaltrubber material .
asphaltrubber material is also referred to as crumb rubber asphalt cra .
num materials num asphaltrubber a asphalt cement section num num asphalt cement shall be a performance grade pg asphalt binder conforming to the requirements of section num .
b crumb rubber crumb rubber shall meet the following gradation requirements when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
table num sieve percent passing size type a type b no .
num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num the crumb rubber shall have a specific gravity of num num and shall be free of wire or other contaminating materials except that type a crumb rubber shall contain not more than num percent fabric and type b crumb rubber shall contain not more than num percent fabric .
calcium carbonate up to four percent by weight of the crumb rubber may be added to prevent the particles from sticking together .
certificates of compliance conforming to subsection num shall be submitted .
in addition the certificates shall confirm that the rubber is a crumb rubber derived from processing whole scrap tires or shredded tire materials and the tires from which the crumb rubber is produced are taken from automobiles trucks or other equipment owned and operated in the united states .
the certificates shall also verify that the processing does not produce as a waste product casings or other round tire material that can hold water when stored or disposed of above ground .
num asphaltrubber proportions the asphaltrubber shall contain a minimum of num percent crumb rubber by the weight of the asphalt cement .
num asphaltrubber properties asphaltrubber shall conform to the following section num num table num property requirement cra type num cra type num cra type num grade of base asphalt cement pg num pg num pg num rotational viscosity num of pascalseconds num num num num num num penetration num of num g num sec .
astm d num num mm num num num minimum softening point astm d num oc minimum num num num resilience num of astm d num minimum num num num the viscotester used must be correlated to a rion formerly haake model vtnum viscotester using the no .
num rotor .
the rion viscotester rotor while in the off position shall be completely immersed in the binder at a temperature from num to num degrees f for a minimum heat equilibrium period of num seconds and the average viscosity determined from three separate constant readings num pascalseconds taken within a num second time frame with the viscotester level during testing and turned off between readings .
continuous rotation of the rotor may cause thinning of the material immediately in contact with the rotor resulting in erroneous results .
if during production it is determined by testing that asphaltrubber fails to meet the above requirements for the specified type the material in which the asphaltrubber is incorporated and represented by the corresponding test results shall be evaluated for acceptance .
should the material in which the asphaltrubber is incorporated be allowed to remain in place the contract unit price for asphaltrubber will be adjusted by the percentage shown in table num .
should the asphaltrubber be in reject status the contractor may within num days of receiving notice of the reject status of the asphaltrubber supply an engineering analysis of the expected performance of the material in which the asphaltrubber is incorporated .
the engineering analysis shall detail any proposed corrective action and the anticipated effect of such corrective action on the performance .
w ithin three working days the engineer will determine whether or not to accept the contractors proposal .
if the proposal is rejected the material in which the asphaltrubber is incorporated shall be removed and replaced with material meeting the requirements of the applicable specifications at no additional cost to the department .
if the contractors proposal is accepted the material in which the asphaltrubber is incorporated shall remain in place at the applicable percent of contract unit price allowed and any necessary corrective action shall be performed at no additional cost to the department .
section num num table num asphaltrubber pay adustment table cra type num cra type num cra type num test property test value percent of contract unit price test value percent of contract unit price test value percent of contract unit price penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num softening point num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num resilience num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject status the pay adjustment applies if allowed to remain in place .
should the asphaltrubber be deficient on more than one property the pay adjustment will be the greatest reduction to the contract unit price specified considering individual test results .
num asphaltrubber design at least two weeks prior to the use of asphaltrubber the contractor shall submit an asphaltrubber design prepared by an approved laboratory .
the design shall be formulated using asphalt cement and crumb rubber that are representative of the materials to be utilized in production and shall meet the requirements specified herein .
the design shall show the values obtained from the required tests along with the following information percent grade and source of the asphalt cement used and percent gradation and sources of crumb rubber used .
num construction requirements during production of asphaltrubber the contractor shall combine materials in conformance with the asphaltrubber design unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num mixing of asphaltrubber the temperature of the asphalt cement shall be between num and num degrees f at the time of addition of the crumb rubber .
no agglomerations of crumb rubber particles in excess of two inches shall section num num be allowed in the mixing chamber .
the contractor shall document that the amount of crumb rubber used does not deviate more than plus or minus num from the percentage specified in the accepted asphaltrubber mix design .
the temperature of the asphaltrubber immediately after the initial dispersion of the crumb rubber into the asphalt cement shall be between num and num degrees f. the contractor shall ensure that the crumb rubber and asphalt cement are thoroughly mixed prior to the beginning of the reaction period .
the reaction period shall be a minimum of onehour during which time the asphaltrubber is continued to be mixed while a temperature between num and num degrees f is maintained .
the reaction period shall be completed before the asphaltrubber is used .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the crumb rubber particles have been uniformly incorporated into the mixture and that they have been wetted .
the occurrence of crumb rubber floating on the surface or agglomerations of crumb rubber particles shall be evidence of insufficient mixing .
prior to use the viscosity of the asphaltrubber shall be tested by the use of a rotational viscotester which is to be furnished by the contractor or supplier .
num handling of asphaltrubber once the asphaltrubber has been mixed it shall be kept thoroughly agitated to prevent settling of the crumb rubber particles .
the temperature of the asphaltrubber shall be maintained between num and num degrees f. if in the first ten hours after the completion of the reaction period the temperature of the asphaltrubber drops below num degrees f it may be reheated to a temperature between num and num degrees f. in no case shall the asphaltrubber be held at a temperature between num to num degrees f for more than num hours after the completion of the reaction period .
asphaltrubber held for more than num hours shall be allowed to cool and gradually reheated to a temperature between num and num degrees f before use .
the reheating of asphaltrubber that has cooled below num degrees f shall not be allowed more than one time .
asphaltrubber shall not be held at temperatures above num degrees f for more than four days after the completion of the reaction period .
for each load or batch of asphaltrubber the contractor shall provide the engineer with the following documentation num the source grade amount and temperature of the asphalt cement prior to the addition of crumb rubber .
section num num num the source and amount of crumb rubber and the crumb rubber content expressed as percent by the weight of the asphalt cement .
num times and dates of the crumb rubber additions and resultant viscosity test .
num a record of the temperature with time and date reference for each load or batch .
the record shall begin at the time of the addition of crumb rubber and continue until the load or batch is completely used .
readings and recordings shall be made at every temperature change in excess of num degrees f and as needed to document other events which are significant to batch use and quality .
section num drainage pipe num general requirements certificates of compliance shall be furnished in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
num metal pipe num corrugated metal pipe type numa pipe as specified in aashto m num section num may be used if the shell thickness meets or exceeds the thickness specified on the plans for type num pipe .
metallic coated zinc or aluminum corrugated iron or steel culverts underdrains and spiral rib corrugated steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except as otherwise noted herein .
polymer precoated metallic coated zinc or aluminum corrugated steel culverts and underdrains shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except as otherwise noted herein .
bituminous coated corrugated metal metallic coated steel or aluminum culverts and underdrains shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
aluminum alloy corrugated metal pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
the types of bituminous coating and the type of precoated sheets to be used will be specified on the project plans .
in lieu of the type a bituminous coating the pipe shall be coated either in the field or at the plant on the outside surface only in accordance with the requirements section num num of aashto m num .
either asphalt mastic or tar base material shall be used .
coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num m num and m num except that the use of bands with projections dimples will be limited to connection of new pipe to existing inplace pipe .
bands of special design that engage factory reformed ends of corrugated metal pipe may be used .
bolts and nuts for all types of coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of astm f num .
coupling band connection hardware consisting of nuts bolts rods bars and rivets shall be either galvanized after fabrication by the hot dip process in accordance with the requirements of astm a num or coated by the electroplating process in accordance with the requirements of astm b num or astm b num .
components of bolted assemblies shall be galvanized in accordance with astm a num separately before assembly .
special sections such as elbows and prefabricated end sections shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto m num m num m num and m num .
gaskets for all waterresistant joints shall be a continuous band or strip at least seven inches wide and one half inch thick .
rubber for the gaskets shall conform to the requirements of astm d num for the numa closed cell expanded grades .
w atertight joints shall use oring gaskets .
the oring gasket shall conform to the diameter dimensions specified in aashto m num section num and conform to the technical requirements of aashto m num .
w atertight joints may be used when waterresistant joints are specified .
num spiral rib metal pipe spiral rib metal pipe shall conform to the requirements specified under subsection num for corrugated metal pipe except as modified herein a fabrication ribbed steel pipe shall be fabricated with a continuous helical lock seam in accordance with aashto m num type numr or corrugation in accordance with aashto m num type numr .
aluminum rib pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with aashto m num type numr .
each pipe end shall be fabricated with a minimum of two annular rerolled corrugations for the purposes of joining pipes together with band couplers .
section num num b coatings the types of coatings and the type of precoated sheets to be used shall be as specified on the project plans .
c coupling bands coupling bands for spiral ribbed steel pipe shall be rerolled bands manufactured from numinch thick metalliccoated steel conforming to the requirements specified under subsection num and shall be twopiece for pipe greater than num inches in diameter .
coupling bands shall be a minimum of num inches wide formed with two corrugations that are spaced to provide nesting in the second corrugation of each pipe end and shall be drawn together by a minimum of two numinch diameter galvanized bolts through the uses of a bar and strap suitably welded to the band .
bands may be drawn together by other means such as angles as approved by the engineer .
d fittings fittings for ribbed steel pipe shall conform to the requirements for corrugated steel pipe fittings specified in subsection num except the material shall be ribbed steel .
e miscellaneous all spiral rib manhole risers num inches in diameter or greater shall be reinforced with a rolled threeinch by threeinch by numinch angle or as approved by the engineer .
pipe thickness for spiral rib pipe shall be specified in the pipe summary but shall not be less than that listed in the following tables spiral rib metallic coated steel pipe pipe diameter inches minimum thickness gage corrugation rib size inches num num num num by num by num or num by num by num num num num num by num by num or num by num by num num num num num by num by num or num by num by num section num num spiral rib aluminum pipe pipe diameter inches minimum thickness gage corrugation rib size inches num num num num by num by num or num by num by num num num num num by num by num or num by num by num num num num num by num by num or num by num by num num num num num by num by num or num by num by num num concretelined corrugated metal pipe a corrugated metal pipe corrugated metal pipe coupling bands and fittings for concretelined pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified sectional dimensions and metallic coatings .
aluminized coating shall conform to aashto m num .
pipe shall be full circle and shall be fabricated with helical corrugations .
pipe thickness shall be as specified in the pipe summary but shall not be less than that listed in the following table pipe diameter inches minimum thickness inches gage corrugation rib size inches num num num num num by num num num num num num by num num by num num by num num num num num num by num num by num num by num num num num num num by num num by num num by num num num num num num by num num by num each pipe end shall be fabricated with a minimum of two annular rerolled corrugations for purposes of joining pipes together with band couplers .
pipe shall be joined with rerolled bands made from the same material as the pipe .
the bands shall be a minimum of num gage num inches section num num thick .
bands shall be twopiece for pipe greater than num inches in diameter .
coupling bands shall be a minimum of num inches wide formed with two num corrugations that are spaced to provide nesting in the second corrugation of each pipe end and shall be drawn together by a minimum of two numinch diameter galvanized bolts through the use of a bar and strap suitably welded to the band .
bands may be drawn together by other means such as angles as approved by the engineer .
w hen watertight joints are specified o ring gaskets will be required .
o ring gaskets shall be per astm c num section num and shall be placed in the first corrugation of each pipe end and shall be compressed by tightening the coupling band in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
b concrete lining num composition concrete for the lining shall be composed of cement fine aggregate and water that are well mixed and of such consistency as to produce a dense homogeneous nonsegregating lining .
num cement portland cement shall be in accordance with subsection num .
num aggregate aggregates shall conform to aashto m num except that the requirements for gradation and uniformity of gradation shall not apply .
num mixture the aggregates shall be sized graded proportioned and thoroughly mixed with such proportions of cement and water as will produce a homogeneous concrete mixture of such quality that the pipe will conform to the design requirements of this specification .
in no case however shall the proportions of portland cement plus pozzolanic admixture be less than num pounds per cubic yard of concrete .
num lining the lining shall have a minimum thickness of num inch above the crest of the corrugations and shall be applied by a machine traveling through a stationary pipe .
the rate of travel of the machine and the rate of concrete placement shall be mechanically regulated so as to produce a homogeneous nonsegregated lining throughout .
the lining shall be applied in a twocourse application and shall be mechanically troweled by the lining machine as the unit moves through the pipe .
the trowel section num num attachment shall be such that the pressure applied to the lining will be uniform and shall produce a lining that has a uniform thickness and a consistent troweled finish .
the vertical diameter anywhere inside the pipe must be num percent of the nominal diameter less acceptable tolerances as stated in aashto m num .
pipe not meeting these tolerances with be rejected .
c experience the manufacturer shall certify in writing that it has successfully manufactured and furnished corrugated steel pipe with a concrete lining per these specifications on a minimum of fifteen num previous projects of a storm sewer nature .
num slotted pipe slotted pipe shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto m num .
it shall be the grate slot or angle slot type .
pipe shall be helically or annular corrugated .
grate assemblies shall be fabricated from steel conforming to the requirements of either astm a num or a num and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the method of manufacture shall relieve all strain and prevent distortion of the pipe .
w hen a lockseam joint is used slotted drain pipe shall be placed in a clamping device and cut the entire length prior to placement of the grate .
the grate must be continuous and full depth .
the grate shall be welded continuously to the pipe with a num inch fillet weld from end to end on both sides .
bolts and nuts shall be steel conforming to the requirements of astm f num and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
the butyl rubber joint sealant material shall be an extruded strip or bead compounded from a nondrying nontoxic synthetic resin base with butyl rubber and inorganic extenders and be num percent solid material with no shrinkage .
the sealant material shall have sufficient adhesion so that the strip or bead will adhere to galvanized steel and be soft enough to allow cold flow when compressed during connection of the pipe sections .
the sealant material shall not flow or sag at temperatures up to num degrees f nor become brittle crack or lose adhesion at temperatures as low as num degrees f and shall contain no migrating components that could leach out or produce any chemical reaction with galvanized steel .
the sealant material shall be furnished in num inch by one inch strips or in one inch diameter beads on one inch wide release paper and wound into rolls .
an alternative joint sealant or sealing method that will provide a watertight joint may be used if approved by the engineer .
section num num materials used for grout shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the grout shall be composed by volume of one part portland cement three parts fine aggregate and onefifth part hydrated lime .
hydrated lime shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type n. to these mixed materials sufficient water shall be added to provide a mixture that will flow readily .
grout that has been mixed more than one hour shall not be used .
retempering of grout will not be permitted .
num structural plate pipe structural plate steel for pipe pipearches and arches and the accessories for connecting the plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
structural plate aluminum alloy for pipe pipe arches and arches and the accessories for connecting the plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
w hen specified on the project plans or in the special provisions structural plates steel and structural plates aluminum alloy shall be bituminous coated in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
unless otherwise specified the coating shall be applied to the outside only .
concrete for footings bottom slabs on paved inverts and rings on struts shall conform to the requirements of section num for the strength and class specified on the project plans .
steel bars wire wire fabric anchor bolts and structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num or num as applicable .
num nestable steel pipe nestable corrugated steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except that the pipe shall be fabricated in two separate semicircular sections .
the two sections shall be firmly joined together in accordance with the requirements of military specification milpnum .
at the option of the contractor the longitudinal joint of the nestable pipe sections shall be either type i flanged or type ii notched as specified in milpnum .
num reinforced concrete pipe reinforced concrete pipe circular shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the dload specified .
reinforced concrete pipe circular shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the class of pipe specified .
section num num reinforced concrete pipe elliptical shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the class of pipe specified .
reinforced concrete pipe arch shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the class of pipe specified .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer a copy of the pipe design when the standard aashto tables are exceeded .
precast reinforced concrete flared end sections shall conform to the requirements of the previously cited specifications to the extent to which they apply .
the area of steel reinforcement per linear foot of the flared end section shall be at least equal to the minimum steel requirement for the reinforcement in that portion of the flared end section which abuts the pipe .
gaskets for reinforced concrete pipe circular joints shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
mortar used to join reinforced concrete pipe shall be composed by volume of one part portland cement two parts fine aggregate onefifth part hydrated lime and sufficient water to provide a plastic mixture .
cement and water shall conform to the requirements of section num .
fine aggregate shall conform to the grading requirements of astm c num .
hydrated lime shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type n. the lime shall be considered as an addition to and not as replacement for any cement .
num nonreinforced concrete pipe nonreinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the class of pipe specified .
gaskets and mortar used to join nonreinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements hereinbefore specified under subsection num .
num corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe fittings couplings and ends where specified shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for pipe sizes less than num inches in diameter and aashto m num for pipe sizes num to num inches in diameter .
nonperforated pipe shall have either water resistant or watertight joints as specified on the project plans .
w atertight joints may substitute or be used when water resistant joints are required .
w ater resistant joints shall be watertight according to the requirements of astm d num except that the internal water pressure test shall be section num num conducted at num pounds per square inch during which the joint leakage shall not exceed num gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per day .
w atertight joints shall be watertight according to the requirements of astm d num .
magnetic tape which is to be placed in the trench with the corrugated high density polyethylene plastic pipe as an aid in location after burial shall have a minimum overall thickness of num mils and a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch .
num metal safety end sections metal safety end sections shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto m num .
bolts and nuts shall be steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
safety and longitudinal bars shall be fabricated using schedule num galvanized pipe .
all bars shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of astm a num .
components of bolted assemblies shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of astm a num separately before assembly .
section num joint materials num rubber waterstops rubber waterstops shall be either molded or extruded from plain rubber or synthetic rubber at the option of the contractor .
the waterstops shall be formed with an integral cross section which shall be uniform within num inch in width and the web thickness or bulb diameter within num and num inch .
no splices will be permitted in straight strips and special connection pieces shall be well cured in a manner such that any cross section shall be dense homogeneous and free from porosity or other defects .
all junctions in the special connection pieces shall be fullmolded .
during the vulcanizing period the joints shall be securely held by suitable clamps .
the material at the splices shall be dense and homogeneous throughout the cross section .
field splices shall be vulcanized mechanical using stainless steel parts or made with a splicing union of the same stock as the waterstop at the option of the contractor .
all finished splices shall have a tensile strength of not less than num percent of the unspliced material .
section num num certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num plain rubber waterstops plain rubber waterstops shall be formed from stock composed of a high grade compound made exclusively from new plantation rubber reinforcing carbon black zinc oxide accelerators antioxidants and softeners and shall conform to the following requirements new plantation rubber content by volume percent minimum num tensile strength astm d num psi minimum num elongation at breaking astm d num percent minimum num unit stresses at num percent elongation psi minimum num at num percent elongation psi minimum num shore durometer hardness astm d num num to num tensile strength and elongation at breaking astm d num after num days in air at num num of or after num hours in oxygen at num num of and num psi percent of original minimum num num synthetic rubber waterstops synthetic rubber waterstops shall be formed from a compound made exclusively from neoprene or sbr styrene butadiene rubber reinforcing carbon black zinc oxide polymerization agents and softeners and shall conform to the following requirements neoprene or sbr content by volume percent minimum num tensile strength astm d num psi minimum num elongation at breaking astm d num percent minimum num shore durometer hardness astm d num num to num tensile strength and elongation at breaking astm d num after num days in air at num num of or after num hours in oxygen at num num of and num psi percent of original minimum num num polyvinyl chloride pvc waterstops polyvinyl chloride waterstops shall be manufactured from virgin polyvinyl chloride conforming to the requirements of the corps of engineers specification number crdcnum .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted stating that the requirements specified under paragraph six of crdcnum have been complied with .
section num num field splices shall be performed by heat sealing the adjacent surfaces in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the heat shall be sufficient to melt but not char the plastic .
num joint sealant hotpoured joint sealant material shall be a one component hot poured type conforming to the requirements of either astm d num or astm d num .
joint sealant shall not contain any coaltar materials .
the following requirement shall be added to paragraphs num of astm d num and num of astm d num the minimum ambient temperature during application and ambient temperatures under various storage conditions shall be clearly marked on the container .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num joint sealant coldapplication joint sealant shall be coldapplication mastic single or multiplecomponent type .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num bridge deck joint seals the elastomer for joint seal elements shall be polychloroprene rubber neoprene and shall be compatible with concrete and shall be resistant to abrasion oxidation aging and sunlight and to oils gasoline salt and other materials that may be spilled on or applied to the surface .
joint seals shall be of the cellular compression type or strip type .
one piece of the material supplied shall be at least num inches longer than required by the plans and the additional length will be removed by the engineer and used for testing by adot materials group .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num compression seals compression seals shall consist of a prefabricated preformed elastomer joint seal material and shall conform to the requirements of astm d num .
section num num the seal shall consist of a multichannel nonporous homogeneous material furnished in a finished extruded form .
the minimum depth of the seal measured at the contact surface shall be at least num percent of the minimum uncompressed width of the seal as designated by the manufacturer .
the joint seal shall provide a movement rating mr of not less than that shown on the plans .
the seal shall be so formed that it can be compressed to num percent of its original width without damage while simultaneously maintaining the top center of the exposed surface below the top surface of the installed joint .
the top and bottom edges of the joint seal shall maintain continuous contact with the side of the armor over the entire range of joint movement .
the compression seal shall be furnished full length except as otherwise specified on the project plans and as indicated on standard drawing bnum .
at all open ends of the seal that would admit water or debris each cell shall be filled to a depth of three inches with commercial quality open cell polyurethane foam or closed by other means subject to the approval of the engineer .
the seal element shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations subject to these specifications and the approval of the engineer using equipment manufactured specifically for the installation of said element .
the equipment shall not cause structural damage to either the seal element or the joint armor and shall not twist distort or cause other malformations in the installed seal element .
contact surfaces of the seal element shall be cleaned with normal butylacetate using clean rags or mops immediately prior to application of lubricant adhesive and sealant .
the lubricant adhesive and sealant shall be applied to the seal element and joint armor contact surfaces at the rate recommended by the manufacturer .
if the required joint opening at the time of installation is inadequate to allow for easy installation of the seal element the compression seals shall be shop installed into deck joint assemblies to be shipped fully assembled and installed as a unit .
fully assembled units shall have the lubricant adhesive applied to the seal and armor contact surfaces and shall be equipped with shipping and temperature adjustment devices approved by the engineer .
the lubricant adhesive and sealant shall conform to the provisions of astm d num .
section num num the lubricant adhesive and sealant shall have a viscosity such that it will perform suitably with installation equipment remaining fluid from num degrees f to num degrees f. each lot of lubricant adhesive and sealant shall be delivered in sealed containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark and the date of manufacture .
the shipping containers shall also indicate any special precautions or instructions required because of product toxicity flammability or other such information pertinent to the proper storage and use of the product .
num strip seals strip seals shall be preformed nonreinforced polychloroprene strip seal glands that mechanically lock into steel retainers .
the steel retainers shall be anchored into the structure in accordance with the contract requirements .
the adhesive lubricant used to install the strip seal gland into the locking steel retainer shall be a one part moisture curing polyurethane compound meeting the requirements of astm d num .
the strip seal gland shall be delivered to the jobsite in lengths suitable for continuous onepiece installation for each individual expansion joint .
field splicing is not permitted .
all steel surfaces that come in contact with the strip seal gland shall be cleaned to meet the requirements of sspcspnum .
special conditions such as mitres tees and crosses shall be shop fabricated in a mold under heat and pressure .
strip seal gland installation at joint openings of less than num inches will not be permitted .
the elastomer for strip seal elements shall conform to the requirements of astm d num modified as follows a recovery testing is excluded .
b table num of astm d num is revised as follows section num num table no .
num physical properties for preformed elastomer strip seals property require ment astm test method tensile strength minimum psi num d num elongation at break min .
num d num hardness type a durometer points num num d num modified num num oven aging num hr at num of tensile strength loss max .
elongation loss max .
hardness type a durometer points change num num num to num d num d num modified num num oil swell astm oil no .
num num hr at num of weight change max .
num d num ozone resistance num strain num pphm in air num hr at num of no cracks d num modified num low temperature stiffening num days at num of hardness type a durometer points change num to num d num modified num num compression set num hr at num of maximum num d num method b modified num num the term modified in the table relates to the specimen preparation .
the use of the strip seal as the specimen source requires that more plies than specified in either of the modified test procedures be used .
such specimen modification shall be agreed upon by the purchaser and producer or supplier prior to testing .
num test in accordance with procedure a of astm d num and ozone concentration is expressed in pphm .
num the hardness test shall be made with the durometer in a durometer stand as recommended in astm d num .
num preformed expansion joint filler preformed expansion joint filler for concrete structures pavements and incidental items shall conform to the requirements on the plans .
w hen not specified one of the following joint fillers may be used .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num bituminous joint filler bituminous joint filler shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
section num num num nonbituminous joint filler nonbituminous joint filler shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num type ii with the following modifications .
the joint filler may be formed as a premolded strip from suitable fibers .
the compression test specimen of the premolded fiber joint filler shall recover to at least num percent of its thickness before testing .
num cellular plastic joint filler cellular plastic joint filler shall conform to the requirements of astm d num .
the lubricantadhesive shall be furnished by the manufacturer and used according to its recommendations .
certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
num silicone joint sealant num general requirements silicone joint sealant shall be a low modulus silicone that is specifically formulated to seal portland cement concrete pavement joints .
silicone sealant shall be furnished in a one part formulation which is non acidcuring and shall conform to the requirements of astm d num except as specified herein .
num packaging and marking the sealant shall be delivered in the manufacturers original sealed container .
each container shall have attached intact the original manufacturers label .
the label shall be tamperproof nonremovable and shall be legibly marked with the manufacturers name the trade name of the sealant the manufacturers batch or production lot number and the expiration date of the manufacturers shelf life warranty .
sealant that has exceeded the shelf life warranty expiration date shall not be used unless it has been retested and recertified for bond test method in conformance with astm dnum .
the sealant may be recertified for a period not exceeding six months from the date of retesting .
retesting or replacement of the sealant will be at the contractors option .
retesting will be at no additional cost to the department .
failure to meet specification requirements shall not be cause for claim or extension of the contract .
the contractor shall be held liable for all costs incurred in procuring and testing of materials that are found to be outside specification requirements .
num field performance the manufacturer of the joint sealant shall demonstrate satisfactory field performance in arizona of less than one percent total failure section num num either within the material or the adhesive bond to the joint face after one year of service before the material shall be used .
num acceptance only those sealants shown on the departments approved products list apl shall be used .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
in addition a certificate of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall accompany each lot or batch of sealant .
no joint sealant shall be used until the engineer has approved the material for placement .
section num guardrail materials num general requirements certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted .
references to artba in this section shall hereinafter refer to aashto agcartba a guide to standardized highw ay barrier hardw are num edition .
num fasteners elements posts and blocks guardrail fasteners posts blocks and other components shall conform to the requirements of artba .
unless otherwise specified all surfaces of guardrail elements which are exposed to traffic shall present a uniform pleasing appearance and shall be free of scars stains or corrosion .
num miscellaneous materials nails shall be numpenny common galvanized .
nails for retainer strap shall be numpenny common galvanized .
the metal used to manufacture reflector tabs shall be either numhnum aluminum strip num num inches thick or steel strip num num inches thick galvanized in accordance with astm a num coating designation g num .
the reflector material shall be highreflectivity sheeting either silverwhite or yellow and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
adhesive for sheeting attachment to the metal tab shall be of the type and quality recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
nuts bolts and washers to be used in installations for which the details are not shown on the plans nor in the artba publication shall conform to the requirements of astm f num or a num be galvanized in section num num accordance with the requirements of astm a num class c and conform to the dimensional requirements of the american national standards institute .
structural steel shapes plates bars and strips used in fabrication of hardware and all miscellaneous steel shall conform to the requirements of astm a num and shall be galvanized in conformance with the appropriate requirements of aashto m num and m num .
they shall meet the dimensional requirements of the american institute of steel construction .
round and square structural steel tubing shall conform to the material requirements of either astm a num or a num and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num type num .
the tubular thrie beam shall be fabricated from thrie beam elements conforming to the requirements of artba .
w here galvanizing has been damaged the coating shall be repaired by painting with two coats of zinc paint in accordance with section num .
num timber guardrail posts and blocks timber for posts and blocks shall be rough sawn unplaned or snums with the nominal dimensions indicated .
any species or group of woods graded in accordance with the requirements for timber and posts of the w estern w ood products association may be used .
timber shall be no .
num or better and the stress grade shall be as follows num inch by num inch post and block num psi num inch by num inch post and block num psi num inch by num inch post and block num psi w hen the plans show guardrail systems using eightinch by eightinch timber posts and blocks the contractor may use num inch by num inch nominal size posts and blocks with a stress grade of num pounds per square inch .
at the time of installation the dimensions of timber posts and blocks shall vary no more than num inch from the nominal dimensions as hereinbefore specified .
the size tolerance of rough sawn blocks in the direction of the bolt holes shall vary no more than num inch .
only one type of post and block shall be used for any one continuous length of guardrail .
all timber shall have a preservative treatment in accordance with the requirements of aashto m num .
section num num section num bearing pads num preformed fabric pads preformed fabric pads shall be composed of multiple layers of eightounce cotton duck impregnated and bound with high quality natural rubber or of equivalent and equally suitable materials compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
the number of plies shall be such as to produce the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
the finished pads shall withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of not less than num pounds per square inch without detrimental reduction in thickness or extrusion .
preformed fabric pad samples will be tested by the department .
the manufacturer certification and sampling shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num elastomeric bearing pads num general the work shall consist of furnishing and installing elastomeric bearing pads .
bearings shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans and as specified in these specifications .
prior to shipment from the point of manufacture bearings shall be packaged in such manner to ensure that during shipment and storage the bearings will be protected against damage from handling weather or any normal hazard .
all bearings shall be stored at the work site in an area that provides protection from environmental and physical damage .
w hen installed bearings shall be clean and free of all foreign substances .
bearings shall be installed to the positions and orientations shown on the plans .
bearings shall be set level in exact positions and must have full and even bearing on all bearing planes .
bearings surfaces located at improper elevations or set not level and true to plane shall be corrected prior to placement of bearings .
elastomeric bearing pads shall be set directly on properly prepared concrete surfaces without bedding material .
elastomeric bearing pads shall include unreinforced pads consisting of elastomer only and reinforced bearings with steel or fabric laminates .
bearings shall be furnished with the dimensions material properties and elastomer grade required by the plans .
unless otherwise specified on the plans bearings which have thicknesses greater than num inch shall be reinforced with steel or fabric laminates .
the design method section num num a or b and the design load shall also be shown on the plans and testing shall be performed accordingly .
in the absence of more specific information bearings shall be grade num shall be an elastomer with num pounds per square inch shear modulus num durometer hardness and shall be subjected to the load testing requirements corresponding to method a design .
num material properties the sole polymer in the elastomeric compound shall be neoprene and shall be not less than num percent by volume of the total compound .
the elastomer compound shall be classified as being of low temperature grade num num or num .
the grades are defined by the testing requirements in table num .
a higher grade of elastomer signified by a larger grade number may be substituted for a lower one .
the elastomer compound shall meet the minimum requirements of table num except as otherwise specified by the engineer .
test requirements may be interpolated for intermediate hardness .
the material will be specified by its shear modulus whose measured value shall lie within num percent of the specified value .
a consistent value of hardness shall also be supplied for the purpose of defining limits for the tests in table num .
laminated bearings shall have a shear modulus not greater than num pounds per square inch .
w hen test specimens are cut from the finished product the physical properties shall be permitted to vary by num percent from those specified in table num .
all material tests shall be carried out at num num degrees f unless otherwise noted .
shear modulus tests shall be carried out using the apparatus and procedures described in annex anum of astm d num .
section num num table num elastomeric compound requirements note that astm d num refers to modulus of rigidity while astm d num refers to shear modulus .
the word stiffness is used here to cover both terms .
physical properties d num hardness shore a durometer num to num num num num num num num d num ultimate elongation min .
num num num tensile strength min .
psi num heat resistance d num num hrs at change in durometer hardness maximum points num num of change in tensile strength maximum num change in ultimate elongation maximum num compression set d num method b num hr at num of maximum num ozone d num num pphm ozone in air by vol .
num strain num num of num hr mounting iaw astm d num procedure a no cracks low temperature brittleness d num procedure b grade num no test required grade num no test required grade num brittleness at num of no failure instantaneous low temperature thermal stiffening d num grade num tested at num of grade num tested at num of grade num tested at num of num num num low temperature crystallization quad shear test as described grade num no test required grade num num days at num of grade num num days at num of num num num num stiffness at test temperature shall not exceed four times the stiffness measured at num of .
num stiffness at test time and temperature shall not exceed four times the stiffness measured at num of with no time delay .
the stiffness shall be measured with a quad shear test rig in an enclosed freezer unit .
the test specimens shall be taken from a randomly selected bearing .
a num strain cycle shall be used and a complete cycle of strain shall be applied with a period of num seconds .
the first num cycle of strain shall be discarded and the stiffness shall be determined by the slope of the force deflection curve for the next num cycle of loading .
section num num certification sampling and testing shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
num plain and fabricreinforced elastomeric bearing pads pads less than or equal to num inch in thickness shall be all elastomer .
pads greater than num inch thick shall be laminated .
the stacking of individual laminated pads to attain thicknesses over num inch will not be permitted however cold bonding of individual laminated pads will be permitted providing the bond between the pads has a minimum peel strength of num pounds per inch of width .
laminated pads shall consist of alternate layers of elastomer and fabric reinforcement bonded together .
the top and bottom layers of reinforcement shall be uniformly covered with a layer of elastomer .
the thickness of elastomer cover shall not vary .
laminated pads shall have reinforcement every num inch through the entire thickness .
fabric reinforcement shall be singleply at top and bottom surfaces of the pad and doubleply within the pad .
fabric shall be free of folds and ripples and shall be parallel to the top and bottom surfaces .
variations in the location of the reinforcement from its theoretical location in excess of the specified fabrication tolerances will be cause for rejection .
pads of allelastomer or with fabric reinforcement may be cut from large sheets .
cutting shall be performed in such a manner as to avoid heating of the material to produce a smooth edge with no tears or other jagged areas and to cause as little damage to the material as possible .
the cutting method shall not cause any separation of the fabric from the elastomer for laminated bearings .
flash tolerance finish and appearance shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the rubber handbook published by the rubber manufacturers association inc. rma fnum and t.num for molded bearings and rma fnum for extruded bearings .
the bond between elastomer and fabric shall be such that when a sample is tested for separation it shall have a minimum peel strength of num pounds per inch of width .
fabric reinforcement shall be woven from num percent glass fibers of etype yarn with continuous fibers .
the minimum thread count in either direction shall be num threads per inch .
the fabric shall have either a crowfoot or an num harness satin weave .
each ply of fabric shall have a breaking strength of not less than num pounds per inch of width in each thread direction when num inch by num inch samples are tested on split drum grips .
the bond between double plies shall have a minimum peel strength of num pounds per inch of width .
holes in the fabric will not be permitted .
section num num num steel reinforced elastomeric bearing pads at the contractors option steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads may be furnished in lieu of fabricreinforced elastomeric bearing pads that are num inch and over in thickness .
steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads shall conform to the requirements for steellaminated elastomeric bearings as specified in astm d num and the following the thickness of each bearing pad shall be as shown on the project plans .
the bearings shall consist of nnum internal elastomer laminates and n steel laminates where n is equal to the bearing pad thickness in inches shown on the project plans divided by num inch .
the steel laminates shall be num gage and shall be spaced every num inch centertocenter .
the top and bottom steel laminates shall have num inch of elastomer cover as measured from the center of the steel laminate to the pad surface .
the elastomer clear cover thickness from the surface to the steel laminates at the sides of the bearings shall be num inch .
if guide pins or other devices are used to control the side cover over the steel laminates any exposed portions of the steel laminates shall be sealed by vulcanized patching .
steel laminates used for reinforcement shall be made from rolled mild steel conforming to astm a num astm a num or astm a num grade num .
holes in plates for manufacturing purposes will not be permitted unless they have been accounted for in the design as shown on the plans .
bearings with steel laminates shall be cast as a unit in a mold and shall be bonded and vulcanized under heat and pressure .
the mold finish shall conform to standard shop practice .
the internal steel laminates shall be sandblasted and cleaned of all surface coatings rust mill scale and dirt before bonding and shall be free of sharp edges and burrs .
external load plates sole plates shall be protected from rusting by the manufacturer and preferably shall be hot bonded to the bearing during vulcanization .
bearings that are designed to act as a single unit with a given shape factor must be manufactured as a single unit .
steel laminated bearings shall develop a minimum peel strength of num pounds per inch of width .
section num num num fabrication tolerances plain pads and laminated bearings shall be built to the specified dimension within the tolerances listed in table num .
table num fabrication tolerances parameters tolerances minus plus num .
overall height design thickness num inch or less design thickness over num inch num num num inch num inch num .
overall horizontal dimensions num inches or less over num inches num num num inch num inch num .
thickness of individual layers of elastomer at any point w ithin the bearing num of design value but no more than num inch num .
parallelism with opposite face top and bottom sides num radians num radians num .
position of exposed connection members holes slots or inserts num inch num .
edge cover embedded laminates or connection members num num inch num .
thickness top and bottom cover layer if required num smaller of num inch and num of the nominal cover layer thickness num .
size holes slots or inserts num inch num certification and testing num general requirements a general a lot shall consist of a single type of bearing of the same design material and thickness delivered to the project site at the same time .
unless otherwise specified on the plans certification and testing shall be as described in subsections numb and c. b testing by manufacturer the contractor shall furnish the engineer with certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num from the manufacturer certifying that the bearings to be furnished conform to all specified requirements .
section num num each reinforced bearing shall be marked in indelible ink or flexible paint .
the marking shall consist of the order number lot number bearing identification number and elastomer type and grade number .
the marking shall be on the face that is visible after erection of the bridge .
the ambient temperature tests on the elastomer described in subsection numa shall be conducted for the materials used in each lot of bearings .
in lieu of performing a shear modulus test for each batch of material the manufacturer may elect to provide certificates from tests performed within the preceding year on identical formulations .
certificates of analysis from the manufacturer shall be provided for each lot of reinforcement .
all three low temperature tests described in subsection numc shall be conducted on grade num material used in each lot of bearings with the following exception .
in lieu of the low temperature crystallization tests on each lot of bearings to be used the manufacturer may choose to provide certificates of analysis from lowtemperature crystallization tests performed within the preceding year on identical grade num material .
instantaneous thermal stiffening tests shall be conducted on material of grades num and num .
low temperature brittleness and crystallization tests are not required for grade num or num materials .
every finished bearing shall be visually inspected in accordance with subsection numd .
every steel reinforced bearing shall be subjected to the shortterm load test described in subsection nume .
from each lot of bearings designed by method b of aashto bridge specifications division i article num a random sample shall be subjected to the longterm load test described in subsection numf .
the sample shall consist of at least one bearing chosen randomly from each size and material batch and shall comprise at least num percent of the lot .
if one bearing of the sample fails all the bearings of that lot shall be rejected unless the manufacturer elects to test each bearing of the lot at no additional cost to the department .
in lieu of this random sampling procedure the engineer may require every bearing of the lot to be tested .
c testing by contractor a minimum of two sample pads from every num pads furnished or portion thereof will be selected at random by the engineer at the project site for testing .
a minimum of one sample pad will be selected from each lot .
bearing pads marked or otherwise presented to the department as being test pads shall not be tested .
samples shall consist of complete pads as detailed on the project plans and as specified herein .
the contractor shall furnish additional complete pads section num num to replace those taken for testing .
pads shall be available for testing at least three weeks in advance of intended use .
the contractor shall at no additional cost to the department have the sample elastomeric bearing pads tested by a testing laboratory .
the testing laboratory shall be approved by the engineer shall be not affiliated with the bearing pad manufacturer and shall be under the supervision of a registered professional engineer .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num from the approved testing laboratory certifying that the bearings tested conform to the specified requirements for dimensional tolerances and material properties .
the following tests shall be performed as appropriate and be supported with certificates of analysis num ambient temperature test num heat resistance test num low temperature test num visual inspection num shear modulus test num bond and peel strength tests the heat resistance tests shall be performed in accordance with subsection numb .
shear stiffness tests shall be performed on material from a random sample of the finished bearings in accordance with subsection numg .
cold bonding of individual laminated pads and peel strength tests shall be performed in accordance with subsection numh .
num testing requirements a ambient temperature tests on the elastomer the elastomer used shall satisfy the limits prescribed in table num for durometer hardness tensile strength and ultimate elongation .
the bond to the reinforcement if any shall also satisfy the bond requirements in subsection num or num and shall be tested in accordance with astm d num method b .
the shear modulus of the material shall be tested at num degrees f using the apparatus and procedure described in annex anum of astm d num .
it shall fall within num percent of the specified value .
b heat resistance tests on the elastomer the elastomer shall satisfy the limits prescribed in table num for the change in durometer hardness change in tensile strength and change in ultimate elongation as well as for compression set and ozone .
section num num c low temperature tests on the elastomer grade num elastomer shall be subjected to low temperature brittleness tests astm d num instantaneous low temperature stiffness tests astm d num and low temperature crystallization tests astm d num .
grades num and num elastomers shall be subjected to instantaneous low temperature stiffness tests astm d num .
the tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of table num and the compound shall satisfy all limits for its grade .
d visual inspection of the finished bearing every finished bearing shall be inspected for compliance with dimensional tolerances and for overall quality of manufacture .
in steel reinforced bearings the edges of the steel shall be protected everywhere from corrosion .
e shortduration compression tests on bearings the bearing shall be loaded in compression to num times its maximum design load .
that load shall be held constant for five minutes removed and reapplied for another five minutes .
the bearing shall be examined visually while under the second loading .
if the bulging pattern suggests layer thickness or parallelism outside the specified tolerances or a poor laminate bond the bearing shall be rejected .
if there are three or more separate surface cracks greater than num inches wide and num inches deep the bearing shall be rejected .
f longduration compression tests on bearings the bearing shall be loaded in compression to num times its maximum design load for a minimum period of num hours .
if during the test the load falls below num times the maximum design load the test duration shall be increased by the period of time for which the load is below this limit .
the bearing shall be examined visually at the end of the test while it is still under load .
if the bulging pattern suggests layer thickness or parallelism outside the specified tolerances or a poor laminate bond the bearing shall be rejected .
if there are three or more separate surface cracks greater than num inches wide and num inches deep the bearing shall be rejected .
g shear modulus tests on material from bearings the shear modulus of the material in the finished bearing shall be evaluated by testing a specimen cut from it using the apparatus and procedures described in annex anum of astm d num or if directed by the engineer a comparable nondestructive stiffness test may be conducted on a pair of finished bearings .
the shear modulus shall fall within num percent of the specified value .
if the test is conducted on finished bearings the material shear modulus shall be computed from the measured shear stiffness of the bearings taking account of the influence on shear stiffness of bearing geometry and compressive load .
section num num h bond and peel strength tests cold bonding between individual laminated pads if used shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of california test num .
the peel strength test shall be performed in accordance with astm d num method b for both fabric and steel reinforced pads .
num installation bearings shall be placed on surfaces that are plane to within num inch and horizontal to within num radians .
exterior plates of the bearing shall not be welded unless at least num inches of steel exists between the weld and the elastomer .
in no case shall the elastomer or the bond be subjected to temperatures higher than num degrees f. section num geosynthetics num general requirements certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer by the contractor upon delivery of geosynthetic materials for use on a specific project .
if the delivered materials have not been evaluated and preapproved as noted below it will be necessary for a certificate of analysis to be submitted to the engineer along with the supporting documentation before the material may be considered for use on the project .
each geosynthetic material lot or shipment must be approved by the engineer before the materials may be incorporated in the work .
certificates of analysis conforming to the requirements of subsection num may be submitted along with a representative sample of appropriate size for testing by the supplier or manufacturer of any geosynthetic material to adot materials group for evaluation and preapproval .
testing methods and results shown in the certificate of analysis shall conform to the listed specifications for the proposed geosynthetic use .
supporting documentation including but not limited to product information sheets installation procedures and recommendations recommended use and project references shall also be submitted by the supplier or manufacturer as part of product evaluation and preapproval .
geosynthetic materials shall be furnished in protective covers capable of protecting the materials from harmful environmental conditions such as ultraviolet rays abrasion extreme heat and water .
storage of the materials will be in a manner to prevent damage contamination or deterioration of the materials .
samples of geosynthetic materials shall be submitted for testing .
no samples shall be taken within five feet of either end of a roll .
samples section num num shall be a minimum of three feet long by the full roll width .
a minimum of one sample shall be taken per lot .
more samples may be required as determined by the engineer .
num pavement fabric pavement fabric shall be a geotextile fabric material constructed of nonwoven synthetic fibers of polyester or polypropylene .
the pavement fabric shall be resistant to chemical attack rot and mildew and shall have no tears or defects which will adversely alter its physical properties .
the fabric shall be specifically designed for the designated pavement application as a stress relieving membrane between two successive asphalt layers .
the fabric material shall additionally conform to the following physical requirements property requirement test method w eight oz.sq .
yd .
num num astm d num grab tensile strength lbs .
num minimum astm d num elongation at break percent num minimum astm d num fabric thickness mils num to num astm d num melting point degrees f num or greater astm d num asphalt retention gal.sq .
yd .
num minimum task force num method num minimum average value in weaker principal direction .
all numerical values represent minimum average roll values i.e .
the average test result in the weak direction for a lot shall meet or exceed the minimum values listed when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
the width of the fabric shall be appropriate for the proposed construction .
longitudinal fabric joints shall meet the same location requirements shown in subsection num for pavement joints .
num geogrid geogrid reinforcement material for roadway base applications shall be a biaxial polymer grid structure specifically fabricated for use as a base reinforcement .
the geogrid shall be one of the following structure types a a structure comprised of punched and drawn polypropylene or high density polyethylene sheet to form a grid .
b a structure comprised of high density polyethylene or polypropylene extruded to form a grid .
section num num the geogrid shall have high tensile strength and modulus in both principal directions perpendicular to each other .
the geogrid polymer materials shall contain stabilizers or inhibitors or shall be coated or encapsulated to prevent degradation of properties due to ultraviolet light exposure .
the polymer shall also be inert to all naturally occurring alkaline and acidic soil conditions .
the geogrid material shall additionally conform to the following physical requirements property requirement test method average aperture size inch md note num xd note num num num num num i.d .
calipered num open area num min .
num coe method num w eight oz.yd .
num min .
astm d num thickness mils at rib at junction num min .
num min .
astm d num w ide w idth strip tensile strength lb.ft .
at num strain at num strain at num strain or ultimate num min .
num min .
num min .
astm d num flexural rigidity mgcm num min .
astm d num junction strength num min .
astm d num modnum num maximum inside dimension in each principal direction measured by calipers .
num mdmachine direction which is along roll length .
num xdcross machine direction which is across the roll width .
num minimum average value in weaker principal direction .
all numerical values represent minimum average roll values i.e .
the average test result in the weaker principal direction shall meet or exceed minimum values listed when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
num percent open area measured without magnification by the corps of engineers method as specified in cw num civil w orks construction guide november num .
num junction strength is measured as a percent of ultimate single rib strength by tensile loading test astm d num modified to clamp the horizontal and vertical ribs of a t shaped specimen with the grid junction forming the cross of the t and with a constant rate of extension of the specimen applied across the junction at a rate of two inches per minute at a temperature of num degrees f. the width of the geogrid shall normally be approximately num feet or as appropriate for the proposed construction .
longitudinal geogrid joints shall meet the same location requirements shown in subsection num for pavement joints .
num separation geotextile fabric section num num separation geotextile fabric shall be a nonwoven or woven fabric consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments such as polypropylene or polyester formed or woven into a stable network such that the filaments retain their relative position to each other .
the fabric shall be inert to commonly encountered chemicals resistant to rot and mildew and shall have no tears or defects which adversely affect or alter its physical properties .
the physical requirements for the separation fabric will be determined by the survivability rating called out for the fabric in the special provisions or as shown on the project plans .
physical requirements for nonwoven or woven fabrics for each survivability rating are listed in subsections num num num and num .
num low survivability fabric a nonwoven low survivability nonwoven separation fabric shall meet the following minimum average roll values property requirement test method grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num ultraviolet stability num astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
b woven low survivability woven separation fabric shall meet the physical requirements listed in subsection numa for moderate survivability nonwoven fabric except that the grab elongation at break percent shall be num minimum num maximum .
num moderate survivability fabric section num num a nonwoven moderate survivability nonwoven separation fabric shall meet the following minimum average roll values property requirement test method grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num ultraviolet stability num astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
b woven moderate survivability woven separation fabric shall meet the physical requirements listed in subsection numa for high survivability nonwoven fabric except that the grab elongation at break percent shall be num minimum num maximum .
num high survivability fabric a nonwoven high survivability nonwoven separation fabric shall meet the following minimum average roll values property requirement test method grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num ultraviolet stability num astm d num section num num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
b woven high survivability woven separation fabric shall meet the physical requirements listed in subsection numa for very high survivability nonwoven fabric except that the grab elongation at break percent shall be num minimum num maximum .
num very high survivability fabric a nonwoven very high survivability nonwoven separation fabric shall meet the following minimum average roll values property requirement test method grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num ultraviolet stability num astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
b woven very high survivability woven separation fabric shall meet the following minimum average roll values section num num property requirement test method grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num ultraviolet stability num astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
num bank protection fabric geotextile fabric to be used behind bank protection such as rip rap rail bank or gabions as called out on the project plans shall be a woven monofilament fabric or nonwoven fabric consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments such as polypropylene or polyester formed into a stable network such that the filaments retain their relative position to each other .
the fabric shall be inert to commonly encountered chemicals resistant to rot and mildew and shall have no tears or defects which adversely affect or alter its physical properties .
the physical requirements for the bank protection fabric shall be as specified in subsection numa except that the grab elongation at break percent shall be num minimum num maximum and the permittivity shall be num minimum .
num geocomposite wall drain system the geocomposite w all drain system shall be of composite construction consisting of a supporting structure of drainage core material and a geotextile filter fabric permanently bonded to the core material on one side only .
the geocomposite shall be resistant to commonly encountered chemicals and hydrocarbons and resistant to ultraviolet exposure .
num geocomposite wall drain core the wall drain core material shall consist of a preformed stable polymer plastic material with a cuspated nippled or geonet structure .
the drainage core shall provide support for and shall be bonded to the geotextile filter fabric at intervals not exceeding num inches in any direction .
its preformed structure shall be perforated to allow water to flow freely to the weephole drainage outlets .
if not perforated during manufacture the core shall be perforated in the field at the weephole section num num drainage outlet locations .
the core shall have at least num square inches per square foot of flat area in contact with the geotextile fabric to support the fabric .
the core material shall additionally conform to the following minimum physical requirements property requirement test method thickness with fabric inch num num astm d num compressive strength psf num astm d num transmissivity gradient num normal stress num psf gal.min.ft .
num astm d num num minimum average roll value i.e .
the average test result for a lot shall meet or exceed the minimum value listed when sampled and tested according to the specified test method .
the geocomposite core shall be furnished with an approved method for connecting with outlet pipes or weepholes as shown on the plans .
these fittings shall allow entry of water from the core but shall not allow intrusion of backfill material into the core .
num geocomposite wall drain fabric the geotextile wall drain fabric shall be laminated onto or adhere to the side of the drainage core which will face the backfill .
the geotextile fabric shall be a nonwoven polyester or polypropylene fabric meeting the following minimum average roll values property requirement test method w eight oz.sq .
yd .
num astm d num grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num mullen burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num ultraviolet stability num astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
a minimum threeinch wide flap of geotextile fabric shall extend beyond both longitudinal edges of the geocomposite core .
the geotextile fabric shall cover the full length of the core .
section num num num geocomposite edge drain system the geocomposite edge drain system shall be of composite construction consisting of a supporting rectangular structure of drainage core material wrapped with a geotextile filter fabric .
the fabric shall surround and be attached to the core material in a manner which does not restrict the flow capacity of the core material .
the geocomposite shall be resistant to commonly encountered chemicals and hydrocarbons and resistant to ultraviolet exposure .
num geocomposite edge drain core the edge drain core material shall consist of a preformed stable polymer plastic material with a cuspated nippled ridged slotted andor perforated structure .
the drainage core shall provide support for and may be bonded to the geotextile filter fabric .
its preformed structure shall be perforated to allow water to flow freely to the weephole drainage outlets .
if not perforated during manufacture the core shall be perforated in the field at the weephole drainage outlet locations unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the core shall have at least num square inches of flat area in contact with the geotextile fabric to support the fabric per square foot .
the core material shall additionally conform to the following minimum physical requirements property requirement test method thickness w rapped with fabric inch num num astm d num compressive strength psf num astm d num transmissivity fabric w rapped core gradient num normal stress num psf gal.min.ft .
num astm d num num w idth ft. num num measured notes num minimum average roll value i.e .
the average test result for a lot shall meet or exceed the minimum value listed when sampled and tested according to the specified test method .
num use a full width panel if possible testing flow on the side which may be placed against the soil to be drained .
num minimum width normally required but shall be the minimum width specified on the plans if that is greater .
num geocomposite edge drain fabric the geotextile edge drain fabric shall completely wrap around the drainage core material in a snug manner and may be permanently bonded to the core .
the geotextile fabric shall be a nonwoven polyester or polypropylene fabric meeting the following minimum average roll values section num num property requirement test method w eight oz.sq .
yd .
num astm d num grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm d num grab elongation at break num min .
num max .
astm d num mullen burst strength psi num astm d num trapezoidal tear lbs .
num astm d num puncture strength lbs .
num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num num astm d num permittivity second num num ariz num ultraviolet stability num astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
if the average grab elongation of the fabric is greater than num percent at break the elongation will be acceptable if the grab tensile strength requirement is met prior to or at num percent elongation .
num outlet pipes the pipe for the edge drain outlet lateral shall be rigid fourinch diameter schedule num pvc pipe conforming to the requirements of astm d num schedule num polyethylene pipe conforming to the requirements of astm d num or schedule num abs pipe conforming to the requirements of astm d num .
the open end of the outlet pipe conduit shall be connected into either a drainage structure or a concrete pad drain in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
num temporary silt fence fabric the geotextile silt fence fabric shall be a nonwoven or woven fabric consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments such as polypropylene or polyester formed or woven into a stable network such that the filaments retain their position relative to each other .
the fabric shall contain a stabilizer andor inhibitors to make the filaments resistant to deterioration resulting from exposure to sunlight or heat .
the edges of the fabric shall be finished to prevent the outer yarn from pulling away from the fabric .
the fabric shall be free of defects or flaws which significantly affect its physical or filtering properties .
the fabric shall have a minimum width of num inches .
sheets of fabric may be sewn or bonded together .
no deviation from any physical requirements will be permitted due to the presence of the seam .
section num num the fabric may be manufactured with pockets for posts hems with cord or with posts preattached using staples or button head nails .
during all periods of shipment and storage the fabric shall be wrapped in a heavy duty protective covering which will protect the cloth from sunlight mud dust and debris .
the fabric shall not be exposed to temperatures greater than num degrees f. the fabric shall meet the following average roll values property requirement test method grab tensile strength lbs .
num min .
astm d num elongation at num of min .
tensile strength num lb .
num max .
astm d num permittivity second num num min .
ariz num apparent opening size u.s. standard sieve size num max .
astm d num ultraviolet stability num min .
astm d num minimum average roll values represent the average test results for a lot in the weaker direction when sampled according to astm d num and tested according to the test method specified above .
num drainage fabric drainage geotextile fabric shall be used in the following applications pavement edge drains interceptor drains underdrains wall drains recharge basins and relief wells .
drainage geotextile fabric shall be a nonwoven fabric consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments such as polypropylene polyethylene or polyester formed into a stable network such that the filaments retain their relative position to each other .
the fabric shall be inert to commonly encountered chemicals resistant to rot and mildew and shall have no tears or defects which adversely affect or alter its physical properties .
the physical requirements for the drainage fabric shall be as specified in subsection numa for moderate survivability nonwoven separation fabric except that the permittivity requirement for drainage fabric shall be num second num .
section num epoxy materials num general requirements certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection numb shall be submitted to the engineer by the contractor for any epoxy materials used on a specific project .
the epoxy material must be on the current adot approved products list section num num apl prior to submittal for use on an adot project .
copies of the most current version of the apl are available on the internet from the arizona transportation research center atrc through its pride program .
the epoxy material must be approved for the use or application for which it is intended .
the contractor shall submit product literature and material safety data sheets msds .
the literature shall identify the recommended product use or applications for which it is intended and the directions for use .
num packaging labeling and storing each component of epoxy material shall be packaged in containers of size proportional to the amount of that component in the mix so that one container of each component is used in mixing one batch of epoxy material .
the containers shall be of such design that all of the contents may be readily removed and shall be well sealed to prevent leakage .
the containers and labeling shall meet u.s. department of transportation hazardous material shipping regulations and the containers shall be of a material or lined with a material of such character as to resist any action or breakdown by the components .
each container shall be clearly labeled with the product type and identification code component designation a or b manufacturers name date of manufacture batch or lot number all directions for use and such warnings or precautions concerning the contents as may be required by state or federal laws and regulations .
epoxy materials shall be stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at all times .
attention is directed to the characteristic of some epoxy components to crystallize or thicken excessively prior to use when stored at temperatures below num degrees f. any material which shows evidence of crystallization or a permanent increase in viscosity or settling of pigments which can not be readily dispersed with a paddle shall not be used .
num directions for use use of epoxy materials shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
use of epoxy materials shall be allowed for only those uses as shown on the adot approved products list .
at the time of mixing the two components of the epoxy material shall be at a temperature between num and num degrees f unless otherwise specified or approved by the engineer .
any heating of the epoxy components shall be done by application of indirect heat .
immediately prior to mixing each component shall be thoroughly mixed with a paddle .
separate paddles shall be used to stir each component .
section num num immediately prior to use the components of the epoxy materials shall be mixed together in the specified ratios according to the manufacturers recommendations .
w hen mixed all epoxy materials shall have a uniform color without streaks .
no solvent shall be added to any epoxy .
surfaces on which the epoxy is to be placed shall be free of rust paint grease asphalt and loose or otherwise deleterious materials .
the surface shall be dry unless otherwise allowed according to the manufacturers recommendations for use .
any overlay or inserted material which is to be bonded to the underlying surface shall be placed before thickening of the epoxy has begun .
w hen epoxy is used as a binder to make epoxy mortar the components of the epoxy shall be thoroughly mixed together before the sand or fine aggregate is added .
the type gradation and proportion of sand or fine aggregate added and mixed with the epoxy adhesive to make epoxy mortar shall be as specified or recommended by the manufacturer .
the sand or fine aggregate moisture content shall not be more than num percent as determined in accordance with aashto t num .
all surfaces against which epoxy mortar is to be placed shall be primed with a coat of the epoxy adhesive just prior to placing the epoxy mortar .
num epoxy resin base anchoring adhesive epoxy resin base anchoring adhesive shall be used in anchoring dowels or tie bars into concrete .
for horizontal applications where flow out of the anchoring hole is a problem high viscosity or nonsag epoxies in the form of a gel are to be used .
low and medium viscosity epoxies may be used in vertical holes which open upward .
the product shall specifically be designed for this application according to the manufacturers product literature .
epoxy resin base anchoring material shall provide a minimum pullout resistance of num pounds when tested in accordance with arizona test method num .
the pot life of the material shall be determined in accordance with aashto t num part i .
the pot life shall be within num percent or num minutes of the pot life specified by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
num epoxy resin base adhesives a general the grade of the epoxy adhesive system shall match the proposed use as identified in the product literature provided by the manufacturer .
the product shall specifically be designed for this application according to the manufacturers product literature .
the pot life of the material shall be determined in accordance with aashto t num part i .
the pot life shall be within num percent or num minutes of the pot life specified by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
epoxies with high early section num num strength development as stated by the manufacturer will be tested for conformance to the manufacturers claims .
b hardened concrete to hardened concrete epoxy resin base adhesive to be used for adhering or bonding hardened concrete to hardened concrete and other materials shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type i for nonload bearing applications and type iv for load bearing applications .
epoxy resin base adhesive shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of astm c num and shall provide a slant shear compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at two days and num pounds per square inch at num days .
the compressive strength shall be determined in accordance with astm c num for twoinch cube specimens except that the epoxy materials shall be tested without the addition of sand and for low viscosity materials which readily flow no tamping is necessary .
the compressive strength determined at seven days shall be num pounds per square inch for type i epoxy and num pounds per square inch for type iv epoxy .
c hardened concrete to fresh concrete epoxy resin base materials to be utilized for adhering or bonding freshly mixed concrete materials to hardened concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type ii for nonload bearing applications and type v for load bearing applications .
epoxy resin base adhesive shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of astm c num and shall provide a slant shear compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at num days .
the compressive strength shall be determined in accordance with astm c num for twoinch cube specimens except that the epoxy materials shall be tested without the addition of sand and for low viscosity materials which readily flow no tamping is necessary .
the compressive strength determined at seven days shall be num pounds per square inch for type ii epoxy and num pounds per square inch for type v epoxy .
num epoxy resin base binder for epoxy mortar epoxy resin base materials to be used for binder in epoxy mortar shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type i for nonload bearing applications and type iv for load bearing applications .
the grade of the epoxy adhesive system shall match the proposed use as identified in the product literature provided by the manufacturer .
the product shall specifically be designed for this application according to the manufacturers product literature .
epoxy resin base adhesive for use as binder in epoxy mortar shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of astm c num .
in this test the upper half of the slant shear test shall be molded epoxy mortar with the epoxy adhesive and sand or aggregate material mixed together as specified and in the proportions as recommended by the manufacturer .
prior to placing the epoxy mortar the same epoxy section num num adhesive shall be applied to the underlying concrete slant shear surface .
the epoxy adhesive and mortar tested in this manner shall provide a slant shear compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at two days and num pounds per square inch at num days .
the pot life of the mixed epoxy mortar shall be determined in accordance with aashto t num part i .
the pot life shall be within num percent or num minutes of the pot life specified by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
the compressive strength of the epoxy mortar shall be determined in accordance with astm c num for twoinch cube specimens .
the epoxy material shall be tested with the addition of sand mixed together as specified and in the proportions as recommended by the manufacturer .
the compressive strength determined in this test at seven days shall be num pounds per square inch for type i epoxy and num pounds per square inch for type iv epoxy .
epoxies with high early strength development as stated by the manufacturer will be tested for conformance to the manufacturers claims .
num epoxy resin base adhesive for crack repair epoxy resin base materials to be used for crack repair in concrete shall be furnished as two components which shall be mixed together at or just before the point of injection .
the epoxy resin base adhesive shall conform to the requirements of astm c num type i for use in nonload bearing applications and type iv for use in load bearing applications .
the grade of the epoxy adhesive system shall normally be grade num low viscosity .
grade num medium viscosity epoxy adhesive systems may be used in larger width cracks .
the product shall specifically be designed for this application according to the manufacturers product literature .
the epoxy resin base adhesive for crack repair shall be tested in accordance with the requirements specified in subsection numb .
immediately prior to injection usually at or near the injection tip the two components shall be brought together as part of the injection process .
the injection equipment and process utilized shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
no solvents shall be utilized to thin the material .
section num packaged dry concrete and mortar materials num general requirements certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection numb shall be submitted to the engineer by the contractor for any packaged dry concrete or mortar materials used on a specific project .
the packaged dry concrete or mortar material must be on the current adot approved products list prior to submittal for use section num num on the project and must be approved for the application for which it is intended .
packaged dry concrete and mortar materials shall be furnished premixed in a dry state including hydraulic cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate and other ingredients as required for product performance .
only the addition of mix water shall be required at the site of the work .
the contractor shall submit product literature and material safety data sheets msds .
the literature shall identify the recommended product use or application for which it is intended and the directions for use .
num packaging labeling and storing the dry concrete or mortar material shall be packaged in suitable containers of such design that all of the contents may be readily removed and shall be moisture resistant to prevent premature hydration of the hydraulic cement in the mixture .
the containers and labeling shall meet the applicable u.s. department of transportation material shipping regulations and the containers shall be of a material or lined with a material of such character as to resist any action or breakdown by the components .
each package or container shall be clearly labeled with the product name type and identification code manufacturers name date of manufacture batch or lot number and such warnings or precautions concerning the contents as may be required by state or federal laws and regulations .
additional information shall be either marked on the package or attached to it .
the additional information may include surface preparation requirements mixing placing and curing instructions maximum amount of water to be used or maximum recommended consistency recommended maximum usable working time potlife and approximate consistency at the end of that time and the allowable temperature range for preparation and placement of the material .
packaged dry concrete or mortar materials shall be stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at all times .
attention is directed to the characteristic of hydraulic cement materials to hydrate in the presence of moisture .
any material which shows evidence of hydration or does not appear suitable shall not be used .
num directions for use use of packaged dry concrete or mortar materials shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified or limited by the engineer .
use of packaged dry concrete or mortar materials shall be allowed for only those uses as shown on the adot approved products list .
section num num at the time of mixing the packaged dry concrete or mortar materials shall be at a temperature within the range allowed according to the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified or approved by the engineer .
any heating of the dry materials shall be done by application of indirect heat .
the manufacturer may permit in the package instructions adjusting the mixing water temperature to achieve temperature limitations imposed for use of the dry concrete or mortar materials .
immediately prior to use the mixing apparatus shall be clean prewetted and drained and essentially free of hardened concrete mortar and other foreign material that can be removed with a trowel or with a hammer using reasonable force .
w ater shall be added to the dry concrete or mortar mix materials and the materials shall be thoroughly mixed to the desired consistency according to the manufacturers recommendations .
w hen thoroughly mixed the concrete or mortar mixture shall have a uniform color .
the amount of mixing water may be varied to achieve the desired consistency for the proposed use however the maximum recommended amount of mixing water shall not be exceeded .
surfaces on which the concrete or mortar material is to be placed shall be free of rust paint oil grease asphalt and loose or otherwise deleterious materials .
the surface of existing concrete shall be roughened to ensure a good bond and shall be cleaned thoroughly with water leaving existing concrete saturated but free of standing water .
an epoxy resin base adhesive may be required to bond the concrete or mortar material to the old concrete .
any overlay or inserted material which is to be bonded to the underlying surface shall be placed before the concrete patching material has begun to set .
the concrete or mortar materials may be drypacked troweled flowed pumped or vibrated into place unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer or specified herein .
use of an epoxy adhesive for bonding requires a dry surface unless otherwise recommended by the adhesive manufacturer .
the method of placement depends on the application but shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num packaged dry highearly strength concrete packaged dry highearly strength concrete materials for use in building and repair jobs requiring a more rapid strength development such as required for the earlier removal of forms shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
the compressive strength of packaged highearly strength concrete material at three days shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
the compressive strength at seven days shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
section num num w hen placing the mixed highearly strength concrete against existing concrete for repair or patching applications an epoxy resin base adhesive meeting the requirements of subsection num shall be applied to the surface of the existing concrete prior to placing the new concrete .
num packaged dry normal strength concrete packaged dry normal strength concrete materials for use in building and repair jobs where thicknesses exceed two inches shall conform to the requirements of astm c num normal weight concrete .
typical uses include building or repairing sidewalks steps footings and for setting posts .
the compressive strength of packaged normal strength concrete material at seven days shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
the compressive strength at num days shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
w hen placing the mixed normal strength concrete against existing concrete for repair or patching applications an epoxy resin base adhesive meeting the requirements of subsection num shall be applied to the surface of the existing concrete prior to placing the new concrete .
num packaged dry high strength mortar packaged dry high strength mortar materials for use in work requiring thicknesses less than two inches shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
typical uses include topping and patching .
highstrength mortar is often referred to as sand mix .
the compressive strength mortar cubes of packaged high strength mortar material at seven days shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
the compressive strength at num days shall be a minimum of num pounds per square .
w hen placing the mixed high strength mortar against existing concrete for repair or patching applications an epoxy resin base adhesive meeting the requirements of subsection num shall be applied to the surface of the existing concrete prior to placing the new mortar .
num packaged dry rapidhardening concrete packaged dry rapidhardening concrete materials for use in rapid repairs to hardened concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
aqueous solutions emulsions or dispersions may be included as components of the packaged materials .
the manufacturer may specify that these liquids are to replace some or all of the mixing water .
section num num if the material contains soluble chlorides or other ingredients in sufficient quantity to cause corrosion to steel reinforcement the material will not be acceptable .
the compressive strength of packaged rapidhardening concrete material at three hours shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
the compressive strength at one day shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch and at seven days the compressive strength shall not be less than num pounds per square inch .
the strength at num days shall not be less than the strength at seven days .
rapidhardening concrete materials shall be tested in accordance with the slant shear requirements of astm c num by placing the test sample against a dummy section of hardened portland cement mortar .
the slant shear test samples prepared in this manner shall provide a slant shear compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at one day and num pounds per square inch at seven days .
the allowable length change of the rapidhardening concrete material shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of astm c num except as modified in astm c num sections num and num .
based on the lengths of threeinch prisms at three hours the allowable length increase after num days in water shall be less than num percent .
the allowable length decrease in air after num days shall be less than num percent .
the rapidhardening concrete shall have a slump of three inches at num minutes after addition of the mixing liquid .
w hen placing the mixed rapidhardening concrete against existing concrete for repair or patching applications no adhesive or other bonding system will be necessary unless required by the manufacturer .
num packaged dry very rapidhardening concrete packaged dry very rapidhardening concrete materials for use in rapid repairs to hardened concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
aqueous solutions emulsions or dispersions may be included as components of the packaged materials .
the manufacturer may specify that these liquids are to replace some or all of the mixing water .
if the material contains soluble chlorides or other ingredients in sufficient quantity to cause corrosion to steel reinforcement the material will not be acceptable .
the compressive strength of packaged very rapidhardening concrete material at three hours shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch .
the compressive strength at one day shall be a minimum of num pounds per square inch and at seven days the compressive strength shall not be less than num pounds per square inch .
the strength at num days shall not be less than the strength at seven days .
section num num very rapidhardening concrete materials shall be tested in accordance with the slant shear requirements of astm c num by placing the test sample against a dummy section of hardened portland cement mortar .
the slant shear test samples prepared in this manner shall provide a slant shear compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at one day and num pounds per square inch at seven days .
the allowable length change of the very rapidhardening concrete material shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of astm c num except as modified in astm c num sections num and num .
based on the lengths of threeinch prisms at three hours the allowable length increase after num days in water shall be less than num percent .
the allowable length decrease in air after num days shall be less than num percent .
the very rapidhardening concrete shall have a slump of three inches at five minutes after addition of the mixing liquid .
w hen placing the mixed very rapidhardening concrete against existing concrete for repair or patching applications no adhesive or other bonding system will be necessary unless required by the manufacturer .
num packaged dry rapidhardening mortar packaged dry rapidhardening mortar materials for use in rapid repairs to hardened concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
the packaged dry rapid hardening mortar material shall conform to the same requirements for rapid hardening concrete listed in subsection num except that the compressive strength shall be determined on mortar cubes the length changes will be determined using oneinch prisms and the consistency at num minutes after mixing will be a mortar flow of num percent minimum .
num packaged dry very rapidhardening mortar packaged dry very rapidhardening mortar materials for use in rapid repairs to hardened concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
the packaged dry very rapid hardening mortar material shall conform to the same requirements for very rapid hardening concrete listed in subsection num except that the compressive strength shall be determined on mortar cubes the length changes will be determined using oneinch prisms and the consistency at five minutes after mixing will be a mortar flow of num percent minimum .
section num num section num nonshrink grout materials num general requirements certificates of compliance conforming to the requirements of subsection numb shall be submitted to the engineer by the contractor for any nonshrink grout materials used on a specific project .
the nonshrink grout material must be on the current adot approved products list prior to submittal for use on an adot project .
the nonshrink grout material must be approved for the use or application for which it is intended and shall meet the requirements of crdcnum corps of engineers specification for nonshrink grout unless otherwise specified herein .
the contractor shall submit product literature and material safety data sheets msds .
the literature shall identify the recommended product use or application for which it is intended and the direction for use .
nonshrink grout materials shall be furnished premixed in a dry state including hydraulic cement fine aggregate and other ingredients as required for grout performance .
only the addition of mix water shall be required at the site of the work .
num packaging labeling and storing the nonshrink grout materials shall be packaged in suitable containers of such design that all of the contents may be readily removed and shall be moisture resistant to prevent premature hydration of the hydraulic cement in the grout mixture .
the containers and labeling shall meet the applicable u.s. department of transportation material shipping regulations and the containers shall be of a material or lined with a material of such character as to resist any action or breakdown by the components .
each package or container shall be clearly labeled with the product name type and identification code manufacturers name date of manufacture batch or lot number and such warnings or precautions concerning the contents as may be required by state or federal laws and regulations .
additional information shall be either marked on the package or attached to it .
the additional information may include surface preparation requirements mixing placing and curing instructions maximum amount of water to be used or maximum recommended consistency unit weight and yield at maximum recommended water content or maximum consistency recommended maximum usable working time also called potlife and approximate consistency at the end of that time and the allowable temperature range for preparation and placement of the material .
nonshrink grout materials shall be stored in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at all times .
attention is directed to the characteristic of hydraulic cement materials to hydrate in the section num num presence of moisture .
any material which shows evidence of hydration or does not appear suitable shall not be used .
num directions for use use of nonshrink grout materials shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified or limited by the engineer .
use of nonshrink grout materials shall be allowed for only those uses as shown on the adot approved products list .
at the time of mixing the nonshrink grout materials shall be at a temperature within the range allowed according to the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified or approved by the engineer .
any heating of the dry materials shall be done by application of indirect heat .
the manufacturer may permit in the package instructions adjusting the mixing water temperature to achieve temperature limitations imposed for use of the grout materials .
immediately prior to use the grout mixing apparatus shall be clean prewetted and drained and essentially free of hardened grout and other foreign material that can be removed with a trowel or with a hammer using reasonable effort .
w ater shall be added to the grout materials and the grout shall be thoroughly mixed to the desired consistency according to the manufacturers recommendations .
w hen thoroughly mixed the nonshrink grout mixture shall have a uniform color .
the amount of mixing water may be varied to achieve the desired consistency for the proposed use however the maximum recommended amount of mixing water shall not be exceeded .
surfaces on which the nonshrink grout material is to be placed shall be free of rust paint oil grease asphalt and loose or otherwise deleterious materials .
the surface of existing concrete shall be roughened to ensure a good bond and shall be cleaned thoroughly with water leaving existing concrete saturated but free of standing water .
any overlay or inserted material which is to be bonded to the underlying surface shall be placed before the nonshrink grout material has begun to set .
the nonshrink grout materials may be drypacked troweled flowed pumped or vibrated into place unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer .
the method of placement depends on the application but shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num nonshrink grout material requirements nonshrink grout materials placed against existing concrete shall be tested in accordance with the slant shear requirements of astm c num by placing nonshrink grout against a dummy section of hardened portland cement mortar .
the slant shear test samples prepared in this manner shall provide a slant shear compressive strength of num pounds per square inch at seven days and num pounds per square inch at num days .
section num num the vicat time of set for the material shall be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
the time of set shall be within num percent or num minutes of the time of set specified by the manufacturer whichever is greater .
the time of final setting shall be a maximum of eight hours .
the compressive strength shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of crdcnum corps of engineers specification for nonshrink grouts .
the minimum compressive strength at seven days shall be num pounds per square inch and the minimum compressive strength at num days shall be num pounds per square inch .
nonshrink grouts with high early strength development as stated by the manufacturer will be tested for conformance to the manufacturers claims .
the compressive strength of nonshrink grout material at num days shall be equal to or greater than the num day compressive strength requirement of the concrete to be patched .
the expansion percent for the nonshrink grout material shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of crdcnum .
the maximum expansion shall be num percent when measured at num num and num days .
the percent shrinkage at num days shall be zero .
num index a page aashto application of num definition of num abbreviations num acceptance and substantial completion of work final num partial num adhesive requirements for reflective sheeting num admixtures for lean concrete base num portland cement concrete num advertisement for bids definition of num information contained in num aggregate base finishing num aggregate for base num asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num blotter material num cement treated base num cover material num lean concrete base num portland cement concrete pavement num sacked concrete riprap num shotcrete num structural concrete num subbase num aggregate stockpiling for asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num structural concrete num air and noise pollution prevention of num airentraining admixture num alkali content in portland cement concrete num num alterations of contract num anchor bolts guardrail num light poles num sign supports num structures num anticipated compressive strength cement treated base num lean concrete base num structural concrete num application of bituminous material num bituminous material traffic control num cover material num paint num tack coat time defined num w ater prewetting material pits num approval of falsework plans num num prestressing systems num w orking drawingsnum approved products list num arbitration num arch corrugated metal pipe num structural plate pipe num num archaeological features num arrow panels flashing num num asphalt binder coat num cement num num cutback num dampproofing and waterproofing concrete surfaces num emulsified num num emulsified recycling agents num num liquid num num mixing plants num recycling agents num num rubber material num num asphaltic concrete num asphalt rubber num asphaltrubber endproduct num endproduct num endproduct shrp volumetric mix num friction course num friction course asphalt rubber num friction course miscellaneous num hot plant requirements num miscellaneous structural num statistical acceptance num num asphaltrubber stressabsorbing membrane num astm application of num definition of num attenuation devices num authority and duties of district engineer num inspector num resident engineer num award of contract num b backer rod num backfill compaction num definition of num for guardrail posts num for minor structures num placement num slurry num structure num num trench num ballast num num ballast wiring enclosure luminaire housing num bank protection num bank protection fabric num num num bar reinforcement num barbed wire fence num barricades and warning signs num barrier concrete num base courses aggregate base and subbase num cement treated base num definition of num lean concrete base num basins concrete catch num batch mixing cement treated base num bearing pads elastomeric num preformed num bearing surfaces planing of num bearing values determination of num bidder definition num disqualification num prequalification num bidding requirements and conditions num bidding schedule interpretation of quantities in num bidding electronic num num bidding suspension fromnum bids advertisement for definition of num irregular num w ithdrawal of num bituminized cotton fabric num bituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num coated corrugated metal pipe num joint filler num material for curing seal num num num material application of num num prime coat num road mix pavement num tack coat num treatments num blasting controlled num use of explosives num blotter material application of num num requirements of num num bolts anchor light poles num anchor structural num highstrength steel num borrow adjustment num compaction num description of num embankment num breakaway sign posts num brick for manhole num bridge decks curing concrete num finishing num placing concrete num w idening num bridge removal num brooming num num bulletin board num buried and bolted guardrail anchors num c cable and wire for traffic signal num messenger num calendar day definition of num cancellation of awardnum num cantilever sign structure foundation num care and protection of trees shrubs and plants num num casing removal drilled shaft num castinplace concrete minor structures num piles num pipe num catch basins concrete num catch basins reconstruct to grade num cattle guards new or reconstruct to grade num temporary num cement hydraulic num num storage of num cement treated base num cement treated subgrade num cementtreated slurry bedding material num ceramic pavement markers num certificates of compliance andor analysis num chain link cable barrier num chain link fence and gates num changeable message board num channel protection bank num character of workers num chemical fertilizer num num chip seal coat num chip seal pavement marker num num circuit continuity testing num claims arbitrationnum decision on num mediation num notice of claim num submission of num classes of finish structural concrete num cleaning up pit sites num num clearing and grubbing num removal and disposal of materials num collected stock num commercial source num compaction and density requirements for aggregate bases and subbases num asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num cement treated base num cement treated subgrade num embankment num grading roadway for pavement num lime treated subgrade num road mix pavement num structure backfill num compensation for altered quantities num num complete in place definition of num completion date determination of num failure to meet num compressive strength acceptance for concrete num concrete asphaltic num barrier transition num barriers num beams tolerances num num catch basin num catch basin reconstruct num curbs gutters sidewalks and driveways num curing compound num num end sections num finishing num gore paving num packaged dry highearly strength num packaged dry normal strength num packaged dry rapid hardening num packaged dry very rapidhardening num pavement deficiency num num pavement repairs num pipe nonreinforced num pipe nonreinforced castinplace num placing num posttensioning castinplace num prestressing num num sidewalk and sidewalk ramp num slope protection bank num structures num utility for miscellaneous construction num valley gutter num vibrating num concrete curing castinplace num liquid membrane num lowpressure steam num radiant heat with moisture num w ater method num num concrete structures bridge deck num bridge deck widening num compressive strength num construction joints num dimensional tolerances num falsework and forms num finishing num joints num materials num minor num num num opening to traffic num placing concrete for num placing concrete in water for num num price adjustment low strength concrete num removal of forms num surface finish num concrete portland cement acceptance sampling and testing num num admixtures num num aggregates num num compressive strength acceptance for num curing compounds num num cylinders cores num num num design procedures num materials num mixing num pavement num proportioning num sampling frequency num num testing for minor precast structures num w eather limitations num conductors electrical num conduit electrical highway lighting num num electrical water distribution system num embedded in concrete structures num jacked under pavement num polyvinyl chloride num conformity reasonably close num w ith plans and specifications num consideration of proposals num consistency of concrete num construct chain link fence from salvage num construct guardrail from salvage num construction stakes lines and grades num construction surveying and layout num contents of proposal pamphlet num continuous mixing num asphaltic concrete num cement treated base num contract alterations ofnum award and execution num bond definition of num bond requirement of num cancellation of award of num default of num definition of num execution of num failure to execute num intent num subletting of num termination of num time of executionnum time definition of num time determination and extension of num contractor cooperation of num definition of num quality control num records num responsibilities for utilities num responsibility for work num contractorfurnished source num control cabinet num num control of material num control of worknum controlled blasting num controlling item definition of num cooperation contractor by num contractors betweennum utility companies num coordination of contract documents num cores num num num num corrugated metal pipe bituminous coated num end sections num laying and joining num precoated galvanized num cost reduction incentive num cover material application of num removing loose num requirements for num rolling num crack repair num crown dike num num crown ditches num curb concrete num embankment num curing bridge deck num cement treated subgrade num lean concrete base num lime treated subgrade num materials portland cement concrete num materials portland cement concrete pavement num nonreinforced castinplace pipe num portland cement concrete pavement num precast concrete num shotcrete num structural concrete num curing seal bituminous material for num num num for cement treated base num num for cement treated subgrade num num for lime treated subgrade num num cutback asphalt num d dagmars reflectorized num damage by storm flood or earthquake num occurrence num payment for repair work num repair work num damage claims responsibility for num dampproofing and waterproofing concrete surfaces num deck joint assemblies num decomposed granite num default termination of contract for num deficiency adjustment for lean concrete base num portland cement concrete num structural concrete strength num definitions and terms num delineators and markers num department definition of num departmentfurnished materials num departmentfurnished source num detectors num detectors installation num determination and extension of contract time num determination of bearing values piling num devices for sampling num patented num num differing site conditions num director definition of num disqualification of bidders num distributor truck num dowels num num num downdrains embankment num drainage excavation num num drainage fabric num drawings working and supplemental num num drilled shaft foundations num num drilling slurry num driving piles num dumped riprap num num duties inspector num resident engineer num e earthwork num adjustments num blasting num num roadway excavation num slopes num surplus material num unsuitable material num num edge drains num edge sealing num elastomeric bearing pad num electrical conductors num conduit num num tests num underground material num eliminated items num embankment compaction num construction requirements num curb num downdrains num inlets and outlets num moisture content num spillways num tolerances num emitter num emulsified asphalt num encasement of new pipe num energy absorbing terminal num engineer field laboratory num engineers field office num num engineer definition of num environmental analyses num epoxy adhesives resin base num resin base anchoring num epoxy coating for reinforcing steel num num epoxy resin base binder num equipment definition of num equipment force account num erosion num num examination of plans specifications and site work num excavation disposal of num num num drainage num erosion control num for drilled shafts num for trees shrubs and plants num landscape num roadway num structural num num surplus material from num execution of contract num expansion joint filler num num expansion joints in major structures num expansion joints portland cement concrete pavement num explosives use of num extension of contract time num extraction of pit material num f failure to complete work on time num execute contract num maintain roadway or structure num falsework and forms num falsework removal num federal aid participation num fence barbed wire num chain link construct from salvage num gate num num hardware num posts num num w ire num fertilizer chemical num num field painting num filler expansion joint num num filter fabric num num num num filter material pipe num num final clean up num final payment num fine aggregate for portland cement concrete num finishing concrete bridge decks num formed num fire plan num fixed form method for constructing portland cement concrete pavement num num flared end section num flasher num num flasher controller num flashing arrow panels num num num flood gates num flood plain material num fly ash num fog coat num followers num force account work equipment and rates num equipment standby time num labor num materials num w ork by subcontractors num forest protection num forms for structural concrete num formulas for determining bearing values num foundation for signs num frames and covers num num frames and covers for manholes num num frames and grates for catch basins num furnish water supply num furnishing rightofwaynum g gabions num galvanizing sign structures num structural steel num num gaskets num gate valve num num gates fence and num num geocomposite edge drain num num geocomposite wall drain num num num geogrid num num geosynthetics num geotextile fabric separation num num glass spheres preformed pavement markings num gore paving concrete num num grader ditch num grading roadway for pavement num grading landscaping num granite mulch num grass seed num grinding pavement num grooving pavement num ground rubber edge sealing concrete pavement num grouted riprap num num grouting of posttensioned members num grubbing clearing and num guardrail elements num end terminal assemblies num guardrail terminals num miscellaneous materials num nested num painting damaged galvanized areas num posts num reconstruct num reconstruct from salvage num removal of num roadway num transition section num gutter concrete curb and num valley num h hammers for driving piles num handling materials num hazardous materials num headwalls basis of payment num construction requirements num heating aggregate for asphaltic concrete num heating requirements bituminous materials num highway lighting anchor bolts num ballast num base plates num cable num conductor num num conduit num num conduit embedded in concrete structures num conduit jacked under pavement num control lighting num electrical tests num equipment list and drawings num num foundations num grounding bonding num installation of conduit and pull boxes num installation of poles num junction box num lamps num num load center cabinets num luminaire num num mast arms and tie rods num photo electric controls num pull box num num regulations and codes num removal salvage or reinstallation num service system components num testing num transformer num w iring procedures splices num holidays definition of num holidays epoxy coating num hotpoured joint sealant num humus num hydraulic cement num num hydroseeding num i illumination value sign lighting num immigration and nationality act num incidental electrical work num increase or decrease of quantities num independent approved laboratory definition of num inlets and outlets embankment num inspection of the plantnum inspection of work num inspection surface portland cement concrete pavement num inspector definition of num installation of corrugated metal pipe num nonreinforced castinplace concrete pipe num precast concrete pipe num structural plate pipe num temporary cattle guards and fence num insulation water distribution system num num insurance num intent of contract num interpretation of quantities in bidding schedulenum irregular proposals num irrigation system establishment num issuance of proposals num item pay item definition of num num items of special manufacture num j jetting and drilling num jiggle bars num joint and crack repair num joint filler expansion bituminous num num nonbituminous num num joint material for concrete pipe num joint sealant cold application num hotpoured num silicone num joint seals bridge deck num joints cellular polychloroprene neoprene num expansion num num sawed portland cement concrete num joints in asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete friction course num concrete barriers num deck units num major structures num nonreinforced concrete pipe num portland cement concrete pavement num precast manhole sections num rubber gaskets reinforced concrete pipe num junction boxes metal num l laboratory definition of num lamps high pressure sodium num num signal num landscape establishment num excavation num grading num irrigation system establishment num irrigation system installation num plating materials num topsoil num lapping and splicing reinforcement num lawn mowing and weeding num laws to be observed num lean concrete base num num lean concrete base thickness num legal relations and responsibility to public num legal rights no waiver of num light pole wood marking num lighting highway num lime num lime treated subgrade num lime treated subgrade safety program num limitation of operations num liquid asphalt num liquid membrane forming compound num liquidated damages schedule of num load center cabinet num load restrictions num num load test for piles num load transfer dowels num local stock num loop detector installation num pavement cutting num num saw cut sealant num num unit num num w ire num losses prestressed concrete num luminaire adjusting and aiming device num high pressure sodium num num housing num num removal salvage reinstallation num num lump sum payment for structures num m mag num magnetometer detector unit num num maintain changeable message board num maintenance of traffic num maintenance of traffic during construction num suspension of work for the winter seasonnum major item definition ofnum manhole num num reset frame and cover num markers object num markers rightofway num markings thermoplastic stripes and num mast arms and tie rods num material sources categories of num cleaning up num num clearing and stripping num commercial num contractorfurnished num departmentfurnished num in flood plains num royalty charges num materials certification ofnum definition of num departmentfurnished num extraction of from pit num information available on num patented num rights in and use of found on work num source of supply and quality requirements num storage of num unacceptable num w eighing num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities num methods and equipment num milepost markers num mill inspectionnum mineral admixture for asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num mineral aggregate for asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num minimum cement content structural concrete num minor item definition ofnum minor structures concrete num num num minor structures steel num mix design for asphaltic concrete num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num num asphaltic concreteend product num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num num asphaltic concrete friction course num num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num num num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num num lean concrete base num portland cement concrete num previously utilized asphaltic concrete num num num revisions num num num num num num num shotcrete num mix design deviations from num mixing asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete friction course num bituminous road mix num cement treated base num cement treated subgrade num lean concrete base num lime treated subgrade num portland cement concrete pavement num road mix bituminous pavement num shotcrete num structural concrete num mobilization num monuments survey num mortar packaged dry high strength num packaged dry rapidhardening num packaged dry very rapidhardening num mortar joints precast concrete pipe num mulch materials num num mulching num mutcd num n neoprene joint seal num nestable corrugated steel pipe num no waiver of legal rights num nonbituminous joint filler num num noncollusion certification num nonreinforced concrete pipe num nonshrink grout materials num notice of award definition of num nursery stock num o object markers num obliterate pavement marking num num obstructions removal of structures and num occupational safety and health standards num officials personal liability of public num opening concrete pavement to traffic num num opening lean concrete base to traffic num overhead sign structures num p paint acrylic emulsion num num aluminum num num for pavement marking num num general requirements num threepaint coating system num num zinc num num painting concrete surfaces num damaged galvanized coat num damaged galvanized coat guardrail num metal surfaces num surfaces other than metal or concrete num structural steel num surface cleaning num w eather conditions num panels flashing arrow num num partial payment num partial payment for material on hand num partnering num patented devices materials and processes num pavement fabric num num pavement marker chip seal num num pavement markings dual component num glass beads for pavement marking paint num num num num obliteration of existing num num paint num num preformed num num num raised num temporary raised or painted line num pavement markings thermoplastic application num method of measurement stripes and symbols num reflective glass spheres num num pavement structure definition of num pavement bituminous road mix num pavement portland cement concrete base for num cracks num curing num num edge sealing num forming fixed form num num forming slipform num num grinding num num grooving num joint and crack repair num joints num num load transfer dowel assemblies num materials num opening to traffic num placing and finishing num removal and replacement num num repair of num sealing joints num setting forms num slab repair full depth num smoothness num num statistical acceptance num surface texturing num thickness num payment partial num payment partial for material on hand num pedestal cabinet meter num pedestrian push button detector num perforated sign posts num performance bonds num permits licenses and taxes num personal liability of public officials num photo electric lighting controls num piles bearing value determination num castinplace num cutoff num defective num driving of num embankment num load tests for num painting metal num num precast num num splices num steel num timber num pilot trucks num pipe aluminum num backfilling and compacting num bedding num bituminous coated num concrete nonreinforced castinplace num concrete reinforced num num concretelined corrugated metal num num corrugated high density polyethylene num num corrugated metal num num corrugated polyethylene num num num encasement of new num excavation for num gaskets for num installation of num iron num num nonreinforced concrete num polyvinyl chloride num precoated galvanized steel num removal num slotted num num spiral rib corrugated metal num num structural plate pipearches and arches num num pipe corrugated metal construction requirements num material num pipe nonreinforced castinplace curing num excavation num placement num repair num w all thickness num pipe perforated for underdrains aluminum num clay num plastic num steel num placing and finishing asphaltic concrete num num lean concrete base num portland cement concrete pavement num placing structural concrete num plain rubber waterstops num plans and working drawings num plans approval of num plans definition of num plant inspection num planted stock and seeding establishment num planting care and protection of trees shrubs and plants num collected stock and local stock num nursery stock num pruning and staking num planting season num plants inspection num plants shipping and handling num plants trees shrubs and num pneumatic tired rollers num num num poles steel num pollution prevention num portland cement concrete num num portland cement concrete pavement num statistical acceptance num posts fence num guardrail num metal num wood num posttensioning castinplace concrete num precast concrete barriers num precast concrete piles num precast concrete pipe num preconstruction conference num preformed expansion joint filler num num preformed plastic pavement markings num preparation of proposal num prepared soil num prequalification of biddernum preservation of seeded areas num preservative treatment timber piles num prestressing concrete approval of prestressing systems num ducts num num grouting posttensioned members num posttensioning castinplace concrete num pretensioning precast concrete num steel for num prevailing wage force account work num prevention of landscape defacement num price adjustments num num num prime coat num prismatic reflectors num num profile grade definition of num profile index portland cement concrete pavement num num project plans definition of num project definition of num proposal combination or conditional num definition num delivery of num guaranty num guaranty definition of num irregular num issuance of num pamphlet contents of num public opening of num w ithdrawal of num proprietary products trade names and substitutions num prosecution and progress num num protection and restoration of property and landscapenum num of trees shrubs and plants num pruning and staking num public convenience and safety num public officials personal liability of num pugmill num pull box num num pumping concrete num q quality control and acceptance terms num quality control contractor num quantities approximate in advertisement for bids num compensation for altered num num num earthwork adjustments num increase or decrease of num num interpretation of in bidding schedule num measurement of num r radiant heat curing precast concrete num rail bank protection num railwayhighway provisions num raised pavement markers bituminous adhesive for num ceramic num dagmars reflectorized num jiggle bars num reflective num reasonably close conformity definition of num reconstruct catch basins num cattle guards num fence chain link num guardrail num guardrail from salvage num recycling agent num num reduction for noncompliance asphalt cement num reference markers num reflective glass beads pavement marking paint num num num reflective glass spheres num reflectorized raised pavement markers num reflectors prismatic num num reimbursement traffic control num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforcement num num reinforcing steel bending num num clearance num dowel placement num epoxy coated num num for drilled shaft num placing num num splicing and lapping num supports num w elded wire fabric num removal and disposal of materials num removal of bituminous pavement num bridges num concrete barriers num concrete curb and gutter num embankment curb num falsework and forms num fence num guardrail num light poles and bases num loose cover material num num materials clearing and grubbing num miscellaneous concrete num pipe num portland cement concrete pavement num num signs and delineators num structural concrete num structures and obstructions num unacceptable and unauthorized work num removal construction requirements num remove and salvage guardrail num removing electrical equipment salvage or reinstall num repair of damaged work num requirement of contract bondnum reset frame and cover for manhole num survey monuments num reshaping and grading existing improvements num responsibility for damage claims num restoration of surfaces opened by permit num retaining wall removal of num retroreflective sheeting num return of proposal guaranty num rightofway definition of num furnishing num markers num rights in and use of materials found on the work num riprap dumped num num grouted num num num sacked concrete num num slope mattress num num w ire tied num num road mix bituminous pavement num roadbed definition of num roadside development definition of num roadside sign supports num roadside definition of num roadway definition of num excavation num rock mulch num rollers pneumatic tired num num num num num tandem power steel wheel num num num num rolling method asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num cover material num road mix bituminous pavement num rounding of slopes num royalty charges num rub rail num rubbed finish concrete num rubber gasket joints precast concrete pipe num rumble strip groundin num s sacked concrete riprap num num safety plan contractorsnum safety program for lime treated subgrade num sampling device num sand barrel crash cushion num num sanitary health and safety provisions num saw cut sealant detector installation num num saw cutting num sawed joints num num schedule of liquidated damages num scope of payment num scope of work num seal cracks in portland cement concrete pavement num num edge of portland cement concrete pavement num seal coat chip num fog num season planting num seeding num selfpropelled paving machine asphaltic concrete num num separation geotextile fabric num septic tanks num sewer pipe num sewerage system num sheeting retroreflective num shielded cable num shipping and handling of stock plants num shop drawings definition of num requirements of num shop inspection structural steel num shotcrete num shoulder definition of num shoulders landscape grading num shrubs trees and plants num sidewalks concrete and driveways num sign fabrication num panel installation num panels num retroreflective sheeting num num sign lighting and electrical signs ballast num changeable message board num conduit num num flasher assembly num housing num load center cabinets num luminaire num num manualoffphoto switch num photo electric control num switches num uplight shield num num sign panels num sign supports foundations concrete num overhead num posts breakaway num posts perforated num posts uchannel num silicone joint sealant num num silt fence temporary fabric num num slab repairs num slipform method for embankment curb num for lean concrete base num for portland cement concrete pavement num num for single curb curb and gutter and sidewalk num num slope and channel protection bank num slope plating num slopes earthwork num num slotted pipe num num slump concrete num slump shotcrete num slurry backfill num num slurry bedding material num smoothness asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num snow markers num soil anchor stakes num sound barrier walls num soundness test for portland cement concrete aggregate num sources material num operation at num spall repairs num special provisions definition of num specifications conformity with plans and num definition of num spillways embankment num splicing and lapping reinforcement num spreading bituminous road mix num cover material num staking pruning and num standard drawings definition of num standard specifications definition of num standpipes num start of work num state definition of num steam curing precast concrete member num steel reinforcement num steel shells for castinplace concrete piles num steel structures num stock plants nursery collected and local num stockpiling aggregate for asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num num structural concrete num storage of materials num storm flood or earthquake damage by num stripping material source num structural concrete num concrete removal of num excavation and structure backfill num num pipe num plate structures num structural steel bolts high strength num num certification num cleaning num erection num fabrication num galvanizing num joints bolts for num painting num num shop and working drawings num shop inspection num straightening of num test reports num w elding num structures castinplace num concrete num drainage of num overhead sign num precast barriers num precast piles num prestressed num steel num structures lump sum payment for num stud shear connectors num subcontractor definition of num subcontractor records num subgrade compaction num num construction num drainage num num lime treated num moisture and density control num subletting of contract num substitution proprietary products trade names and num substructure definition of num superstructure definition of num supplemental agreement definition of num supplemental drawings num supplier definition of num num surety definition of num surface requirements and tolerances asphaltic concrete num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num asphaltic concreteend product num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num road mix bituminous pavement num surface test inspection portland cement concrete pavement num surface treatment bituminous num surfacing bituminous materials for num surge protector num surplus material excavation num survey monuments num suspension from bidding num switches num t tack coat num num tacking existing surfaces num tar num temperature limitations weather and portland cement concrete num temporary concrete barrier num num num num fence num fence and cattle guards num impact attenuation devices num num num preformed pavement markings num num raised pavement markers num num traffic signal devices num tensioning prestressed concrete bridge members num termination of contract num num terms definitions and num testing irrigation system num testing water distribution system num num thermoplastic stripes and markings num pavement markings num traffic stripes num thrie beam barrier num tie bars num timber piles num num timber posts and blocks guardrail num time contract determination and extension of num tolerances asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete surface num num bituminous road mix surface num castinplace concrete num portland cement concrete pavement num num num precast concrete beams num precast minor structures num topsoil num tracer w ire num trade names and substitutions proprietary products num traffic cones and drums num control plan num num maintenance and protection of num maintenance directed by engineer num maintenance of num on chip seal num paint num pavement marking num traffic control elements of work completeinplace num elements of work in use num reimbursement num reimbursement exceptions num relocation services num traffic signal controller material cabinet num cable num conductors num conflict monitor num num num connectors num controller assembly num flasher num num flasher controller num lightning protection num load switch num num power breaker num reflectors num traffic signal controllers assembly num num cabinets num switches num synchronization functions num testing and prequalification num num traffic signal equipment control cabinet num num department testing of num foundations num num installation of electrical conduit and pull boxes num lamps num maintaining num num optical equipment num num num pedestrian signals num num poles num poles base plates num num power service num pull boxes num num removal storage or reinstallation num signal face num num signal lamps num temporary num num testing num traffic signal indications and mounting assemblies num transverse construction joints portland cement concrete pavement num traveled way definition of num traveling plant mixing bituminous road mix num cement treated subgrade num lime treated subgrade num treated base cement num lean concrete num treatment bituminous surface num w ood preservative for timber piles num tree staking materials num trees shrubs and plants num tremie concrete num num trench backfill num trench during milling operations num trench open utility num trenching pipe installation num num num truck mounted attenuator num num tubular marker num turnout construction num u unacceptable materials num unauthorized work removal of num unsuitable material removal and disposal ofnum num uplight shield num num usage of material in designated material sources num use of curb and gutter machines num use of explosives num utilities cooperation with num utility concrete for miscellaneous construction num utility property and services contractors responsibility for num v num valley gutter num value engineering proposals num values bearing determination of num valve boxes num valves water distribution num vertical panels num vertical restrainers num vibrating portland cement concrete num num num w w arning signs barricades and num w arning marker and regulatory sign panels num w arranties and guaranties num w ater distribution bedding and cover material num components construction requirements num components materials num installation num permits warranties and guaranties num testing num testing prior to backfilling num w ater for dust control num w ater stops rubber synthetic num num w ater supply furnish num w ater curing structural concrete num w ater payment for num w ater portland cement concrete pavement num w aterproofing concrete surfaces dampproofing and num w eakened plane joints portland cement concrete pavement num w eather and temperature limitations asphaltic concrete num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber num asphaltic concreteend product num num asphaltic concrete asphaltrubber endproduct num asphaltic concreteend product shrp volumetric mix num num asphaltic concrete friction course num asphaltic concrete friction course asphaltrubber num asphaltic concrete friction course miscellaneous num asphaltic concrete miscellaneous structural num concrete pavement num painting num pavement fabric interlayer num road mix bituminous pavement num shotcrete num structural concrete num w eeds control of num w eight of steel reinforcement num w elded wire fabric num w elding num num w ire barbed num num fabric num fence and gates num num loop detector num reinforcement num rope num steel used as spirals or ties num tied riprap num num w iring procedures electrical num w ithdrawal of proposals num w ood forms structural concrete num posts and blocks guardrail num w ood poles lighting num defects num definitions wood terminology num dimensions num inspection num installation num manufacturing requirements num preservatives num w ood poles temporary traffic signal num w ork contractors responsibility for num control of num definition of num extra num failure to complete on time num inspection of num limitations of num prosecution and progress of num num scope of num start of num w orking and supplemental drawings definition num w orking day definition of num w orking forces and working stresses num w oven wire fabric num w oven wire fence num
