standard specifications for construction of roads and bridges on federal highway projects fpnum u.s. department of transportation federal highway administration federal lands highway standard specifications for construction of roads and bridges on federal highway projects fpnum united states department of transportation federal highway administration i preface these standard specifications for the construction of roads and bridges on federal highway projects are issued primarily for constructing roads and bridges on federal highway projects under the direct administration of the federal highway administration .
these specifications are cited as fpnum indicating federal project standard specifications issued in num and contain both united states customary and metric units of measure .
when designated in a contract the fpnum becomes part of the contract and binding upon all parties to the contract .
construction contracts of the federal highway administration are also governed by the following regulations federal acquisition regulation far title num code of federal regulations chapter num and transportation acquisition regulation tar title num code of federal regulations chapter num .
the far and tar regulations are not included in the fpnum .
a complete copy of the far is available from the superintendent of documents congressional sales office u.s. government printing office washington dc num .
u.s .
customary units of measure are used in the fpnum as provided in the november num num memorandum from jeffrey f. paniati entitled update on metric use requirements for fhwa documents .
metric units are noted in parentheses following the u.s .
customary units .
the references to metric or metric units apply only when the project or portion of the project expressly calls for metric units of measure .
ii metric to u.s .
customary conversion factors approximate symbol when you know multiply by to find symbol length µm micrometers num num inches in mm millimeters num inches in m meters num feet ft m meters num yards yd km kilometers num miles mi area mmnum square millimeters num square inches innum mnum square meters num square feet ftnum mnum square meters num square yards ydnum ha hectares num acres ac kmnum square kilometers num square miles minum volume ml milliliters num fluid ounces fl oz l liters num gallons gal mnum cubic meters num cubic feet ftnum mnum cubic meters num cubic yards ydnum mass g grams num ounces oz kg kilograms num pounds lb mg megagrams num short tons t or t or metric ton num lb temperature exact c celsius temperature numc num fahrenheit temperature f illumination lx lux num footcandles fc cdmnum candelamnum num footlamberts fl miscellaneous j joule num footpoundforce ftlbf n newtons num poundforce lbf kpa kilopascals num poundforce per square inch lbfinnum iii table of contents division num general requirements num section num .
terms format and definitions num section num .
bid award and execution of contract num section num .
scope of work num section num .
control of work num section num .
control of material num section num .
acceptance of work num section num .
legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num .
prosecution and progress num section num .
measurement and payment num division num project requirements num section num .
mobilization num section num .
construction survey and staking num section num .
contractor quality control num section num .
contractor sampling and testing num section num .
schedules for construction contracts num section num .
public traffic num section num .
soil erosion and sediment control num section num .
watering for dust control num division num earthwork num section num .
clearing and grubbing num section num .
additional clearing and grubbing num section num .
removal of structures and obstructions num section num .
excavation and embankment num section num .
rock blasting num section num .
reserved num section num .
earthwork geosynthetics num section num .
structure excavation and backfill for selected major structures num section num .
structure excavation and backfill num section num .
reserved num section num .
roadway obliteration num section num .
linear grading num section num .
subgrade stabilization num iv division num slope reinforcement and retaining walls num section num .
riprap num section num .
rockery special rock embankment and rock buttress num section num .
gabions and revet mattresses num section num .
reserved num section num .
mechanicallystablilized earth walls num section num .
permanent ground anchors num section num .
contractordesigned retaining walls num section num .
reinforced concrete retaining walls num section num .
soil nail retaining walls num section num .
rock bolts and dowels num section num .
reinforced soil slopes num division num aggregate and base courses num section num .
untreated aggregate courses num section num .
minor crushed aggregate num section num .
road reconditioning num section num .
full depth reclamation num section num .
full depth reclamation with cement num section num .
full depth reclamation with asphalt num section num .
reserved num section num .
reserved num section num .
emulsified asphalttreated base course num section num .
cold inplace recycled asphalt base course num section num .
stabilized aggregate surface course num section num .
dust palliative num section num .
aggregatetopsoil course num section num .
stockpiled aggregates num division num asphalt pavements and surface treatments num section num .
asphalt concrete pavement by gyratory mix design method num section num .
asphalt concrete pavement by hveem or marshall mix design method num section num .
asphalt concrete num section num .
reserved num section num .
opengraded asphalt friction course num section num .
fog seal num v section num .
chip seal num section num .
reserved num section num .
micro surfacing num section num .
slurry seal num section num .
asphalt prime coat num section num .
asphalt tack coat num section num .
asphalt pavement milling num section num .
asphalt pavement crack sealing and filling num section num .
paving geotextiles num section num .
reserved num section num .
reserved num section num .
asphalt concrete pavement patching num division num rigid pavements num section num .
minor concrete pavement num section num .
concrete pavement restoration num division num bridge construction num section num .
driven piles num section num .
structural concrete num section num .
prestressed concrete num section num .
reinforcing steel num section num .
steel structures num section num .
bridge railing num section num .
timber structures num section num .
dampproofing num section num .
waterproofing num section num .
removal of concrete by hydrodemolition num section num .
structural concrete injection and crack repair num section num .
temporary works num section num .
painting num section num .
bearing devices num section num .
drilled shafts num section num .
shotcrete num section num .
micropiles num section num .
high performance concrete num section num .
concrete overlays for bridge decks num vi division num incidental construction num section num .
minor concrete structures num section num .
culverts and drains num section num .
structural plate structures num section num .
manholes inlets and catch basins num section num .
underdrains sheet drains and pavement edge drains num section num .
corrugated metal spillways num section num .
cleaning relaying and repairing existing drainage structures num section num .
paved waterways num section num .
curb and gutter num section num .
horizontal drains num section num .
water systems num section num .
sanitary sewer systems num section num .
simulated stone masonry surface num section num .
lean concrete backfill num section num .
sidewalks pads and paved medians num section num .
slope paving num section num .
guardrail num section num .
concrete barriers and precast guardwalls num section num .
fences gates cattle guards and bollard posts num section num .
stone masonry num section num .
monuments and markers num section num .
rental equipment num section num .
general labor num section num .
topsoil num section num .
turf establishment num section num .
plants trees shrubs vines and groundcovers num section num .
sod num section num .
reserved num section num .
rolled erosion control products and cellular confinement systems num section num .
reserved num section num .
reserved num section num .
reserved num section num .
permanent traffic control num vii section num .
permanent pavement markings num section num .
temporary traffic control num section num .
traffic signal traffic counter lighting and electrical systems num section num .
facilities and services num division num material num section num .
cement num num hydraulic cement num num masonry and mortar cement num section num .
asphalt material num num asphalt binder num num material for dampproofing and waterproofing concrete and masonry surfaces num num asphalt mastic num num antistrip additive num num mineral fiber num section num .
aggregate num num fine aggregate for concrete num num coarse aggregate for concrete num num granular backfill num num reserved .
num num subbase base and surface course aggregate num num crushed aggregate num num asphalt concrete aggregate num num opengraded asphalt friction course aggregate num num chip seal aggregate num num slurry seal and micro surfacing aggregate num num reserved num num blotter num num aggregate for aggregatetopsoil course num num sand num num aggregate for lean concrete backfill num num shotcrete aggregate num num granular rock backdrain num section num .
soil num viii num foundation fill num num bedding material num num backfill material num num structural backfill num num topping num num unclassified borrow num num select borrow num num select granular backfill num section num .
rock num num gabion and revet mattress rock num num riprap num num rock for masonry structures num num rock for special rock embankment num num rock for buttresses num num rock for rockeries num section num .
concrete pipe num num nonreinforced concrete pipe num num reinforced concrete pipe num num perforated concrete pipe num num reinforced archshaped concrete pipe num num reinforced ellipticallyshaped concrete pipe num num reinforced dload concrete pipe num num precast reinforced concrete box sections num num gaskets for concrete pipe num num supplemental concrete pipe ties num section num .
metal pipe num num ductile iron culvert pipe num num metalliccoated corrugated steel pipe num num aluminumalloy corrugated pipe num num asphaltcoated pipe num num steel structural plate structures num num aluminumalloy structural plate structures num num asphaltcoated structural plate structures num num polymercoated steel pipe num num reserved num ix num slotted drain pipe num num metalliccoated spiral rib pipe num num aluminumalloy spiral rib pipe num num concretelined corrugated steel pipe num num invertpaved corrugated steel pipe num num cast iron soil pipe and fittings num num seamless copper water tube and fittings num num gaskets for metal pipe num num gaskets for ductile iron pipe num section num .
plastic pipe num num smooth wall polyethylene pipe num num corrugated polyethylene pipe num num profile wall ribbed polyethylene pipe num num corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing num num smooth wall polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe num num profile wall ribbed polyvinyl chloride pipe num num acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene abs pipe num num gaskets for plastic pipe num section num .
reinforcing steel and wire rope num num reinforcing steel num num prestressing steel num section num .
fence and guardrail num num barbed wire num num woven wire num num chain link fence num num fence posts and bollards num num fence gates num num rail elements num num guardrail posts num num guardrail blocks num num guardrail nuts bolts and cables num num guardrail hardware num num temporary plastic fence num section num .
concrete curing material and admixtures num num curing material num x num airentraining admixtures num num chemical admixtures num num latex emulsion num num concrete coloring agents num section num .
joint material num num sealants fillers and seals num num mortar num section num .
roadside improvement material num num topsoil num num agricultural limestone num num fertilizer num num seed num num mulch num num plant material num num cellular confinement systems num num miscellaneous planting material num num sod num num pegs for sod num num tackifiers num num fiber rolls and socks num num gravel bags num num sandbags num num temporary culvert pipe num num silt fence num num temporary rolled erosion control products num num turf reinforcement mats num num sediment filter bags num num prefabricated filter insert num num floating turbidity curtains num section num .
geosynthetic material num num geotextile num num geocomposite drain num num stabilization geogrid num num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid num num geomembrane num xi section num .
piling num num untreated timber piles .
num num treated timber piles .
num num concrete piles .
num num steel shells .
num num steel pipes .
num num steel hpiles .
num num sheet piles .
num num pile shoes .
num num splices .
num section num .
material for timber structures num num untreated structural timber and lumber num num hardware num num treated structural timber and lumber num num structural glued laminated timber num section num .
structural metal num num structural steel num num steel forgings num num pins and rollers num num castings num num welded stud shear connectors num num steel pipe num num galvanized coatings num num sheet lead num num steel grid floors num num bearings num num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe surfaces for bearings num num aluminum alloy for bridge rail num num aluminum bolt heads and nuts num num aluminum welding wire num section num .
traffic signing and marking material num num retroreflective sheeting num num reserved num num panels num num sign posts num xii num object marker and delineator posts num num hardware num num legends and borders num num delineator and object marker retroreflectors num num solventborne traffic paint num num waterborne traffic paint num num epoxy markings num num thermoplastic markings num num preformed pavement marking tape num num glass beads num num pavement markers num num temporary pavement markings num num epoxy resin adhesives num section num .
paint num num general num num paint for timber structures num num paint for masonry block structures num num paint for steel structures num num paint for concrete structures .
num num paint for aluminum structures num num paint for other metal structures .
num num penetrating stain num num mineral spirits petroleum spirits num section num .
structural wall and stabilized embankment material num num mechanicallystabilized earth wall material num num gabion and revet mattress material num section num .
electrical and illumination material num num electrical material num num lighting material num section num .
anchor material num num anchorage devices num num anchor tendons num num rock bolts num num soil nails num xiii section num .
reserved num section num .
reserved num section num .
miscellaneous material num num water num num calcium chloride magnesium chloride and lignosulfonate num num lime num num pozzolans num num mineral filler num num concrete building brick num num concrete masonry units num num paving brick num num precast concrete units and accessories num num frames grates covers and ladder rungs num num corrugated metal units num num plastic lining num num grout num num polymer concrete and mortar num num color coating num num slurry drilling fluids num num reinforcing fibers num num epoxy resin adhesives num xiv num division num general requirements section num num section num .
terms format and definitions num meaning of terms .
these specifications are generally written in the imperative mood .
in sentences using the imperative mood the subject the contractor is implied .
also implied in this language are shall shall be or similar words and phrases .
in material specifications the subject may also be the supplier fabricator or manufacturer supplying material products or equipment for use on the project .
wherever directed required prescribed or ordered are used the direction requirement prescription or order of the contracting officer is intended .
wherever something is to be submitted submitting to the contracting officer is intended .
similarly wherever approved acceptable suitable satisfactory or similar words are used the words mean approved by acceptable to or satisfactory to the contracting officer .
the word will generally pertains to decisions or actions of the contracting officer .
num specifications format .
these specifications are divided into num divisions .
division num consists of general contract requirements for which no direct payment is made .
the requirements contained in division num are applicable to all contracts .
division num consists of project contract requirements that are applicable to all contracts .
work under division num is paid for directly or indirectly according to subsection num and the section ordering the work .
when there is no pay item in the bid schedule no direct payment is made .
divisions num through num consist of construction contract requirements for specific items of work .
work under these divisions is paid for directly or indirectly according to subsection num and the section ordering the work .
when there is no pay item in the bid schedule no direct payment is made .
division num contains the material requirements for divisions num through num .
no direct payment is made in division num .
payment for material is included as part of the work required in divisions num through num .
the first three digits of the pay item number in the bid schedule identify the section under which the work is performed .
num abbreviations .
whenever these abbreviations are used in the contract they represent the following a acronyms .
aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america aisc american institute of steel construction aitc american institute of timber construction ansi american national standards institute section num num apwa american public works association artba american road and transportation builders association asme american society of mechanical engineers astm astm international atssa american traffic safety services association awpa american wood protection association aws american welding society awwa american water works association bmp best management practice cfr code of federal regulations co contracting officer and authorized representatives crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute epa environmental protection agency far federal acquisition regulations num cfr chapter num fhwa federal highway administration fica federal insurance contributions act flh federal lands highway fss federal specifications and standards fedstd federal standards futa federal unemployment tax act iso international organization for standardization issa international slurry surfacing association jmf jobmix formula mash manual for assessing safety hardware mpi master painters institute msds material safety data sheet mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways nchrp national cooperative highway research program nema national electrical manufacturers association nist national institute of standards and technology osha occupational safety and health administration pci precastprestressed concrete institute pvc polyvinyl chloride pti posttensioning institute section num num sep sand equivalent passing sf standard form si international system of units sspc the society for protective coatings swppp storm water pollution prevention plan tar transportation acquisition regulations num cfr chapter num ul underwriters laboratory u.s. united states of america usc united states code b u.s .
customary unit abbreviations and symbols .
f degree fahrenheit temperature ft feet length ftnum square feet area ftnum cubic feet volume in inches length innum square inches area innum cubic inches volume lb pound mass mi mile length oz ounces mass psi pounds per square inch pressure t ton num lb mass yd yards length ydnum square yards area ydnum cubic yards volume s second time degree plane angle minute plane angle second plane angle c metric unit abbreviations and symbols .
a ampere electric current cd candela luminous intensity c degree celsius temperature section num num d day time g gram mass h henry inductance ha hectare area hz hertz snum frequency j joule nm energy k kelvin temperature kg kilogram mass l liter volume lx lux illuminance m meter length mm millimeter length mnum square meter area mnum cubic meter volume min minute time n newton kgmsnum force pa pascal nmnum pressure t metric ton mass v volt wa electric potential w watt js power ω ohm va electric resistance d metric prefix symbols .
e exa num p peta num t tera num g giga num m mega num k kilo num c centi num m milli num µ micro num n nano num p pico num f femto num section num num a atto num e slope notation vertical horizontal .
for slopes flatter than numvnumh express the slope as the ratio of one unit vertical to a number of units horizontal .
for slopes steeper than numvnumh express the slope as the ratio of a number of units vertical to one unit horizontal .
num definitions .
the following definitions apply to this contract award the written acceptance of a bid by the co. backfill material used to replace or the act of replacing material removed during construction .
material placed or the act of placing material adjacent to structures .
base the layer or layers of material placed on a subbase or subgrade to support a surface course .
bid a written offer by a bidder to perform work at a quoted price .
bidder an individual or legal entity submitting a bid .
bid guarantee a form of security assuring that the bidder will not withdraw a bid within the period specified for acceptance and will execute a written contract and furnish required bonds .
bid schedule the prepared schedule included with the bid forms containing the estimated quantities of pay items for which unit bid prices are invited .
bridge a structure more than num feet num meters long including supports spanning and providing passage over a depression waterway railroad highway or other obstruction .
clear zone the portion of the roadside including the shoulder available for the safe use by an errant vehicle in which the driver may regain control of the vehicle .
commercial certification see subsection num .
construction limits the limits on each side of the project that establish the area disturbed by construction operations and beyond which no disturbance is permitted .
typically the construction limits are the same as the clearing limits except when additional clearing is required .
contract the written agreement between the government and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties for the performance of and payment for the prescribed work .
contracting officer co an official of the government with the authority to enter into administer and terminate contracts and make related determinations and findings .
the term includes certain authorized representatives of the co acting within the limits of their authority as delegated by the co. contract modification a written change in the terms of the contract .
contract modifications are of the following forms a administrative change .
a unilateral contract change in writing that does not affect the substantive rights of the parties such as a change in the paying office or the appropriation data .
section num num b change order .
a written order signed by the co directing the contractor to make a change that far clause num changes authorizes the co to order without the contractors consent .
c supplemental agreement .
a contract modification that is accomplished by the signature of the co unilateral contract modification or by the signature of the co and the contractor bilateral contract modification .
contractor the individual or legal entity contracting with the government for performance of prescribed work .
contract time the specified time allowed for completion of contract work .
crashworthy a highway feature that has been successfully crash tested under mash or the nchrp report num recommended procedures for the safety performance evaluation of highway features or accepted through analysis by fhwa based on similarity to other crashworthy features .
crosssection a vertical section of the ground or structure at right angles to the centerline or baseline of the roadway or other work .
culvert a structure not classified as a bridge that provides an opening under the roadway .
day a calendar day beginning and ending at midnight .
density mass per unit volume of material .
specific gravity multiplied by the density of water .
detour a temporary rerouting of public traffic onto alternate existing roadways to avoid the work or part of the work .
diversion defined as follows a a temporary rerouting of public traffic onto a temporary alignment within the project limits to bypass the work or a portion of the work .
b a temporary rerouting of water into a temporary channel or through a system of structures within the project limits to maintain water flow through or around the project .
drawings design sheets or fabrication erection or construction details submitted to the co by the contractor according to far clause num specifications and drawings for construction .
also refers to submissions and submittals .
federal land management agencies federal agencies including the national park service u.s. forest service u.s .
fish wildlife service u.s. army corps of engineers bureau of land management and bureau of reclamation .
government the government of the united states of america .
highway street or road a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
lane mile lane kilometer an area of pavement one mile kilometer long and one lane wide not including turn lanes turnouts parking area lanes or other auxiliary lanes .
section num num layer see lift .
lift defined as follows a when placing and compacting soils aggregates or pavement a lift is a single continuous layer of material that receives the same compactive effort throughout during a single work operation .
b when installing culvert pipe less than or equal to num inches num millimeter in diameter the backfill material placed on both sides of the pipe is considered to be contained in the same lift when the material is placed to the same elevation on both sides of the culvert the compactive effort applied to one side of the culvert is the same as that applied to the other and the compactive effort is applied to both sides of the pipe in a continuous operation .
material substances specified or necessary to satisfactorily complete the contract work .
measurement the process of identifying the dimensions quantity or capacity of a pay item .
see section num for measurement methods terms and definitions .
notice to proceed written notice to the contractor to begin the contract work .
pavement structure the combination of subbase base paving geotextiles and surface courses placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
pay item a specific item of work for which a unit and price is provided in the contract .
payment bond the security executed by the contractor and surety or sureties and furnished to the co to ensure payments as required by law to persons supplying labor or material according to the contract .
performance bond the security executed by the contractor and surety or sureties furnished to the co to guarantee completion of the contract work .
plans the contract plans furnished by the government showing the location type dimensions and details of the work .
production certification see subsection num .
professional engineer engineers holding valid state licenses permitting them to offer engineering services directly to the public .
engineers that are experienced in the work for which they are responsible take legal responsibility for their engineering designs and are bound by a code of ethics to protect the public health .
profile grade the trace of a vertical plane intersecting a particular surface of the proposed road construction located according to the plans usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of the trace according to the context .
project the specific section of the highway or other property on which construction is to be performed under the contract .
rightofway real property necessary for the project including roadway buffer areas access and drainage areas .
section num num roadbed the graded portion of a highway prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
roadside the area between the outside shoulder edge and the rightofway limits .
the area between roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
roadway in general the portion of a highway including shoulders for vehicular use .
a divided highway has two or more roadways .
in construction specifications the portion of a highway within the construction limits .
roadway prism the volume defined by the area between the original terrain crosssection and the final design crosssection multiplied by the horizontal distance along the centerline of the roadway .
roller pass one trip of a roller in one direction over one spot .
shoulder a portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way that accommodates pedestrians bicycles stopped vehicles and emergency use as well as for lateral support of the subbase base and surface courses .
sieve see aashto m num .
solicitation the complete assembly of documents whether attached or incorporated by reference furnished to prospective bidders .
special contract requirements scr additions and revisions to the standard specifications applicable to an individual project .
specifications the written requirements for performing work .
standard forms sf numbered forms issued by the general services administration for use as contract documents .
standard specifications the standard specifications for construction of roads and bridges on federal highway projects approved for general application and repetitive use .
station a precise location along a survey line .
structures bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other constructed features that may be encountered in the work .
subbase the layer or layers of material placed on a subgrade to support a base .
subcontract the written agreement between the contractor and an individual or legal entity prescribing the performance of a specific portion of the work .
subcontractor an individual or legal entity with which the contractor sublets part of the work .
this includes subcontractors in all tiers .
subgrade the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
section num num substantial completion the point at which the project is complete such that it can be safely and effectively used by the public without further delays disruption or other impediments .
for conventional bridge and highway work the point at which bridge deck parapet pavement structure shoulder drainage sidewalk major demolition roadway obliteration permanent signing and markings traffic barrier safety appurtenance utility and lighting work is complete .
substructure components of a bridge below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
suitable material rock or earth material that will provide stable foundations embankments or roadbeds and is free of organic matter muck frozen lumps roots sod or other deleterious material .
suitable material may require drying or adding water root picking and other methods of manipulation before use .
suitable material includes the classifications of material for which the project was designed .
superintendent the contractors onsite representative who has authority to act for the contractor and is responsible for directing and supervising construction operations on behalf of the contractor .
superstructure the entire bridge except the substructure .
surety an individual or corporation legally liable for the debt default or failure of a contractor to satisfy a contract obligation .
surface course the top layer or layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load and resist skidding traffic abrasion and weathering .
target value a number established as a center for operating a given process .
once established adjustments should be made in the process as necessary to maintain a central tendency about the target value .
test results obtained from a wellcontrolled process should cluster closely around the established target value and the mean of the test results should be equal to or nearly equal to the established target value .
traveled way the portion of the roadway designated for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders .
unsuitable material material not capable of creating stable foundations embankments or roadbeds .
unsuitable material includes muck sod or soils with high organic contents .
work the furnishing of labor material equipment and other incidentals necessary to complete the project according to the contract .
section num num section num .
bid award and execution of contract num acquisition regulations .
bid award and execution of the contract is governed by the far and tar .
num preparation of bids .
follow the requirements of far clause num preparation of bids construction .
execute and submit required standard forms bid schedules and solicitation provisions contained in the solicitation as part of the bid .
complete sf num solicitation offer and award and sign as follows a individuals .
sign your individual signature .
for individuals doing business as a firm follow the individual signature with the individuals typed stamped or printed name and the words an individual doing business as name of firm .
b limited liability partnerships and partnerships .
submit a list of partners having authority to bind the partnership .
one of the listed partners must sign on behalf of the partnership .
c corporations .
sign in the corporate name followed by the word by and the signature and title of the person authorized to sign .
submit evidence from the corporation that the person signing has authority to bind the corporation .
d joint ventures .
submit a copy of the joint venture agreement .
sign the sf num according to the joint venture agreement .
e limited liability company .
sign in the company name followed by the word by and the signature of the person authorized to sign .
submit evidence that the individual executing the document has authority to bind the company .
f agents .
when an agent signs other than as stated in subsection numa through e furnish satisfactory evidence that the agent has authority to bind the bidder .
insert a numeric unit bid price for each pay item for which a quantity appears in the bid schedule .
multiply the unit bid price by the quantity for each pay item and show the amount bid .
when mathematical checks made by the government show a mistake in the amount bid the corrected unit price extension governs .
when the words lump sum appear as a unit bid price insert an amount bid for each lump sum pay item .
when the words contingent sum or fixed rate appears as a unit bid price include the government inserted amount bid for the pay item in the total bid amount .
total the amounts bid for each pay item and show the total bid amount .
section num num the quantities listed in the bid schedule are approximate unless designated as a contract quantity and are used for the comparison of bids .
payment will be made for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or material furnished according to the contract .
the scheduled quantities may be increased decreased or deleted .
bid schedule quantities are considered the original contract quantities .
num bid guarantee .
follow the requirements of far clause num bid guarantee .
a general .
submit the bid guarantee on sf num bid bond .
if the bid guarantee is other than a corporate or individual surety sign the sf num as the principal and make a statement on the form pledging the security .
make checks or money orders payable to the agency issuing the solicitation .
b power of attorney .
a corporate surety shall submit a current power of attorney for the signing agent or attorneyinfact with each sf num. c evidence of guarantee assistance .
a surety that has a guarantee of assistance from the small business administration sba shall submit a copy of sba form num surety bond guarantee agreement with each sf num .
in addition submit a power of attorney for the surety representative identified in the agreement .
num individual surety .
follow the requirements of far clause num pledges of assets .
complete and date the sf num affidavit of individual surety after the solicitation date .
the individual surety shall personally sign the sf num .
bidders can not serve as their own surety .
see far num acceptability of individual sureties .
after reviewing the sf num the surety may be requested to submit further documentation with respect to its assets debts or encumbrances .
the information may be required to be furnished under oath .
failure of the surety to respond with the requested documentation within num days of receipt of the request is cause for rejection of the surety .
any material misstatement by the surety overstatement of assets either as to ownership or value or understatement of liabilities is cause for rejection of the surety .
substitution of individual sureties to support a bid bond after the bid opening will not be permitted .
furnish documentary evidence as to the ownership and value of the assets pledged in support of the bond and details of the security interest in the assets by the individual sureties for the apparent low bidder within num days after the opening of bids .
failure to submit evidence within the time required will be grounds for declaring the surety unacceptable .
in addition the co may after reviewing the sf num and documentary information on the security interest and the assets pledged request the surety to submit further information and documents with respect to the documents submitted .
the co may require such information to be furnished under oath .
failure of the surety to accept such mail or failure of the surety to respond with the requested information or documents within num days of receipt of the request will be cause for rejection of the surety .
these requirements are in addition to the requirements in far subpart num except where in conflict with the requirements in the far in which case the far controls .
section num num num public opening of bids .
bids will be publicly opened at the time specified in the sf num solicitation offer and award .
their contents will be made public information .
the government reserves the right to reject bids as set forth in the far part num .
num performance and payment bonds .
follow the requirements of far clause num performance and payment bonds construction .
use sf num performance bond and sf numa payment bond for submitting the bonds .
the requirements contained in subsections num and num relating to power of attorney evidence of guarantee assistance and individual sureties also apply to performance and payment bonds .
submit the documentary evidence for individual sureties at the same time as the affidavit of individual surety and security interest in assets pledged .
a contractor submitting an unacceptable individual surety in satisfaction of a performance or payment bond before the issuance of the notice to proceed will be permitted one opportunity to substitute an acceptable surety or sureties within num days of receipt of notification that the surety is unacceptable .
the governments right to direct the substitution of sureties to ensure the continuing acceptability of the bonds during the performance of the contract according to far clause num additional bond security is not restricted .
these requirements are in addition to the requirements in far subpart num except where in conflict with the requirements in the far in which case the far controls .
section num num section num .
scope of work num intent of contract .
the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion of the work described .
the precise details of performing the work are not described except as considered essential for the successful completion of the work .
furnish labor material equipment tools transportation and supplies necessary to complete the work according to the contract .
num disputes .
follow the requirements of far clause num disputes alternate i .
when requesting a cos decision on an interpretation of contract terms for the recovery of increased costs quantify the amount and certify the amount if required by far clause num disputes alternate i .
include an explanation of the interpretation of contract terms the contract clause under which the claim is made supporting documentation and adequate cost data to support the amount claimed .
num value engineering .
follow the requirements of far clause num value engineering construction .
before undertaking significant expenditures submit a written description of the value engineering change proposal vecp concept .
within num days the co will inform the contractor as to whether the concept appears to be viable or if the concept is unacceptable .
if the co indicates that the concept appears to be viable prepare and submit the formal vecp proposal .
num contractor records .
upon request provide records related to the contract to the government for up to num years after final payment or for longer periods as provided by law .
include a provision in subcontracts at all tiers giving the government the same rights as provided above with respect to the subcontractors records .
num partnering .
to facilitate this contract the co offers to participate in a formal partnership with the contractor .
this partnership draws on the strengths of each organization to identify and achieve reciprocal goals .
partnering strives to resolve problems in a timely professional and nonadversarial manner .
if problems result in disputes partnering encourages but does not require alternative dispute resolution instead of the formal claim process .
the objective is effective and efficient contract performance to achieve a quality project within budget and on schedule .
acceptance of this partnering offer by the contractor is optional and the partnership is bilateral .
if the partnering offer is accepted mutually agree with the co on the level of organizational involvement and the need for a professional to facilitate the partnering process .
engage the facilitator and other resources for key contractor representatives and the co to attend a partnership development and teambuilding workshop usually between the time of award and the notice to proceed .
hold additional progress meetings upon mutual agreement .
section num num the direct cost of partnering facilities professional facilitation copying fees and other miscellaneous costs directly related to partnering meetings will be shared by the contractor and government .
secure and pay for facilities professional fees and miscellaneous requirements .
submit invoices to the co .
the government will reimburse the contractor for num percent of the agreed costs incurred for the partnering process .
the governments share will not exceed num .
each party is responsible for making and paying for its own travel lodging and meal arrangements .
no time extension for the completion of the project will be made for the use of partnering .
section num num section num .
control of work num authority of the contracting officer co .
the co may delegate authority to representatives to decide on acceptability of work progress of work suspension of work interpretation of the contract and acceptable fulfillment of the contract .
the term co includes authorized representatives of the co including inspectors acting within the limits of their authority as delegated by the co. num authority of inspectors .
inspectors are authorized to inspect work including the preparation fabrication or manufacture of material for the project .
the inspector is not authorized to alter or waive contract requirements issue instruction contrary to the contract act as foreman for the contractor or direct the contractors operations .
the inspector has authority to identify nonconforming work until the issue can be referred to and decided by the co .
the inspector may take necessary action to prevent imminent and substantial risk of death or injury including stopping work .
num specifications and drawings .
follow the requirements of far clause num specifications and drawings for construction .
a general .
review and submit documents required to construct the work for accuracy completeness and compliance with the contract for approval by the co .
documents submitted without evidence of contractor approval may be returned for resubmission .
time for approval starts over when documents are returned for revision or if additional information is requested by the co. do not perform work related to submitted documents or drawings before approval of the co .
obtain written approval before changing or deviating from the approved drawings .
num documents other than drawings .
documents other than drawings include descriptive literature illustrations schedules performance and test data and similar material submitted by the contractor to certify or explain in detail specific portions of the work required by the contract .
unless otherwise indicated in the contract submit num paper copies and an electronic copy for review .
allow num days for approval by the co unless otherwise specified .
num drawings .
drawings include a layouts that show the relative position vertical and horizontal as appropriate of work to be performed b fabrication details for manufactured items and assemblies c installation and erection procedures d details of posttensioning and other systems e detailed trench and excavation procedures that conform to osha requirements f traffic control implementation drawings and g methods for performing work near existing structures or other areas to be protected .
show drawing dimensions in the same units as shown in the plans .
limit drawings to a maximum size of num by num inches num by num millimeters .
include on each drawing and calculation sheet the project number name and other identification as shown in the contract .
section num num submit num paper sets of drawings an electronic set of the drawings and supporting calculations .
drawings will be reviewed in the order they are received .
allow num days for co approval of railroad structure drawings and num days for approval of other drawings .
submit additional specific drawings for unique situations to clarify layout construction details or method when requested by the co. b specific requirements for concrete and miscellaneous structures .
num submit drawings for the following a sitespecific layouts for all wall types and gabion installations b gabion and revet mattress details and installation procedures c forms and falsework for castinplace nonbridge concrete structures and retaining walls less than or equal to num feet num meters in height d fabrication drawings for bridge railings and parapets e fabrication drawings for prestressed members f fabrication and installation drawings for expansion joint assemblies g fabrication drawings for bearing assemblies h construction joint location and concrete deck placement sequences not according to the plans i erection diagrams for soilcorrugated metal structure interaction systems multiplate structures j structural steel fabrication drawings k utility hangar details l fabrication and installation drawings for precast items and m sitespecific layouts for rockeries .
num submit drawings that bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer proficient in the pertinent design field for the following a forms and falsework for castinplace concrete structures greater than num feet num meters in height b shoring systems and cofferdams greater than num feet num meters in height c shoring systems that support traffic loadings d bridge concrete forms including deck forms except for railings parapets and components less than num feet num meters in height e containment structures for bridge work f girder erection plans g partial demolition of structural bridge elements section num num h posttensioning systems i concrete box culvert and headwall details j reinforced soil slopes details k ground anchors soil nail rock bolt driven pile drilled shaft and micropile assembly details layout and installation and testing procedures l mse and tie back wall details m alternate retaining wall details and n details and installation procedures for proprietary wall systems .
num submit drawings that bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer who is proficient in forms and falsework design and licensed in the state where the project will be constructed for the following a falsework for structures with spans exceeding num feet num meters b falsework for structures with heights exceeding num feet num meters c falsework for structures where traffic other than workers involved in constructing the structure will travel under the structure and d temporary bridge structures for public use .
c asbuilt drawings .
use one set of governmentprovided plans exclusively for asbuilt drawings .
use the color red to identify changes .
use approved methods to accurately and neatly record changes .
include details and notes on additional information discovered during construction .
note additions or revisions to the location character and dimensions of work .
strikeout details shown that are not applicable to the completed work .
as work progresses continuously update plan sheets to reflect the asbuilt details .
check and initial plan sheets that were incorporated into the completed work without change .
include the following num title sheet .
a asbuilt drawings bold text b name of contractor c name of cos onsite representative d project completion date e revisions to project length f revisions to begin and end stations of project h revisions to index to sheets i revisions to curve widening table j strikeout schedules or options not awarded k a note stating work was constructed as designed unless otherwise noted .
and section num num l plan notes .
numtypical section sheets .
a revisions in dimensions b revisions in material c revisions in station range d revisions to begin and end stations of project and e strikeout schedules or options not awarded .
num summary of quantities and tabulation sheets .
a revisions to quantities locations notesremarks including totals b strikeout unused pay items c revisions to application rates and d revisions to location type end treatments riprap and skew on the drainage summary .
num plan and profile sheets .
note additions or revisions to the location character and dimensions of the following items a plan .
num alignment and curve and spiral information num construction limits num rightofway num road approaches num subexcavation and roadway obliteration num underdrains num trenches and drains num channels and ditches num monuments and permanent references num constructed relocated or encountered utilities and num walls .
b profile .
num grades elevations and stationing of points of intersection num equations num culvert diameter length type and stationing num culvert extension and length of existing culvert section num num num walls and num guardrail guardwall and end treatment .
num bridge sheets .
note additions or revisions to the location character and dimensions of the following items a stationing of bridge ends b elevations including footing bearing pads deck and top of walls c pile driving record with pile length size type and tip elevation d modifications or repairs to drilled shafts or micropiles e micropile installation records with drilling duration and observations drill log final location and inclination final tip elevation cutoff elevation modification or repairs grout pressures and quantities and test records f posttensioning records including stressing sequence jacking force and duct size and layout g construction and concrete placement sequences h bearing details with orientation i expansion joints including actual clearance with atmospheric temperature at time of setting joints and j changes in plan or dimensions including changes in reinforcing .
num miscellaneous sheets .
note additions or revisions to the location character and dimensions of the following items a parking areas and turnouts b curbs and sidewalks c fencing d landscaping and planting e pavement markings f signs g permanent erosion control measures and h plan notes .
num standard and detail sheets .
note the additions or revisions to the character and dimensions of details .
retain the drawings at the project site .
keep the asbuilt drawings current and maintain a revision log of changes made .
meet with the co to jointly review the asbuilt drawings and log for accuracy completeness and legibility before submission of each monthly invoice .
section num num submit the final asbuilt drawings and revision logs before the final inspection .
correct errors and omissions found during the final inspection and resubmit the final asbuilt drawings for approval within num days after the final inspection .
when the final asbuilt drawings are approved submit the finalized set of asbuilt drawings and a single file electronic color copy of the drawings .
submit the electronic copy in an approved format on a cdr dvdr or other approved electronic media .
include the latest version of the approved reader on the electronic media .
provide a resolution quality where color text and lines are clearly discernible .
num coordination of contract documents .
the far tar special contract requirements plans and standard specifications are contract documents .
a requirement in one document is binding as though occurring in all the contract documents .
the contract documents are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete contract .
in case of discrepancy calculated and shown dimensions govern over scaled dimensions .
the contract documents govern in the following order a federal acquisition regulations b transportation acquisition regulations c special contract requirements d plans and e standard specifications .
num load restrictions .
follow the requirements of far clause num operations and storage areas .
comply with legal load restrictions when hauling material and equipment on public roads and bridges to and from the project .
a special permit does not relieve the contractor of liability for damage resulting from the moving of material or equipment .
unless otherwise permitted do not operate equipment or vehicles that exceed the legal load limits over new or existing structures or pavements within the project except those pavements to be removed during the same construction season .
section num num section num .
control of material num source of supply and quality requirements .
follow the requirements of far clause num material and workmanship .
select sources and submit acceptable material .
notify the co of proposed sources before delivery to the project to expedite material inspection and testing .
do not incorporate material requiring submittal into the work until approved .
material may be approved at the source of supply before delivery to the project .
approval of a material source does not constitute acceptance of material submitted from the source .
if an approved source fails to supply acceptable material during the life of the project further use of that source may be denied .
submit samples of material for source quality verification testing for material required to conform to sections num num and num .
num material sources .
a governmentprovided sources .
the government will acquire the permits and rights to remove material from provided sources identified in the contract and to use such property for a plant site and stockpiles .
test reports and available historical material data will be furnished to the contractor upon request .
do not perform work within a source until a source development plan is approved .
allow num days for approval .
include the following as applicable num requirements of written agreements num requirements in sections num num num num num and num num source development details num restoration details and num abandonment details .
perform work necessary to produce acceptable material including work required by the approved source development plan .
the quality of material is generally acceptable .
variations in quality should be expected as it is not feasible to ascertain the quality of material for an entire deposit from exploratory samples .
determine the quantity type of equipment and work necessary and produce acceptable material to be incorporated into the work .
do not perform aggregate source quality tests listed in the sampling testing and acceptance requirements table of other sections when using governmentprovided sources .
perform quality control sampling and testing according to the approved contractor quality control plan in section num and the applicable sampling testing and acceptance requirements tables included at the end of each section .
allow the co the opportunity to witness sampling and splitting of the test material .
section num num b governmentprovided material stockpile .
the quality of the material in the stockpile has been preapproved unless otherwise noted and is considered acceptable for the application for which it has been designated .
perform quality control sampling and testing according to the approved contractor quality control plan in section num and the applicable sampling testing and acceptance requirements table included at the end of each section .
test results submitted will be for the governments information only .
allow the co the opportunity to witness sampling and splitting of the test material .
c contractorlocated sources .
the contractor is responsible for contractorlocated material sources including established commercial material sources .
use sources that fulfill the contract quantity and quality requirements .
determine the quantity type of equipment and work necessary to select and produce an acceptable material .
secure permits and clearances for use of the source and submit copies of the documents to the co .
follow the environmental requirements of subsection numd .
submit available historical data indicating acceptable material can be produced from the source .
perform quality control sampling and testing according to the approved contractor quality control plan in section num aggregate source quality tests and applicable sampling testing and acceptance requirements table included at the end of each section .
allow the co the opportunity to witness sampling and splitting of the test material .
num material source management .
notify the co at least num days before starting operations in the source .
develop and operate according to the approved source development plan for governmentprovided sources or written agreement for contractorlocated sources .
before developing a material source measure the sediment content of bodies of water adjacent to the work area that will receive drainage from the work area .
perform erosion and sediment control according to the source development plan and the storm water pollution prevention plan swppp or erosion control plan .
do not remove material measured inplace from borrow sources or governmentprovided stockpiles until initial ground survey measurements have been taken according to subsection numb and approved .
perform final ground survey measurements according to subsection numb .
dispose of rejected material in an approved manner .
num handling and storing material .
handle and store material to preserve its quality and fitness for the work .
stored material approved before storage may again be inspected before use in the work .
locate stored material to facilitate prompt inspection .
use only approved portions of the rightofway for storing material or equipment .
provide additional space as needed .
do not use private property for storage without written permission of the owner or lessee .
submit copies of agreements and documents .
provide security for stored material .
restore governmentprovided storage sites to their original condition .
section num num num use of material found in the work .
stone gravel sand or other material found in the excavation may be used for another pay item when approved .
if material found in the excavation is used for another pay item material will be paid both as excavation and as the other pay item for which it is used .
replace excavation used with acceptable material at no cost to the government .
excavate or remove material only from within the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines .
the right to use and process material found in the work excludes the use and processing of material for nongovernment contract work except for the disposal of waste material .
if the contractor produces or processes material from government lands in excess of the quantities required for the contract the government may a take possession of the excess material and direct its use paying the contractor only for the cost of production or b require removal of the material and restoration of the land to a satisfactory condition at no cost to the government .
num material source restoration .
restore governmentprovided sources according to the approved source development plan .
restack the unused portion of the governmentprovided stockpiles upon completion of the work at no cost to the government .
do not measure restoration of material sources for payment .
section num num section num .
acceptance of work num conformity with contract requirements .
follow the requirements of far clause num inspection of construction .
references to standard documents and test methods of aashto astm gsa and other recognized standard authorities refer to the documents and methods in effect on the date of the invitation for bids ifb or request for proposal rfp .
use the flh field materials manual fmm appendix b flh test methods in effect on the date of the ifb or rfp .
electronic copies of the flh test methods and fhwa forms can be downloaded from httpflh.fhwa.dot.govresourcesmanualsfmm specification limits tolerances test results and related calculations are according to astm enum absolute method .
perform work to the lines grades crosssections dimensions and processes or material requirements shown in the contract .
incorporate manufactured material into the work according to the manufacturers recommendations or to these specifications whichever is stricter .
when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes and pipe conduits that are identified by gauge density or section dimensions the identification will be considered to be nominal masses or dimensions .
unless specific contract tolerances are noted established manufacturing tolerances will be accepted .
plan dimensions and contract specification values are the values to be strived for and complied with as the design values from which deviations are allowed .
perform work and provide material that is uniform in character and reasonably close to the prescribed value or within the specified tolerance range .
the purpose of a tolerance range is to accommodate occasional minor variations from the median zone that are unavoidable for practical reasons .
the government may inspect sample or test work before final acceptance of the project .
if the government tests work copies of test reports are furnished to the contractor upon request .
government tests may or may not be performed at the work site .
if government testing is performed on work the result will be used for acceptance purposes under subsection num .
do not rely on the availability of government test results for process control .
acceptable work conforming to the contract will be paid for at the contract unit bid price .
four methods of determining conformity and accepting work are described in subsections num through num .
the primary method of acceptance is specified in each section of work but work may be rejected if it is found not to comply with the contract .
section num num for work that is evaluated and accepted under subsection num if contractor testing and inspection is verified by the government the contractors results may be used by the government to evaluate work for acceptance .
contractor data will be verified using the f and ttest statistics in comparison to government test results at a significance level of num .
if the contractors data is not verified and the co determines it to be appropriate the government will perform tests associated for that discrete portion of work .
in this situation the government test results will control in determining the acceptability and pay factor of the work .
remove and replace work that does not conform to the contract or to prevailing industry standards where no specific contract requirements are noted at no cost to the government .
as an alternative to removal and replacement the contractor may submit a written request to a have the work accepted at a reduced price or b perform corrective measures to bring the work into conformity .
include supporting rationale and documentation in the request .
include references or data justifying the proposal based on an evaluation of test results effect on service life value of material or work quality aesthetics and other tangible engineering basis .
the co will determine disposition of the nonconforming work .
num visual inspection .
acceptance is based on visual inspection of the work for compliance with the contract and prevailing industry standards .
num certification .
for material manufactured offsite use a manufacturer with an iso num certification or an effective testing and inspection system .
require the manufacturer to clearly mark the material or packaging with a unique product identification or specification standard to which it is produced .
other than references in or to the far or federal law when these standard specifications or special contract requirements reference certifications certificates or certified documents equipment or individuals these references refer to documentation of nonregulatory peripheral contract requirements that are required to be validated by an individual or organization having unique knowledge or qualifications to perform such validation .
check certifications before incorporating the material into the work to ensure that the requirements of the contract have been met .
mark the certifications with the following information project number and name pay item number and description contractors signature and date .
material accepted by certification may be sampled and tested .
if material is determined not to conform with the contract the material will be rejected whether in place or not .
section num num one of the following certifications may be required a production certification .
material requiring a production certification is identified in the acceptance subsection of each section .
submit a production certification from the manufacturer for each shipment of material .
include the following num date and place of manufacture num lot number or other means of crossreferencing to the manufacturers inspection and testing system and num substantiating evidence that the material conforms to the contract quality requirements as required by far numanum including the following a test results on material from the same lot and documentation of the inspection and testing system b a statement from the manufacturer that the material complies with the contract and c manufacturers signature or other means of demonstrating accountability for the certification .
b commercial certification .
submit one commercial certification for similar material from the same manufacturer .
a commercial certification is a manufacturers or contractors representation that the material complies with the contract .
the representation may be labels catalog data stamped specification standards or suppliers certifications indicating the material is produced to a commercial standard or specification .
num measured or tested conformance .
perform necessary measurements and tests to ensure work complies with the contract .
use prevailing industry standards in the absence of contract requirements or tolerances .
submit measurements tests and supporting data for acceptance .
num statistical evaluation of work and determination of pay factor .
statistical evaluation of work is a method of analyzing inspection or test results to determine conformity with the contract .
the work will be accepted as follows a general .
for work evaluated based on statistical evaluation both the government and contractor assume some risk .
the governments risk is the probability that work of a rejectable quality level is accepted .
the contractors risk is either the probability that work produced at an acceptable quality level aql is rejected α or the probability that the work produced at the aql is accepted at less than the contract unit bid price αnum .
section num num acceptable quality level is the lowest percentage of work within the specification limits that is considered acceptable for payment at contract unit bid price .
there are two categories category i is based on an aql of num percent .
category ii is based on an aql of num percent .
in both cases the contractors risk αnum is num percent and the risk of rejection α is significantly lower .
as an incentive to produce uniform quality work and to offset the contractors risk a final payment greater than the contract unit bid price may be obtained under certain conditions .
the quality characteristics to be evaluated sampling frequency sampling location test methods and category are listed in the acceptance subsection of each section .
the following applies num lot size .
a lot is a discrete quantity of work to which the statistical evaluation procedure is applied .
a lot normally represents the total quantity of work produced .
more than one lot may occur if changes in the target values material sources or jobmix formula are requested in writing and approved .
num sampling frequency .
the frequency rate shown normally requires at least num samples .
the minimum required to perform a statistical evaluation is num samples .
the maximum obtainable pay factor with num num or num samples is num .
at least num samples are required to obtain a num pay factor .
if the sampling frequencies and quantity of work would otherwise result in fewer than num samples submit a written request to increase the sampling frequency to provide for at least num samples .
submit the request to increase the sampling frequency at least num hours before beginning production .
an increase in the sampling frequency may result in a reduced pay factor .
num sampling location .
the exact location of sampling will be determined by the co based on random numbers .
num specification limits .
the specification limits for the quality characteristics are listed in the contract for the work in question .
b acceptance .
the work in the lot will be paid for at a final pay factor when all inspections or test results are completed and evaluated .
before determining the final pay factor the work may be incorporated into the project provided the current pay factor does not fall below num .
if a lot is concluded with fewer than num samples the material will be evaluated under subsection num .
if the current pay factor of a lot falls below num end production .
production may resume after the contractor takes effective and acceptable actions to improve the quality of the production .
a lot containing an unsatisfactory percentage of nonspecification material less than num pay factor is accepted provided the lowest single pay factor has not fallen into the reject portion of table num .
a lot containing an unsatisfactory percentage of nonspecification material with the lowest single pay factor falling into the reject portion of table num is rejected .
remove rejected material from the work .
section num num when approved it is permissible to voluntarily remove nonspecification material and replace it with new material to avoid or minimize a pay factor of less than num .
new material will be sampled tested and evaluated according to this subsection .
any quantity of material may be rejected based on visual inspection or test results .
do not incorporate rejected material in the work .
the results of tests run on rejected material will be excluded from the lot .
c statistical evaluation .
the variabilityunknownstandard deviation method will be used to determine the estimated percentage of the lot that is within specification limits .
the estimated percentage of work that is within the specification limits for each quality characteristic will be determined as follows num calculate the arithmetic mean x of the test values x n x where summation of x individual test value n total number of test values num calculate the standard deviations s num num num n n x x n where xnum summation of the squares of individual test values xnum summation of the individual test values squared num calculate the upper quality index qu qu s usl x where usl upper specification limit note the usl is equal to the contract specification limit or the target value plus the allowable deviation .
num calculate the lower quality index ql ql s x lsl where lsl lower specification limit note the lsl is equal to the contract specification limit or the target value minus the allowable deviation .
num from table num determine pu the estimated percentage of work within the usl .
pu corresponds to a given qu .
if a usl is not specified pu is num .
num from table num determine pl the estimated percentage of work within the lot within the lsl .
pl corresponds to a given ql .
if an lsl is not specified pl is num .
num calculate the total estimated percentage of work within the usl and lsl pu pl num num repeat steps num through num for each quality characteristic listed for statistical evaluation .
section num num table num estimated percent of work within specification limits estimated percent within specification limits pu or pl upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num if the value of qu or ql does not correspond to a value in the table use the next lower q value .
if qu or ql are negative values pu or pl is equal to num minus the table value for pu or pl .
section num num table num continued estimated percent of work within specification limits estimated percent within specification limits pu or pl upper quality index qu or lower quality index ql nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num if the value of qu or ql does not correspond to a value in the table use the next lower q value .
if qu or ql are negative values pu or pl is equal to num minus the table value for pu or pl .
section num num table num pay factors pay factor minimum required percent of work within specification limits for a given pay factor pu pl num category nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to i ii num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num if the value of pu pl num does not correspond to a pu pl num value in this table use the next smaller pu pl num value .
section num num table num pay factors continued pay factor minimum required percent of work within specification limits for a given pay factor pu pl num category nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to nnum nnum to i ii num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num values less than those shown above if the value of pu pl num does not correspond to a pu pl num value in this table use the next smaller pu pl num value .
section num num d pay factor determination value of the work .
the pay factor for a lot will be determined as follows num the pay factor for each quality characteristic will be determined from table num using the total number of test values and the total estimated percentage within the specification limits from subsection numcnum .
num when all quality characteristics for a lot are category i the lot pay factor is based on the lowest single pay factor for any category i quality characteristic .
the maximum obtainable pay factor is num .
num when quality characteristics for a lot are both category i and ii the lot pay factor is based on the following a when all category ii quality characteristics are num the lot payment is based on the lowest single pay factor for all category i characteristics .
the maximum obtainable pay factor is num. b when any category ii quality characteristic is less than num the lot payment is based on the lowest single pay factor for any category i or ii quality characteristic .
num when all quality characteristics for a lot are category ii the lot pay factor is based on the lowest single pay factor for any category ii quality characteristic .
the maximum obtainable pay factor is num .
num adjusted payment for material in a lot will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract unit bid price by the lot pay factor as determined above or as described in the payment subsection of the section ordering the work .
num inspection at the plant .
work may be inspected at the point of production or fabrication .
manufacturing plants may be inspected for compliance with specified manufacturing methods .
material samples may be obtained for laboratory testing for compliance with quality requirements .
allow full entry at all times to the parts of the plant producing the work .
num partial and final acceptance .
maintain the work during construction and until the project is accepted .
repair damage caused by the contractor before final acceptance of the entire project at no cost to the government .
see far clause num use and possession prior to completion .
a partial acceptance .
when a segment of the project is completed a final inspection of that segment may be requested .
if the segment is complete and in compliance it may be accepted .
if accepted the co may relieve the contractor of further responsibility for maintaining accepted work .
when public traffic is accommodated through construction and begins using sections of roadway as they are completed continue maintenance of such sections until final acceptance .
section num num b final acceptance .
notify the co when the entire project is complete to schedule an inspection .
if work is determined to be complete the inspection will constitute the final inspection .
the contractor will be notified in writing of final acceptance as of the date of the final inspection .
final acceptance relieves the contractor of further responsibility for the maintenance of the project .
if the inspection discloses unsatisfactory work the co will provide to the contractor a list of the work that is incomplete or requires correction .
immediately complete or correct the work .
submit notification when the work has been completed as provided above .
section num num section num .
legal relations and responsibility to the public num laws to be observed .
follow the requirements of far clause num permits and responsibilities .
comply with applicable laws ordinances safety codes regulations orders and decrees .
protect and indemnify the government and its representatives against claim or liability arising from or based on the alleged violation of the same .
comply with permits and agreements obtained by the government for performing the work that is included in the contract .
obtain additional permits or agreements and modifications to governmentobtained permits or agreements that are required by the contractors methods of operation .
submit copies of permits and agreements .
num protection and restoration of property and landscape .
follow the requirements of far clause num protection of existing vegetation structures equipment utilities and improvements .
preserve public and private property .
protect monuments established for perpetuating horizontal vertical cadastral or boundary control .
when necessary to destroy a monument reestablish the monument according to applicable state statute or by the direction of the agency or individual who established the monument .
do not disturb the area beyond the construction limits .
replace trees shrubs or vegetated areas damaged by construction operations as directed and at no cost to the government .
remove damaged limbs of existing trees by an approved arborist .
do not excavate remove damage alter or deface archeological or paleontological remains or specimens .
control the actions of employees and subcontractors on the project to ensure that protected sites are not disturbed or damaged .
should these items be encountered suspend operations at the discovery site notify the co and continue operations in other areas .
the co will inform the contractor when operations may resume at the discovery site .
when utilities are to be relocated or adjusted the government will notify utility owners affected by the relocations or adjustments .
before beginning work in an area contact the local utility locating service to mark the utilities .
protect utilities from construction operations .
cooperate with utility owners to expedite the relocation or adjustment of their utilities to minimize interruption of service and duplication of work .
if utility services are interrupted as a result of damage by the construction immediately notify the utility owner the co and other proper authorities .
cooperate with them until service is restored .
do not work around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service are made and approved by the local fire authority .
notify the co if utility work is required .
compensation for the work will be provided under applicable clauses of the contract .
satisfactorily repair damage due to the fault or negligence of the contractor at no cost to the government .
section num num repair of damage to underground utilities not shown in the plans or identified before construction and not caused by the fault or negligence of the contractor will be paid for by the government .
num bulletin board .
furnish a weatherproof bulletin board of suitable size and construction for continuous display of posters and other information required by the contract .
erect and maintain the bulletin board at a conspicuously accessible location on the project and remove and dispose of it after project final acceptance .
display the following documents on the bulletin board a equal employment opportunity commission eeoc equal opportunity is the law poster according to far clause num equal opportunity b fhwa form num notice that the project is subject to title num u.s. criminal code section num poster c department of labor wage and hour division whd whd num employee rights under the davisbacon act poster regarding proper pay d department of labor osha job health and safety its the law poster according to title num code of federal regulations part num e general wage decision contained in the contract f company equal employment opportunity policy according to far clause num affirmative action compliance requirements for construction g emergency telephone numbers in areas where num is not available according to title num code of federal regulation part numf h whd publication employee rights and responsibilities under the family and medical leave act poster according to title num code of federal regulation part numa i whd num employee polygraph protection act poster and j national labor relations board nlra employee rights under the national labor relations act poster according to executive order num .
num railroad protection .
the government will obtain the necessary permits and agreements from the railroad for specified work for relocating railroads or for work at railroad crossings .
make arrangements for other work that due to the method of operation may also impact the railroad .
submit copies of permits and agreements .
do not interfere with railroad operations .
if the construction damages railroad property reimburse the railroad for damages or at the railroads option repair the damage at no cost to the government .
do not cross railroad tracks with vehicles or equipment except at existing and open public grade crossings or railroad approved temporary grade crossings .
if there is a need for a temporary grade crossing make the necessary arrangements with the railroad for its construction protection and removal .
reimburse the railroad for temporary grade crossing work or at the railroads option perform the work .
section num num num responsibility for damage claims .
indemnify and hold harmless the government its employees and its consultants from suits actions or claims brought for injuries or damage received or sustained by a person persons or property resulting from the construction operations or arising out of the negligent performance of the contract .
procure and maintain until final acceptance of the contract liability insurance of the types and limits specified below .
obtain insurance from companies authorized to do business in the appropriate state .
ensure the insurance covers operations under the contract whether performed by the contractor or by subcontractors .
before work begins submit certificates of insurance certifying that the policies will not be changed or canceled until written notice has been given to the government .
insurance coverage in the minimum amounts set forth below does not relieve the contractor of liability in excess of the coverage .
carry insurance conforming to the following minimums a workers compensation insurance .
minimum required by law .
b comprehensive or commercial general liability insurance .
num personal injury and property damage coverage num contractual liability coverage num completed operations liability coverage num num combined single limit for each occurrence and num num general aggregate limit .
c automobile liability insurance .
num combined single limit for each occurrence .
num contractors responsibility for work .
assume responsibility for all work until final acceptance except as provided in subsection num .
this includes periods of suspended work .
protect the work against injury loss or damage from all causes whether arising from the execution or nonexecution of the work .
maintain public traffic according to section num .
rebuild repair restore and make good losses injuries or damages to any portion of the work .
this includes losses injuries or damages caused by vandalism theft accommodation of public traffic and weather that occurs during the contract .
the government will only be responsible for costs attributable to repairing or replacing damaged work caused by declared enemies and terrorists of the government and cataclysmic natural phenomenon such as tornadoes earthquakes major floods and other officially declared natural disasters .
the government will not be responsible for delay costs impact costs or extended overhead costs .
num furnishing rightofway .
the government will obtain rightofway .
num sanitation health and safety .
follow the requirements of far clause num accident prevention .
section num num observe rules and regulations of federal state and local health officials .
do not allow workers to work in surroundings or under conditions that are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous .
admit osha inspectors or other legally responsible officials involved in safety and health administration to the project work site upon presentation of proper credentials .
report accidents on forms furnished by the government or with prior approval on forms used to report accidents to other agencies or insurance carriers .
maintain an osha form num log of workrelated injuries and illnesses and make it available for inspection .
install a reverse signal alarm audible above the surrounding noise level on motorized vehicles having an obstructed view and on earthmoving and compaction equipment .
num legal relationship of the parties .
in the performance of the contract the contractor is an independent contractor .
the contractors independent contractor status does not limit the governments general rights under the contract .
no government employee or a business organization owned or substantially owned or controlled by one or more government employees may be a contractor .
num environmental protection .
a federal water pollution control act clean water act num usc num et seq .
num do not operate equipment or discharge material within the boundaries of wetlands and the waters of the united states as defined by the federal and state regulatory agencies .
permits are issued by the u.s. army corps of engineers according to num usc num and delegated by the agency having jurisdiction .
if an unauthorized discharge occurs a prevent further contamination b notify appropriate authorities and the co and c mitigate damages .
num construct and maintain barriers in work areas and in material sources to prevent sediment petroleum products chemicals and other liquids and solids from entering wetlands or waters of the united states .
remove and properly dispose of barrier collected material .
num do not revise terms or conditions of permits without the approval of the issuing agency .
b oil and hazardous substances .
submit a spill prevention control and countermeasure spcc plan if required at least num days before beginning work .
if a spcc plan is not required submit a hazardous spill plan at least num days before beginning work .
describe preventative measures including the location of refueling and storage facilities and the handling of hazardous material .
describe actions to be taken in case of a spill .
do not use equipment with leaking fluids .
repair equipment fluid leaks immediately .
keep absorbent material manufactured for containment and cleanup of hazardous material on the job site .
notify the co of hazardous spills .
section num num c dirt plant and foreign material .
remove dirt plant and foreign material from vehicles and equipment before mobilizing to work site .
prevent introduction of noxious weeds and nonnative plant species into the work site .
follow applicable federal land management agency requirements and state requirements .
maintain cleaning and inspection records .
d clearances for contractorselected noncommercial areas .
contractorselected noncommercial areas include material sources disposal sites waste areas haul roads and staging areas located outside project construction limits and permitted commercial areas .
permitted commercial areas are enterprises or developed areas providing same type material or use over the last num years with appropriate permits .
before using a contractorselected noncommercial areas submit the following num description schedule and map of area .
num documentation of compliance with applicable laws and regulations .
num owner approval for the area use .
when use of federal land is proposed submit an approval letter or special use permit from the applicable federal land management agency .
num legal compliance for the area use .
submit documentation showing compliance with applicable tribal state and local laws including permits or other approvals issued for the area use .
num protection of forests parks and public lands .
comply with regulations of the state fire marshal conservation commission federal land management agency or other authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of land including or adjacent to the project .
section num num section num .
prosecution and progress num commencement prosecution and completion of work .
follow the requirements of far clause num commencement prosecution and completion of work .
a preconstruction conference will be held after the contract is awarded and before beginning work .
seven days before the preconstruction conference submit copies of the preliminary construction schedule according to section num .
num subcontracting .
follow the requirements of far clause num limitations on subcontracting far clause num subcontracts labor standards and far clause num performance of work by the contractor .
subcontracting does not relieve the contractor of liability and responsibility under the contract and does not create any contractual relation between subcontractors and the government .
the contractor is liable and responsible for actions or lack of action of subcontractors .
within num days of subcontract award submit an sf num statement and acknowledgment with part i completed .
complete other forms that may be provided by the government to show the work subcontracted and the total dollar amount of the subcontract .
for subcontracts involving onsite labor require the subcontractor to complete part ii of the sf num and complete other forms that may be provided by the government .
submit a separate statement documenting the cumulative amount of onsite subcontracts to date as a percentage of the original contract amount .
submit this information on subcontracts at lower tiers .
in far clause num utilization of small business concerns and far clause num prompt payment for construction contracts the term subcontracts includes onsite and offsite work and supply contracts .
for contracts in which far clause num limitations on subcontracting applies the percentage of work performed by the contractor will be computed as the cost of the contract work performed by the contractors employees not including the cost of material divided by the cost of all contract work not including the cost of material .
for contracts on which far clause num performance of work applies the percentage of work performed by the contractor will be computed as the cost of the contract work performed onsite by the contractors employees divided by the total cost of the contract .
num determination and extension of contract time .
follow the requirements of far clause num commencement prosecution and completion of work .
a definitions .
num time impact analysis .
the procedure by which the contractor demonstrates the effect of specific time impacts on the overall construction schedule .
time impacts may result in an increase or decrease in contract time .
num float .
the amount of time between when an activity can start the early start and when an activity must start the late start .
b time impact analysis .
comply with the applicable contract clauses when requesting a time extension .
notify the co in writing within num days after identifying a time impact .
section num num submit a time impact analysis and revised construction schedule within num days after the end of the time impact event for which notice has been given .
include the following num a title page or header block with a contract number b project number and name c contractor name d current fixed completion date e date of submittal and f consecutive number for each analysis .
num state the impact that requires a time impact analysis a co proposed or directed contract modification b contractor proposed contract modification c weather delay or d other government caused delay .
num a copy of the most current approved schedule existing before the impact .
num a detailed narrative describing each impact event .
describe impacts to each affected activity in the construction schedule .
include the following a contract clauses under which the request is being made b cause of the impact c start date of the impact d duration of the impact and e methods to be employed to resequence or reschedule the work to mitigate the impact .
discuss the feasibility of resequencing future work to mitigate delay .
resequencing or rescheduling of work will be at no cost to the government .
include corresponding rationale and assumptions of measures which increase the cost of mitigating the impact .
num a revised construction schedule to show the impact of the activities identified including resequencing which would mitigate the delay .
c time extensions .
only delays or modifications that affect critical activities or cause noncritical activities to become critical will be considered for time extensions .
when a critical path method schedule is used no time extension will be made for delays or modifications that use available float as shown in the most current approved schedule existing before the impact .
no time extension will be made for a claim that states insufficient time was provided in the contract .
d execution of the time impact analysis .
incorporate accepted logic changes or time extensions into the baseline schedule by the next monthly submittal .
section num num num failure to complete work on time .
follow the requirements of far clause num liquidated damages construction .
liquidated damages in the amount specified in table num will be assessed for each day beyond the time allowed to complete the contract until substantial completion of the work .
if a winter shutdown occurs during this period liquidated damages in an amount equal to num percent of the amount specified in table num will be assessed for each day until work resumes at which time full liquidated damages will be assessed .
liquidated damages in an amount equal to num percent of the amount specified in table num will be assessed for each day beyond the time allowed to complete the contract beginning with the day after substantial completion and ending with the date of final completion and acceptance .
liquidated damages will not be assessed for the following a day of the final inspection b days required to perform work added to the contract after substantial completion including items identified during the final inspection that were not required before that time c delays by the government after all work is complete and before a formal acceptance is executed or d periods of time when all work is complete but acceptance is delayed pending the plant establishment period or similar warranty period .
table num charge for liquidated damages for each day work is not substantially completed original contract price daily charge from more than to and including num num num num num num num num num num num num num and more num section num num num stop order .
the co may order the performance of the work to be stopped either in whole or in part for such periods deemed necessary due to the following a weather or soil conditions considered unsuitable for prosecution of the work or b failure of the contractor to num correct conditions unsafe for the workers or the general public num carry out written orders given by the co or num perform provisions of the contract .
no adjustment in contract time or amount will be made for stop orders issued under subsection numa or b except an adjustment in contract time as provided by far clause num default fixedprice construction may be made when the contractor is able to demonstrate that the weather was unusually severe based on the most recent num years of historical data .
section num num section num .
measurement and payment num measurement of work .
take and record measurements and perform calculations to determine pay quantities for invoicing for work performed .
take or convert measurements of work according to u.s .
customary metric measure .
unless otherwise specified measure when the work is inplace and complete according to the contract .
measure the actual work performed except do not measure work outside the design limits or other adjusted or specified limits staked limits .
measure structures to the lines according to the plans or to approved lines adjusted to fit field conditions .
take measurements as described in subsection num unless otherwise modified by the measurement subsection of the section controlling the work being performed .
measurement of quantities for payment for the individual pay items will be based on the contract price for each pay item according to table num .
table num decimal accuracy of quantities for payment contract price decimal accuracy of quantities for payment num num decimal num to num num decimal num to num num decimals num num decimals decimal precision for measurement is one decimal beyond accuracy of quantities for payment .
remeasure quantities if it has been determined that a portion of the work is acceptable but has not been completed to the lines grades and dimensions shown in the plans or established by the co .
submit measurement notes within num hours of completing work that is inplace and complete according to the contract .
for ongoing work submit measurement notes daily .
when work is not complete identify the measurement as being an interim measurement .
submit the final measurement when the installation is completed .
measurement notes form the basis of the governments receiving report see subsection numd .
for lump sum pay items submit documentation to support invoiced progress payment on a monthly basis .
use an acceptable format for measurement records .
as a minimum include the following information a project number and name b pay item number and description c date the work was performed d location of the work e measured quantity section num num f calculations made to arrive at the quantity g supporting sketches and details as needed to clearly define the work performed and the quantity measured h names of persons measuring the work i identification as to whether the measurement is interim or final and j signed certification statement by the persons taking the measurements and performing the calculations that the measurements and calculations are correct .
num measurement terms and definitions .
unless otherwise specified the following terms are defined as follows a acre hectare .
num square feet num square meters .
make longitudinal and transverse measurements for area computations horizontally .
do not make deductions from the area computation for individual fixtures having an area of num square feet num square meters or less .
b contract quantity .
the quantity to be paid is the quantity listed in the bid schedule .
the contract quantity will be adjusted for authorized changes that affect the quantity or for errors made in computing this quantity .
if there is evidence that a quantity specified as a contract quantity is incorrect submit calculations drawings or other evidence indicating why the quantity is in error and request in writing that the quantity be adjusted .
c cubic yard cubic meter .
num cubic yard cubic meter inplace .
measure solid volumes by a method approved by the co or by the average end area method as follows a take crosssections of the original ground and use design or staked templates to determine end areas .
do not measure work outside of the lines or slopes established by the co b if a portion of the work is acceptable but is not completed to the established lines and slopes retake crosssections or comparable measurements of that portion of the work .
use the remeasurements to calculate new end areas and c compute the quantity using the average end areas multiplied by the horizontal distance along a centerline or reference line between the end areas .
deduct quantities outside the designed or staked limits .
num cubic yard cubic meter in the hauling vehicle .
measure the cubic yard cubic meter volume in the hauling vehicle using threedimensional measurements at the point of delivery .
use vehicles bearing a legible identification mark with the body shaped so the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
before use mutually agree in writing on the volume of material to be hauled by each vehicle .
vehicles carrying less than the agreed volume may be rejected or accepted at the reduced volume .
section num num level selected loads .
if leveling reveals the vehicle was hauling less than the approved volume reduce the quantity of all material received since the last leveled load by the same ratio as the current leveled load volume is to the agreed volume .
payment will not be made for material in excess of the agreed volume .
material measured in the hauling vehicle may be weighed and converted to cubic yards cubic meters for payment purposes if the conversion factors are mutually agreed to in writing .
num cubic yard cubic meter in the structure .
measure according to the lines of the structure as shown in the plans except as altered by the co to fit field conditions .
make no deduction for the volume occupied by reinforcing steel anchors weep holes piling or pipes less than num inches num millimeters in diameter .
num cubic yard cubic meter by metering .
use an approved metering system .
d day .
a calendar day beginning and ending at midnight .
round portions of a day up to the full day .
e each .
one entire unit .
measure the actual number of units completed and accepted .
f gallon liter .
the quantity may be measured by the following methods num measured volume container .
num metered volume .
use an approved metering system .
num commerciallypackaged volumes .
num measured by mass .
use an approved weighing device .
when asphalt material is measured by the gallon liter measure the volume at num f num c or correct the volume to num f num c using recognized standard correction factors .
g hour .
num minutes .
measure the actual number of hours ordered by the co and performed by the contractor .
round portions of an hour up to the next half hour .
measure time in excess of num hours per week at the same rate as the first num hours .
h linear foot meter .
as applicable measure the work along its length from endtoend parallel to the base or foundation along the top along the front face or along the invert .
do not measure overlaps .
i lump sum .
do not measure directly .
the bid amount is complete payment for all work described in the contract and necessary to complete the work for that pay item .
the quantity is designated as all .
estimated quantities of lump sum work shown in the contract are approximate .
j mgallon .
num gallons .
measure according to subsection numf .
k mile kilometer .
num linear feet num meters .
measure horizontally along the centerline of each roadway approach road or ramp .
l month .
a month as defined by the gregorian calendar .
measure portions of a month by prorating based on the total days worked .
section num num m pound kilogram .
measure according to subsection num .
if sacked or packaged material is furnished the net weight as packed by the manufacturer may be used .
n slurry unit .
approximately num gallons num liters of water plus the specified material .
four ten slurry units contain material to cover one acre hectare .
measure according to subsection numf .
o square foot and square yard square meter .
num square yard equals num square feet .
measurements for area computations will be made horizontally or vertically to the surface being measured .
no deductions from the area computation will be made for individual fixtures having area of num square feet num square meter or less .
p thousand board feet measure mfbm .
num board feet .
measurement equal to num feet of wood that is num inches wide and num inch thick .
q ton metric ton .
num pounds avoirdupois num kilograms .
measure according to subsection num .
no adjustment in a contract price will be made for variations in quantity due to differences in the specific gravity or moisture content .
use netcertified scale masses or masses based on certified volumes in the case of rail shipments as a basis of measurement subject to correction when asphalt material is lost from the car or the distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
when asphalt material is shipped by truck or transport netcertified masses subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
when emulsified asphalt is converted from volume to mass use a factor of num gallons per ton num liters per metric ton regardless of temperature .
when asphalt binder for asphalt concrete pavement is stored in tanks devoted exclusively to the project base quantities on invoices .
when asphalt binder for asphalt concrete pavement is not stored in tanks devoted exclusively to the project or when the validity of the quantity requested for payment is in question base quantities on the asphalt content determined by testing .
r week .
a num day period beginning and ending at the same designated time .
measure portions of a week by prorating based on the total days worked .
num weighing procedures and devices .
batch masses may be acceptable for determination of pay quantities when an approved automatic weighing cycling and monitoring system is included as part of the batching equipment .
when a weighing device is determined to indicate less than true mass no additional payment will be made for material previously weighed and recorded .
when a weighing device is determined to indicate more than true mass material received after the last previously correct weighing accuracy test will be reduced by the percentage of error in excess of num percent .
when material is proportioned or measured and paid for by mass provide one of the following a commercial weighing system .
use permanentlyinstalled and certified commercial scales .
section num num b invoices .
if bulk material is shipped by truck or rail and is not passed through a mixing plant submit a suppliers invoice with net mass or volume converted to mass .
periodic check weighing may be required .
c project weighing system .
furnish erect and maintain acceptable automatic digital scales .
provide scales that record mass at least to the nearest num pounds num kilograms .
maintain the scale accuracy to within num percent of the correct mass throughout the range of use .
do not use spring balances .
install and maintain platform scales with the platform level with rigid bulkheads at each end .
make the platform of sufficient length to permit simultaneous weighing of all axle loads of the hauling vehicle .
coupled vehicles may be weighed separately or together according to subsection num paragraph ur.num singledraft vehicle weighing of nist handbook num specifications tolerances and other technical requirements for weighing and measuring devices .
install and maintain beltconveyor scales according to subsection num beltconveyor scale systems of nist handbook num .
before production on the project after relocation and at least once per year have the weighing portion of the system checked and certified by the state bureau of weights and measures or a private scale service certified by the bureau of weights and measures .
seal the system to prevent tampering or other adjustment after certification .
attach an automatic printer to the scale that is programmed or otherwise equipped to prevent manual override of all mass information .
for weighed pay quantities program the printer to provide the following information for each weighing num project number and name num pay item number and description num date num time num ticket number num haul unit number num net mass in load at least to the nearest num pounds num kilograms num subtotal net mass for each haul unit since the beginning of the shift and num accumulated total net mass for all haul units since the beginning of the shift .
if a printer malfunctions or breaks down the contractor may manually weigh and record masses for up to num hours provided the method of weighing meets other contract requirements .
furnish competent scale operators to operate the system .
when platform scales are used weigh empty haul units at least twice per day .
section num num use an approved format for the mass records .
submit the original records and a written certification as to the accuracy of the masses at the end of each shift .
num receiving procedures .
when the method of measurement requires weighing or volume measurement in the hauling vehicle furnish a person to direct the spreading and distribution of material and to record the location and placement of the material on the project .
during the placement maintain a record of each delivery and document it in an acceptable manner .
include the following as applicable a project number and name b pay item number and description c location where placed d date e load number f truck identification g time of arrival h mass or volume and i spread persons signature .
use an approved format for the delivery records .
submit the original records and a written certification of the delivery of the material at the end of each shift .
num scope of payment .
payment for contract work is provided either directly or indirectly under the pay items listed in the bid schedule .
a direct payment .
payment is provided directly under a pay item listed in the bid schedule when one of the following applies num the work is measured in the measurement subsection of the section ordering the work and the bid schedule contains a pay item for the work from the section ordering the work .
num the measurement subsection of the section ordering the work references another section for measuring the work and the bid schedule contains a pay item for the work from the referenced section .
b indirect payment .
work for which direct payment is not provided is a subsidiary obligation of the contractor .
payment for such work is indirectly included under other pay items listed in the bid schedule .
this includes instances when the section ordering the work references another section for performing the work and the work is not referenced in the measurement subsection of the section ordering the work .
compensation provided by the pay items included in the bid schedule is full payment for performing contract work in a complete and acceptable manner .
risk loss damage or expense arising out of the nature or prosecution of the work is included in the compensation provided by the pay items .
section num num work measured and paid for under one pay item will not be paid for under other pay items .
the quantities listed in the bid schedule are approximate unless designated as a contract quantity .
limit pay quantities to the quantities staked ordered or otherwise authorized before performing the work .
payment will be made for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or material furnished according to the contract .
no payment will be made for work performed in excess of that staked ordered or otherwise authorized .
num pricing of adjustments .
determine costs according to far part num contract cost principles and procedures .
follow the requirements of far clauses providing for an equitable price adjustment .
if agreement on price and time can not be reached the co may make a unilateral determination .
if the work will delay contract completion request a contract time extension according to subsection num. a proposal .
num general .
submit a written proposal for each line item of the work or a lump sum for the total work .
identify the major elements of the work the quantity of the element and its contribution to the proposed price .
submit further breakdowns if requested by the co. num data .
submit information as requested by the co to the extent necessary to permit the co to determine the reasonableness of the proposed price .
num cost or pricing data .
when the contract modification exceeds the amount indicated in far clause num price reduction for defective cost or pricing data modifications sealed bidding far clause num price reduction for defective certified cost or pricing data or far clause num price reduction for defective cost or pricing data modifications and the co has determined that an exception does not apply submit cost or pricing data .
submit cost or pricing data as defined in far subpart numdefinitions for the contractor and each major subcontractor .
submit with the cost or pricing data a written proposal for pricing the work according to subsection numanum .
see far subpart numcontract pricing and far table num instructions for submitting costprice proposals when certified cost or pricing data are required for guidance .
certify cost or pricing data according to far subpart num upon completion of negotiations .
b postwork pricing .
when a contract modification is not forward priced it requires a change order and a supplemental agreement reflecting the resulting equitable adjustment .
when negotiating the price of a contract modification after all or most of the work has been performed submit the following num direct costs .
a material .
include invoices showing the cost of material delivered to the work .
b labor .
show basic hourly wage rates fringe benefits applicable payroll costs that is fica futa workers compensation insurance and tax levies paid subsistence and travel costs for each labor classification and foreman employed in the adjusted work .
section num num c equipment .
include a complete descriptive listing of equipment including make model and year of manufacture .
support rented or leased equipment costs with invoices .
determine allowable ownership and operating costs for contractor and subcontractorowned equipment as follows num use actual equipment cost data when such data can be determined from the contractors or subcontractors ownership and operating cost records .
num when actual costs can not be determined use the rates shown in the u.s. army corps of engineers construction equipment ownership and operating expense schedule ceooes for the region where costs are incurred .
adjust the rates for used equipment and for other variable parameters used in the schedules .
num compute standby costs from acceptable ownership records or when actual costs can not be determined according to ceooes .
do not exceed num hours in a numhour period or num hours in a week .
do not include standby for periods when the equipment would have otherwise been in an idle status or for equipment that was not in operational condition .
d other direct costs .
include documentation or invoices to support other direct costs incurred that are not included above such as bonds mobilization demobilization permits and royalties .
e production rates .
include actual hours of performance on a daily basis for each labor classification and for each piece of equipment .
include production rate information reflecting the actual work occurring on an approved contractor daily record document .
f subcontract costs .
include supporting data as required above .
num overhead .
identify overhead rates and include supporting data which justifies the rates .
list the types of costs which are included in overhead .
identify the cost pools to which overhead is applied .
apply the overhead costs to the appropriate pool .
limit contractor overhead applied to subcontractor payments to num percent unless a higher percentage is justified .
num profit .
include a reasonable profit except when precluded by the far .
for work priced after all or most of the work is performed profit is limited to num percent of the total cost .
due to the limited risk in postwork pricing a lower profit percentage may be determined by a profit analysis according to far subpart num profit .
num eliminated work .
follow the requirements of far clause num changes .
work may be eliminated from the contract without invalidating the contract .
the contractor is entitled to compensation for direct costs incurred before the date of elimination of work plus profit and overhead on the direct incurred costs .
anticipated profit and overhead expense on the eliminated work will not be compensated .
section num num num progress payments .
follow the requirements of far clause num payments under fixedprice construction contracts and far clause num prompt payment for construction contracts .
a general .
only invoice payments will be made under this contract .
invoice payments include progress payments made monthly as work is accomplished and the final payment made upon final acceptance .
only one progress payment will be made each month .
no progress payment will be made in a month in which the work accomplished results in a net payment of less than num .
full or partial progress payment will be withheld until a construction schedule or schedule update is approved by the co. b closing date and invoice submittal date .
the closing date for progress payments will be designated by the co .
include work performed after the closing date in the following months invoice .
submit invoices to the designated billing office .
c invoice requirements .
submit the invoice to the governments designated billing office with the following items in the invoice num the information required in far clause numanum .
num a tabulation of total quantities and contract prices of work accomplished or completed on each pay item .
do not include quantities unless field note documentation for those quantities were submitted by the closing date .
do not include quantities of work involving material for which test reports required under section num section num or certifications required by subsection num are or will be past due as of the closing date .
num the certification required by far clause numc and if applicable the notice required by far clause numd .
provide an original signature on the certification .
facsimiles are unacceptable .
num if applicable a copy of the notices that are required by far clause numenum and g. num the amount included for work performed by each subcontractor under the contract .
num the total amount of each subcontract under the contract .
num the amounts previously paid to each subcontractor under the contract .
num adjustments to the proposed total payment that relate to the quantity and quality of pay items .
adjustments for the following may be made by the government after validation of the invoice a retent resulting from a failure to maintain acceptable progress b retent resulting from violations of the labor provisions c retent pending completion of incomplete work other no pay work and verification of final quantities d obligations to the government such as excess testing cost or the cost of corrective work pursuant to far clause numg or e liquidated damages for failure to complete work on time .
section num num d governments receiving report .
the governments receiving report will be developed using the measurement notes received by the co and determined acceptable .
within num days after the closing date the co will be available by appointment at the governments designated billing office to advise the contractor of quantities and contract prices appearing on the governments receiving report .
e processing progress payment requests .
no payment will be made for work unless field note documentation for the work was submitted .
num proper invoices .
if the invoice meets the requirements of subsection numc and the quantities and contract prices shown on the contractors invoice agree with the corresponding quantities and contract prices shown on the governments receiving report the invoice will be paid .
num defective invoices .
if the invoice does not meet the requirements of subsection numc or if quantities or contract prices shown on the contractors invoice exceed the corresponding quantities and contract prices shown on the governments receiving report the invoice is defective and the contractor will be notified according to far clause numanum .
defective invoices will be returned to the contractor within num days after receipt by the governments designated billing office .
correct and resubmit returned invoices .
if the defects are minor the contractor may elect in writing to accept the quantities and contract prices shown on the governments receiving report for payment .
f partial payments .
progress payments may include partial payment for material to be incorporated in the work according to far clause numbnum provided the material meets the requirements of the contract and is delivered on or in the vicinity of the project site or stored in acceptable storage places .
partial payment for material does not constitute acceptance of the material for use in completing items of work .
partial payments will not be made for living or perishable material until incorporated into the project .
individual and cumulative partial payments for preparatory work and material will not exceed the lesser of num num percent of the contract price for the pay item or num num percent of amount supported by copies of invoices submitted .
the quantity paid will not exceed the corresponding quantity estimated in the contract .
the co may adjust partial payments as necessary to protect the government .
g retainage .
follow the requirements of far clause num payments under fixed price construction contracts .
num satisfactory progress includes performance of all work under the contract including submittals schedules certifications reports and drawings .
when satisfactory progress has not been made the co may retain a maximum of num percent of the amount the progress payment until satisfactory progress has been made .
num after substantial completion of the contract the co may retain an amount adequate for protection of the government .
section num num num final payment .
follow the requirements of far clause num payment under fixedprice construction contracts and far clause num prompt payment for construction .
upon final acceptance and verification of final pay records the government will send a sf num public voucher for purchases and services other than personal final voucher and a release of claims document .
execute both the voucher and the release of claims and return the documents to the government for payment .
the date of approval by the government of the final voucher for payment constitutes the date of final settlement of the contract .
if unresolved claims exist or claims are proposed reserve the right to the claims by listing a description of each claim and the amount being claimed on the release of claims document .
failure to execute and return the voucher and release of claims document within num days after receipt will constitute execution of the documents and the release of claims against the government arising by virtue of the contract .
in this event the day after num days from receipt constitutes the date of final settlement of the contract .
num num division num project requirements section num num section num .
mobilization description num this work consists of moving personnel equipment material and incidentals to the project and performing work necessary before beginning work at the project site .
this work also includes obtaining permits insurance and bonds .
measurement num measure the section num items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for mobilization by the lump sum will be paid as follows a bond premiums will be reimbursed according to far clause num payments under fixedprice construction contracts after receipt of the evidence of payment .
b when num percent of the original contract amount is earned from pay items not including mobilization num percent of the mobilization pay item or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
c when num percent of the original contract amount is earned from pay items not including mobilization num percent of the mobilization pay item or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
d any portion of the mobilization pay item in excess of num percent of the original contract amount will be paid after final acceptance .
section num num section num .
construction survey and staking description num this work consists of performing surveying staking calculating and recording data for the control of work .
see far clause num layout of work .
construction requirements num qualifications .
provide technically qualified survey crews experienced in highway construction survey and staking .
provide personnel capable of performing in a timely and accurate manner .
num submittals .
submit the following at the preconstruction conference include the following when automated machine guidance amg methods are used a technology statement .
a written statement that includes num the manufacturer model and software version of the amg equipment and num certification that the final numd data is compatible with the amg equipment .
b personnel qualifications .
num the name authority relevant experience and qualifications of the person with overall responsibility for the amg system .
num the names authority and relevant experience of personnel directly responsible for operating the amg equipment .
c contractor quality control plan .
comply with section num and describe procedures for checking mechanical calibration and maintenance of both survey and construction equipment .
include the frequency and types of checks performed .
include a price breakdown by individual tasks when construction survey and staking is paid by the lump sum for use in making progress payments and price adjustments .
num general .
conform to the following a personnel .
provide a crew supervisor on the project whenever surveying and staking is in progress .
b equipment .
furnish survey instruments and supporting equipment capable of achieving the specified tolerances .
construction equipment controlled with a global positioning system gps and robotic total station rts machine guidance system may be used in the construction of subgrade subbase and base aggregate courses or other construction operations when approved .
section num num c material .
furnish acceptable tools and supplies of the type and quality suitable for highway survey work .
furnish stakes and hubs of sufficient length to provide a solid set in the ground with sufficient surface area above ground for necessary legible and durable markings .
include staking activities in the construction schedule required under section num .
include the dates and sequence of each staking activity .
the government will set horizontal control points vertical control points and will provide data for use in establishing control for completion of each element of the work .
data relating to horizontal and vertical alignment theoretical slope stake catch points and other design data will be furnished .
reformatting and additional calculations may be required for the convenient use of the governmentfurnished data .
provide immediate notification of apparent errors in the initial staking or in the governmentfurnished data .
record survey and measurement field data in an approved format .
submit asstaked data and corrections made to the governmentfurnished survey data .
submit survey and measurement data at least weekly .
field data and supporting documentation become the property of the government upon completion of the work .
discuss and coordinate the following with the co before surveying or staking num surveying and staking methods num stake marking num grade control for courses of material num referencing num structure control num field staking data num localization of the gps systems to the governmentestablished control points and num other procedures and controls necessary for the work .
do not start work until staking or threedimensional numd verification data for the affected work has been approved .
preserve initial reference and control points .
notify the co of missing control points or stakes at least num days before beginning construction .
the government will reestablish control points missing before the beginning of construction .
acceptance of the construction staking does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for correcting errors discovered during the work and for bearing additional costs associated with the error .
maintain legibility of stake markings for the duration of the project or until notified in writing the stakes are no longer needed .
replace stakes if necessary to ensure markings are maintained .
remove and dispose of flagging paint lath stakes and other staking material after the project is complete .
section num num num survey and staking requirements .
perform survey staking recording of data and calculations as necessary to construct the project from the initial layout to final completion .
survey and set stakes to the tolerances in table num .
reset stakes refine numd data or both as many times as necessary to construct the work .
a control points .
relocate initial horizontal and vertical control points in conflict with construction to areas that will not be disturbed by construction operations .
furnish the coordinates elevations and supporting documentation for the relocated points before the initial points are disturbed .
set durable monuments for survey control that uniquely identify the points .
furnish the gps localization results at least num days before beginning construction layout survey work .
the co may order the gps localization calibration and associated numd model to be broken into two or more zones to maintain the localized relationship between control points and original ground .
b centerline establishment .
establish or reestablish centerline at roadway design crosssection locations and as necessary to construct the work .
reestablish the centerline when construction survey and staking work does not meet the tolerances .
c original ground topographic verification .
use an approved method to regenerate crosssection data in areas where theoretical and actual ground elevations do not meet a tolerance of plus or minus num feet num millimeters .
retake crosssection to verify existing ground topography to mapping .
submit crosssection or numd data in electronic and printed format for approval .
reduce crosssections to horizontal and vertical distances from centerline .
retake crosssection num feet num meters beyond catch points to verify existing ground topography .
d slope and references stakes .
perform the following num amg method .
after clearing operations are completed set centerline reference stakes and hubs on both sides of centerline at numfoot nummeter intervals at the clearing limit locations .
where clearing limits are greater than num feet num meters vertically num feet num meters horizontally or both from subgrade hinge point provide an additional reference stake and hub as approved by the co. label each centerline reference stake with station hub elevation and offset from centerline .
construct a numfoot nummeter long test section using amg on the project at an approved location before beginning grading operations .
select a test location with superelevation and curve widening transitions if applicable .
notify the co num days before beginning the test section .
demonstrate capability knowledge equipment and experience to achieve work within tolerances .
allow num days to evaluate the test section .
do not start full grading operations until the test section is approved .
provide asbuilt crosssections at random locations specified by the co not to exceed numfoot nummeter intervals .
if asbuilt crosssections do not meet the tolerances in subsection numd rework the section until the specified tolerances are achieved and provide additional crosssections as directed by the co at no cost to the government .
section num num num conventional survey methods .
verify and set slope stakes on both sides of centerline at the theoretical catch point .
if the theoretical catch point is not within a tolerance of num feet num millimeters perform original ground topographic verification according to subsection numc .
set the slope stake at the actual intersection of the design roadway slope with the natural groundline .
set reference stakes outside the clearing limits .
include reference points and slopestake information on the reference stakes .
establish slope stakes in the field as the actual point of intersection of the design roadway slope with the natural groundline when theoretical catch point information is not available .
e clearing and grubbing limits .
set clearing and grubbing limits on both sides of centerline based on the actual slopestake locations .
f gradefinishing stakes .
num amg method .
construct a numfoot nummeter long test section using amg on the project at an approved location before beginning grading operations .
select a test location with superelevation and curve widening transitions if applicable .
notify the co num days before beginning the test section .
demonstrate the capability knowledge equipment and experience to achieve work within tolerances .
allow num days to evaluate the test section .
do not start full grading operations until the test section is approved .
verify the grade elevation and horizontal alignment of roadway gradefinishing operations .
use conventional survey methods at random locations specified by the co not to exceed numfoot nummeter intervals .
submit numd coordinates of gradefinishing quality control checks .
num conventional survey methods .
set gradefinishing stakes for grade elevations and horizontal alignment on centerline and on each shoulder at design roadway crosssection locations .
set stakes at the top of subgrade and the top of each aggregate course .
reset grade finishing stakes as many times as necessary to construct the subgrade and each aggregate course .
during turnout or pullout construction set stakes on the centerline on each normal shoulder and on the shoulder of the turnout .
in parking areas set stakes at the center and along the edges of the parking area .
set stakes in ditches to be paved .
when the centerline curve radius is less than or equal to num feet num meters use a maximum longitudinal spacing between stakes of num feet num meters .
when the centerline curve radius is greater than num feet num meters use a maximum longitudinal spacing between stakes of num feet num meters .
use a maximum transverse spacing between stakes of num feet num meters .
use brushes or guard stakes at each stake .
g culverts .
verify and set culvert locations at the inlet outlet and inlet basin points according to the plans .
perform the following if culvert design does not fit field conditions num survey and record the ground profile along the culvert centerline num determine the slope catch points at the inlet and outlet num set reference points and record information necessary to determine culvert length and end treatments section num num num plot to scale the profile along the culvert centerline .
show the natural ground the flow line the roadway section and the culvert including end treatments and other appurtenances .
show elevations grade culvert length and degree of elbow .
a for single skewed culverts submit a plotted fielddesign crosssection normal to roadway centerline and at each end section .
plot the offset and elevation of natural ground at the end section and at proposed template break points between centerline and the end section .
ensure the template design embankment slope is not exceeded b for multiple skewed culverts submit a plotted field design crosssection normal to roadway centerline and at the end sections left and right nearest to the shoulder .
plot the offset and elevation of natural ground at the end section and at proposed template break points between centerline and the end section .
ensure the template design embankment slope is not exceeded c submit the plotted fielddesign crosssection for approval of final culvert length and alignment .
plot at a clear and readable scale d set inlet outlet and reference stakes when the field design has been approved .
stake inlet and outlet ditches to make sure the culvert and end treatments such as drop inlets are functional and e adjust slope reference and clearing stakes as necessary to provide for culvert inlet treatments in cut slopes .
readjust slope reference and clearing stakes as necessary when culvert inlets are moved from their plan locations .
review slope adjustments with the co and obtain approval .
h bridges .
set adequate horizontal and vertical control and reference points for bridge substructure and superstructure components .
establish and reference the bridge chord bridge tangent or control lines as specified on the bridge plans .
also establish and reference the centerline of each pier bent and abutment .
i retaining walls and reinforced soil slopes .
survey and record profile measurements along the face of the proposed wall or reinforced soil slope at num feet num meters and num feet num meters in front of the wall or slope face .
take crosssections every num feet num meters along the length of the wall or reinforced soil slope and at major breaks in terrain within the limits designated by the co. measure and record points every num feet num meters and at major breaks in terrain for each crosssection .
set additional references and control points to perform the work .
j borrow and waste sites .
perform field work necessary for initial layout and measurement of the borrow or waste site .
establish site limits and clearing limits .
measure both original and final ground conditions and submit crosssections as directed by the co. k permanent monuments and markers .
perform survey and staking work necessary to establish permanent monuments and markers as described in section num or reestablish monuments as described in subsection num. l miscellaneous survey and staking .
survey and stake other work such as guardrail curb and gutter turf establishment utilities and excavation limits for structures to the proper location and required tolerances .
propose staking increments for approval by the co when not specified .
section num num table num construction survey and staking tolerances num staking phase horizontal vertical control points set from existing government control points num feet num millimeters num feet n num millimeters n num mapping topography and crosssection points num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters centerline points num including pc pt potpoc and references num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters slopestake and slopestake references num num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters culverts ditches and minor drainage structures stakes num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters retaining walls stakes num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters curb and gutter stakes num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters bridge substructures stakes num feet num millimetersnum num feet num millimeters bridge superstructures stakes num feet num millimetersnum num feet num millimeters clearing and grubbing limit stakes num feet num millimeters roadway subgrade finish stakes num num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters roadway finish grade stakes num num feet num millimeters num feet num millimeters num at statistical num percent confidence level .
tolerances are relative to existing government control points .
num n is the number of instrument setups .
num centerline points pc point of curve pt point of tangent pot point on tangent poc point on curve .
num take the crosssections normal to the centerline num degree .
num bridge control is established as a local network and the tolerances are relative to that network .
num includes paved ditches .
num acceptance .
construction survey and staking will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
survey notes will be evaluated under subsection num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring grade finishing measure one time for the subgrade and one time for each aggregate course .
when measuring miscellaneous survey and staking paid by the hour do not measure time spent in making preparations traveling to and from the project site performing calculations plotting crosssections and other data processing computer data and other efforts necessary to successfully accomplish construction survey and staking .
do not measure reestablishing missing control points or stakes after construction operations have begun .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for lump sum pay items will be prorated based on the progress of the work under this section .
section num num section num .
contractor quality control description num this work consists of planning and implementing a construction quality process to ensure work conforms to the contract .
this work also includes quality control inspection and documentation and process control sampling and testing .
see far clause num inspection of construction .
construction requirements num qualifications .
submit the following for approval with the quality control plan a quality control manager qcm .
provide a qcm according to num or num below .
if neither is specified conform to num .
num fulltime onsite qcm .
provide a qcm with no responsibilities for performing testing and inspection managing the project or performing operations other than managing quality control and the following a one year experience managing quality control on construction projects of similar type and scope and b one of the following num two years experience as a construction project manager or superintendent on construction projects of similar type and scope num three years experience as a project engineer resident engineer foreman construction inspector or equivalent on construction projects of similar type and scope or num national institute for certification in engineering technologies nicet level iii certification or equivalent in highway construction or highway material .
num parttime onsite qcm .
furnish a qcm who has at least num years experience in highway construction inspection quality control and material testing .
b inspectors .
provide inspectors with at least num years experience inspecting projects of similar complexity and with training related to the work to be inspected .
c testers .
provide testers with at least one year experience in the type of sampling and testing required and with one of the following for the type of sampling and testing performed num nicet level ii certification in highway material or equivalent state or industry certification num certification by a regional certification program such as western alliance for quality transportation construction waqtc northeast transportation technician certification program nettcp southeast task force for technician training and qualification stfttq or multi regional training and certification mtrac or num at least one year employment by an aashto accredited laboratory performing equivalent sampling and testing .
section num num num quality control plan qcp .
develop a qcp addressing all contract work categories .
a category consists of related work items performed in one operationsuch as excavation drainage and paving .
include the work of subcontractors major material suppliers and structural and geotechnical services suppliers .
for each category include the following a quality control personnel .
furnish the name authority responsibilities and qualifications of the quality control manager and other personnel directly involved in inspection and testing .
conform to subsection num. b quality control procedures .
describe the inspection testing and other activities to be performed for each phase of work in subsection num .
include methods schedules equipment and laboratory facilities .
conform to subsections num and num .
list the material to be tested by num pay item num applicable requirements of the sampling testing and acceptance requirements tables num persons responsible for performing the sampling and testing num laboratory testing facilities to be used for process control and project testing and num proposed reporting formats .
as a minimum perform process control testing according to the sampling testing and acceptance requirements tables included at the end of each section where applicable .
c records .
describe the reporting format for inspection testing certification and daily reports .
conform to subsections num and num .
at least num days before the start of work submit the qcp for approval .
do not perform work on a work category unless the quality control for that category is accepted .
approval does not imply that the qcp will result in contract compliance .
revise the qcp when contract quality requirements are not achieved and when changes occur in the contract work progress or personnel .
num prosecution of work .
complete the following a preparatory phase .
num before starting each work category hold a preparatory phase meeting .
include the project superintendent work foreman co qcm and appropriate subcontractors .
be prepared to discuss the following a contract requirements for the work including acceptance procedures schedule and control strip b process and equipment for constructing the work and section num num c plan for inspection process control testing measuring and reporting the work .
num review and coordinate certifications submittals plans drawings and permits .
num verify the capabilities of equipment material and personnel .
provide training as necessary .
num establish a detailed testing schedule based on the production schedule .
num ensure preparatory testing and inspection is accomplished .
num review accuracy of the surveying and staking .
b startup phase .
num hold a startup meeting to review the contract the construction processes and the inspection testing and reporting requirements with the personnel performing the work .
include the project superintendent inspectors testers co and qcm .
explain procedures that will be followed if defective work is identified .
num inspect test and report startup work according to the qcp and ensure the work conforms to the contract .
c production phase .
num inspect test and report according to the qcp and evaluate the acceptability of the work produced .
num identify and correct deficiencies .
num request government inspection and acceptance .
num sampling and testing .
inspect commercial laboratory equipment within num days of project use .
have mobile laboratory equipment inspected and calibrated after the laboratory is moved to the project and every time it is moved thereafter .
keep laboratory facilities clean and maintain equipment in proper working condition .
certify that equipment conforms to testing requirements and submit evidence of current calibrations .
allow the co unrestricted access to the laboratory for inspection and review .
when requested by the co provide additional inspections and tests to demonstrate sampling and testing proficiency .
submit proficiency sample test results within num hours of sample receipt .
perform quality control sampling and testing according to the qcp and the sampling testing and acceptance requirements table in applicable sections .
when no sampling frequencies are specified submit the proposed sampling and testing frequencies .
num certifications .
obtain review and verify certifications for work .
submit certifications when required .
section num num num records and control charts .
maintain records and control charts by pay item .
a quality control and construction operations reports .
submit written quality control and construction operations reports daily according to the qcp .
document meetings work locations labor and equipment used including actual hours worked testing and measurement activities inspection results deficiencies observed corrective actions taken and process changes .
use fhwa form num inspectors daily record of construction operations or approved alternate forms .
include the following certification signed by the qcm on all reports i certify that the information contained in this record is accurate and that work documented herein complies with the contract .
exceptions to this certification are documented as a part of this record .
b control charts .
maintain linear control charts that identify the test number test parameter upper and lower specification limit applicable to each test parameter and test results for applicable material .
use the control charts to document variability of the process to identify production and equipment problems and to identify actions to improve processes or quality .
update and post control charts daily in a location accessible to the co .
cease production and correct the process when problems are evident .
num acceptance .
the contractors quality control system will be evaluated under subsection num based on its demonstrated effectiveness to ensure work conforms to the contract .
measurement and payment num do not measure contractor quality control for payment .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
contractor sampling and testing description num this work consists of obtaining samples for testing .
when there is a pay item for contractor testing included in the bid schedule this work also includes sampling testing and reporting the required test results .
it excludes contractor quality control testing required under section num .
construction requirements num general .
include the work required under this section in the section num quality control plan .
sample and test material according to the sampling testing and acceptance requirements tables included at the end of each section .
perform additional sampling and testing as directed when material does not meet requirements .
provide the co the opportunity to witness sampling splitting and testing of material .
where process control sampling and testing frequencies are identical to the sampling and testing frequencies for acceptance the process control samples may be used for acceptance for the applicable work .
num sampling .
sample and split samples according to aashto or other acceptable procedures .
the location of statistical acceptance sampling will be provided using a random number system .
perform splits when required and deliver the governments portion of the sample or split sample in an acceptable container suitable for shipment .
label samples with the following a project number and name b pay item number and description c source of material d sample number e date sampled f time sampled g location sample taken h name of person sampling i name of person witnessing sampling and j type of test required on sample .
section num num num testing .
perform tests when there is a pay item for contractor testing included in the bid schedule .
demonstration of testing competence may be required .
num records .
when tests are on material being incorporated in the work report test results within num hours unless specified otherwise in the sampling testing and acceptance requirements tables .
report test results on forms containing sample information required by subsection num .
label interim measurements used to determine the results .
attach work sheets used to determine test values to the test result forms .
payment for work may be delayed or the work stopped until test results are submitted .
num acceptance .
contractor sampling and testing will be evaluated under subsections num and num based on government verification testing .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for contractor testing lump sum will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount not to exceed num percent of the original contract amount will be paid after the testing facilities are in place qualified sampling and testing personnel are identified and the work being tested has started .
b payment for the remaining portion of the pay item amount will be prorated based on the total work completed in section num .
payment may be retained if government verification testing does not validate the contractor testing or if it is determined that documentation of sampling and testing does not meet requirements .
section num num section num .
schedules for construction contracts description num this work consists of scheduling and monitoring the progress of construction activities .
num definitions .
a construction schedule .
a progress timescaled logic diagram tabular schedule written narrative and submittal list .
b preliminary construction schedule .
a written narrative and a schedule diagram of contract activities for the first num days after the effective date issued in the notice to proceed .
a schedule diagram consists of either a bar chart method bcm or a critical path method cpm .
c initial construction schedule .
the first approved bcm or cpm construction schedule submitted after the preliminary construction schedule .
once approved the initial construction schedule becomes the first baseline construction schedule .
d baseline construction schedule .
the current approved initial construction schedule in which subsequent construction schedule updates are based on .
e baseline construction schedule update .
the normal monthly updating of the currently approved baseline schedule with no changes in the schedule logic or activities and no changes to the critical path .
f baseline construction schedule revision .
a significant change to the schedule logic schedule activities or activity durations or some other modification to the schedule of planned work .
activities performed out of sequence from the baseline schedule affecting the critical path require a revision .
a baseline schedule revision may show construction being completed at a date other than the contract completion date .
construction requirements num general .
follow the requirements of far clause num schedules for construction contracts .
designate an individual in the contractors organization who will be the authorized representative responsible for the construction schedule .
identify the representative before or at the preconstruction conference .
when preparing schedules show completion of work within the contract time .
num preliminary construction schedule .
do not begin work except mobilization traffic control and section num work without an approved preliminary construction schedule .
no progress payments will be made until a preliminary construction schedule has been approved .
section num num submit a written narrative that includes a a title page stating the contract number project number project name contractor name current contract completion date date of submittal submittal number and schedule name designated as preliminary construction schedule b a description of the work to be done within each activity including the type and quantity of equipment labor and material to be used c a description of the planned production rates by pay item units d a description of the work days per week number of shifts per day and number of hours per shift .
include calendars used in the schedule module e estimated periods during which an activity is idle or partially idle .
show the beginning and end dates for reduced production or idle time f identification of the vendor supplier or subcontractor to perform the activity .
state assumptions made in scheduling their work g a description of site mobilization such as dates of expected material shipments planned dates for equipment arrivals office setup material laboratory arrival and setup and anticipated portable crusher or batch plant setup h a list of drawing and sample submittals and i the fabrication and delivery of key and longlead procurement activities .
submit num copies of a preliminary construction schedule at least num days before the preconstruction conference .
within num days after the preconstruction conference the preliminary construction schedule will be approved or rejected .
if rejected submit a revised schedule within num days .
the preconstruction conference will be rescheduled if the co does not receive the schedule num days before the scheduled preconstruction conference date .
contract time will not be extended for failure to submit a preliminary construction schedule by the date required .
num initial and baseline construction schedule .
prepare and submit a critical path method cpm initial construction schedule unless otherwise required by the contract .
a bar chart method bcm .
include the contract number project number project name contractor name current contract completion date date of submittal and submittal number .
num progress bar chart .
a use a time scale to graphically show the percentage of work scheduled for completion during the contract time b define and relate activities to the contract pay items c show activities in the order the work will be performed including submittals submittal reviews fabrication and delivery section num num d show critical major activities that are controlling factors in the completion of the work e show the time needed to perform each activity and its relationship in time to other activities f show the total expected time to complete work and g provide enough space for each activity to permit two additional plots parallel to the original time span plot .
use one space for revision of the planned time span and one for showing actual time span achieved .
num written narrative .
submit a written narrative of the activities displayed in the progress bar chart .
the following applies to the written narrative a estimate starting and completion dates of each activity b describe work to be done within each activity including the type and quantity of equipment labor and material to be used c describe the location on the project where each activity occurs d describe planned production rates by pay item quantities such as quantity of excavation per day or week e describe work days per week holidays number of shifts per day and number of hours per shift f estimate periods during which an activity is idle or partially idle .
show the beginning and end dates for reduced production or idle time g describe expected and critical delivery dates for equipment or material that can affect completion of the project h describe critical completion dates for maintaining the construction schedule and i identify the vendor supplier or subcontractor to perform the activity .
state assumptions made in the scheduling their work .
num bar chart method updates .
review the construction schedule to verify or adjust start and finish dates of activities underway remaining duration of uncompleted activities and finish dates of completed activities .
inform the co of changes .
submit num copies of an updated construction schedule with each progress estimate or every num days whichever is less or within num days of a a delay occurs in the completion of a critical major activity b a delay occurs which causes a change in a critical activity c the actual prosecution of the work is different from that represented on the current construction schedule d there is an addition deletion or revision of activities caused by a contract modification or e there is a change in the schedule logic .
section num num b critical path method cpm .
prepare an initial construction schedule using a cpm that is computergenerated .
submit an initial construction schedule that includes all activities contractual requirements such as construction or traffic staging contract restrictions and subcontract work .
num format .
prepare a construction schedule diagram and supporting documents as follows a a title page or header block for each component timescaled logic diagram tabular schedule written narrative and submittal list with the contract number project number project name contractor name current fixed completion date date of submittal and submittal number .
b a schedule diagram using the activityonarrow diagram method adm or the precedence diagram method pdm .
depict the order and interdependence of all activities and the sequence of the work that will be accomplished by the contractor in coordination with its subcontractors .
show how the completion of predecessor activities restricts the start of successor activities .
num timescaled logic diagram .
a show all activities including those in the preliminary construction schedule .
add items for correcting punchlist items and general cleanup .
relate an activity or groups of activities to the contract pay items b show all activity nodes or boxes activity ids activity descriptions and durations c group the activities independently by area that is separate distinct bridges or roadways and by type of work such as submittals utilities roadway and bridge d include a description of the work represented by each activity at or near the event node or box for each activity e code each subcontractors activities so that its activities can be shown separately as well as cumulatively f show durations for construction activities as whole working days with a maximum duration of num working days each .
divide activities with longer durations into subgroups of activities not exceeding num working days in duration .
indicate logical start and end points such as stationing and staging for each subgroup g show the durations of nonconstruction activities .
nonconstruction activities include mobilization drawing and sample submittals by pay item number and the fabrication and delivery of key material .
nonconstruction activities may have durations exceeding num working days consistent with the contract .
indicate intended submittal dates and delivery dates for fabrication and delivery activities .
allow for review approval and distribution of each submittal or resubmittal .
where no times are specified allow num days for the review approval and distribution of each submittal or resubmittal after receipt by the co h indicate the total number of anticipated working days to complete each activity of work i identify the critical path on the diagram and section num num j begin the construction schedule diagram with the date of the notice to proceed and include the contract completion date .
float time within the construction schedule is not for use or benefit of either party but is a jointly owned project resource available to both parties as needed to meet the completion date established in the contract .
num tabular schedule .
submit a tabular schedule sorted by early start and total float .
include the following information in the tabular schedule a activity id b activity description c subcontractors codes d activity percent complete e original and remaining duration f early and late schedule dates g total float h a predecessorsuccessor report and i other tabular schedule report formats if requested by the co for analyzing cpm revisions or time impacts .
num written narrative .
submit a written narrative describing the rationale and assumptions utilized in the development of the construction schedule .
use the timescaled logic diagram as the basis of schedulerelated comments referencing specific activities by number and description .
include the following a describe the planned critical path and the general sequence of work b information and references to adequately define the scope of work by pay item included in each major activity type such as roadway excavation and aggregate base course .
include such information as station numbers location etc .
c describe the resource loading planned for use in the performance of the work for each major activity .
the description should include manpower allocation by types of labor and crew size types and number of equipment and special equipment material and subcontractors involved d describe the basis including the resource loading above for the calculation of the duration for all major activities to be stated as quantity production rates such as quantity of excavation per day e describe work days per week number of shifts per day and number of hours per shift f a description of the assumptions used in converting working days to calendar dates .
include anticipated holidays nonwork days winter shutdowns and other constraints within the contract g identify the subcontractor or supplier performing an activity and identify their activity codes used on the schedule diagram .
state assumptions made in the scheduling of the subcontractors or suppliers work section num num h describe expected and critical delivery dates for equipment or material that can affect completion of the project i a description of organizational limitations such as resource constraints or subcontractor commitments which limit scheduling flexibility j ensure that there is no conflict between the diagram and the narrative k an explanation of the schedules work breakdown structure wbs and activity id protocol to be use throughout the life of the work and l a list and description of constraints used in the cpm scheduling software .
num submittal list .
a submit a list of drawings and other submittals by pay item number required for the entire contract period .
b include the following information for each submittal num pay item number and description num related activity id number and description from the cpm num planned date of initial submittal num planned date of cos initial response and num other comments .
f submission and approval submit num paper copies and one electronic copy of the initial construction schedule within num days after the effective date of the notice to proceed has been issued .
submit an electronic copy via media approved by the co .
in case of discrepancy between the paper version and the electronic version the paper version will govern over the electronic version of the schedule .
allow num days for the approval or rejection of the schedule .
if rejected submit corrected schedule within num days after the date of the rejection of the schedule .
if rejected schedule a meeting within num days to discuss corrections .
the approved copy of the initial construction schedule with supporting documents becomes baseline construction schedule .
implement and execute the work under the contract according to the baseline construction schedule .
update the baseline construction schedule according to subsection num .
failure to include elements of work in the construction schedule diagram that are required for performance of the contract even when approved by the government will not excuse the contractor from completing the work required by the contract completion date .
num baseline schedule update .
submit a baseline construction schedule update no less than num days before the closing date for the progress estimate or every num days whichever is less .
show completion of work within the contract time .
no progress payment will be made for any work until an updated construction schedule is approved by the co .
section num num unless previously approval by the co changes to the construction schedule for work that is still to be completed can only be changed with a time impact analysis according to subsection num and a baseline construction schedule revision according to subsection num .
receipt of a baseline construction schedule update with negative float does not constitute agreement by the government of the revised completion date .
a written narrative .
submit an update of the initial or previous written narrative identifying adjustments made to each operation since the last update .
adjustments include but are not limited to the following num equipment added or removed from the project num changes to labor such as added crews or subcontractors num work shift adjustments such as extended hour or added shifts num periods of anticipated suspension or holiday num changes in material delivery num early completion of individual work items and num efficiency of operations b submittal list .
num actual dates of initial and expected dates for all subsequent submittals num actual dates of cos initial and expected dates for subsequent responses num status of cos responses that is approved rejected or approved as noted and num comments .
c bar chart method updates .
submit num paper copies of an updated baseline construction schedule .
verify or adjust start and finish dates of activities underway remaining duration of uncompleted activities and finish dates of completed activities .
include the initial time span plot adjacent to the updated span plot for each work activity .
d critical path method updates .
submit num paper copies and one electronic copy of the construction schedule update .
provide an electronic copy via media approved by the co .
in case of discrepancy between the paper version and the electronic version the paper version will govern over the electronic version of the schedule .
num tabular schedule a actual finish dates for completed activities b remaining duration required to complete each activity started or scheduled to start but not completed c float remaining for each activity d percentages for completed and partially completed activities and e additional tabular schedules using different sort parameters when requested by the co .
section num num num updated timescaled logic diagram .
e review and approval of a construction schedule update .
the co will review and approve the baseline construction schedule update within num days or return it for corrections .
the approved baseline construction schedule revision will become the new baseline construction schedule .
num baseline schedule revision .
submit a time impact analysis when requesting approval of a baseline schedule revision .
submitting a proposed baseline schedule revision is not considered a notification of delay or of other basis for change .
continue to submit monthly schedule updates according to subsection num until a baseline construction schedule revision is approved .
a time impact analysis .
perform a time impact analysis according to subsection num within num days of impacts caused by num changes in the resource loading durations specifications subcontractors num addition or deletion of work num increased or decreased quantities num defective work num acceleration of the work or num other changes .
b bar chart method revisions .
submit a bar chart according to subsection numa which includes revised construction activities affected by impacts addressed with a time impact analysis .
include a revised completion date for the total work .
c critical path method revisions .
submit a tabular schedule and timescaled logic diagram according to subsection numb which includes revised construction activities affected by impacts addressed with a time impact analysis .
include a revised critical path and completion date for the total work .
dwritten narrative .
submit a written narrative according to subsection num describing the changes to the critical path and logic revisions .
identify delays and disruptions which are ongoing as of the date of the proposed revision .
when delays or disruptions have occurred which are the responsibility of the contractor propose efforts to return the project to a schedule consistent with the terms of the contract including the commitment of additional resources or other appropriate action .
notify the co which completion dates or other terms of the contract will not be met .
num acceptance .
construction schedules and supporting documents will be evaluated under subsection num and subsection numa .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for construction schedule lump sum will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount not to exceed num percent of the original contract amount will be paid after the initial baseline construction schedule is approved .
b payment of the remaining portion of the lump sum pay item will be prorated based on the total work completed .
section num num section num .
public traffic description num this work consists of controlling and protecting public traffic adjacent to and within the project .
see far clause num accident prevention .
material num conform to the following section temporary traffic control num construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a traffic control supervisor certified by a state department of transportation atssa or other acceptable certification programs .
num accommodating traffic during work .
accommodate traffic according to the mutcd contract traffic control plan section num and this section .
an alternate traffic control plan may be submitted for approval according to subsection num .
submit alternate traffic control plans at least num days before intended use .
perform work in a manner that ensures the safety and convenience of the public and protects the residents and property adjacent to the project .
accommodate public traffic on roads adjacent to and within the project until the project is accepted according to subsection numb .
num maintaining roadways during work .
maintain roadways as follows a construct and remove diversion roads and bridges as required by the traffic control plan b maintain intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages farms and other features c snow removal to facilitate the work is the contractors responsibility .
snow removal to provide public access is the responsibility of the maintaining agency and will be performed at the maintaining agencys discretion .
allow the maintaining agency access to perform snow removal d maintain a dustfree traveled way such that visibility and air quality are not affected and a hazardous condition is not created e remove accumulations of soil and other material from traveled way f do not allow water to pond on the traveled way and g maintain the roadway detours and diversions in a safe and acceptable condition .
if corrective action is requested and the corrective action is not taken immediately the condition may be corrected and the cost of the corrective action deducted from monies due the contractor .
section num num num maintaining roadways during nonwork periods .
maintain roadways and traffic control for public traffic during periods when work is not in progress .
snow removal to provide public access is the responsibility of the maintaining agency .
num limitations on construction operations .
when the roadway is open to public traffic restrict operations as follows a operate equipment in the direction of traffic where practical b for shoulder dropoffs of num inches num millimeters or less provide low shoulder warning signs .
for shoulder dropoffs in excess of num inches num millimeters provide a numvnumh fillet with shoulder dropoff warning signs .
complete the construction of shoulders adjacent to traffic lanes to the same elevation within num days c provide minimum lane widths of num feet num meters .
use barricades drums or other acceptable devices to delineate traffic lanes through areas where the edge of pavement or intended path has been obliterated by construction operations d locate staging areas at least num feet num meters from the traveled way or behind acceptable traffic barriers .
obtain approval of the location and access to staging areas .
store unused traffic control devices at staging areas e park equipment at least num feet num meters from the traveled way or behind acceptable traffic barriers f provide parking areas for employees personal vehicles in approved areas g provide uninterrupted twoway communications between flaggers and also between flaggers and pilot cars unless flaggers are able to see each other and communicate .
use communications devices approved by the co. citizen band radios are unacceptable .
make communication devices available to the co as necessary h where switching traffic to a completed lane provide adequate personnel and equipment to set or relocate traffic control devices i limit constructioncaused delays to public traffic to a maximum of num minutes per passage through the project and j maintain existing guardrails barriers and bridge railings until removal is necessary for construction .
use a temporary barrier or appropriate channelizing devices while the guardrails and bridge rails are absent .
install permanent barriers guardrails and bridge rails as soon as possible to minimize risk to the public .
num nighttime operations .
perform construction operations during the hours of daylight onehalf hour after sunrise to onehalf hour before sunset .
section num num where night operations are permitted submit a night lighting system for approval .
include the light types locations and the manner in which the lights will be moved .
submit the proposed system at least num days before use .
use an independent source other than vehicle headlights .
do not use incandescent lights .
furnish and install the approved system to illuminate the entire work area .
position the lights so they do not shine directly at motorists traveling from any direction .
if the operation is moving move the lighting with the operation .
provide lighting at each flagger location .
equip vehicles with an exterior flashing yellow dome light .
num traffic control supervisor .
provide a traffic control supervisor according to subsection num .
do not designate the superintendent as the traffic control supervisor .
furnish the traffic control supervisors name address and numhour telephone numbers at the preconstruction conference .
during the contract including periods of suspensions and work stoppages perform the following a implement the traffic control plan .
b coordinate traffic control operations including those of subcontractors and suppliers .
c ensure the condition position and applicability of traffic control devices in use .
d immediately correct traffic control deficiencies .
e coordinate traffic control maintenance operations with the co. f coordinate and ensure that traffic control devices are furnished installed maintained removed stored replaced relocated and cleaned according to subsection num .
ensure unused traffic control devices are properly handled and stored .
g conduct weekly traffic safety meetings for construction workers and invite the co to these weekly meetings .
h submit a weekly certification that inspections and reviews were conducted and that the traffic control devices meet contract requirements .
include the number and types of devices in use .
report with the weekly certification changes or corrective actions taken to ensure the safe passage of public traffic through the project .
i inspect traffic control devices including those in staging storage material sources and disposal areas as follows num daily during daylight hours when daylight work is being performed num daily during hours of darkness when nighttime work is being performed num weekly during a daylight hours and hours of darkness when work is suspended for periods of more than one week except when the project has been shut down for the winter and b periods of winter suspension inspect only as requested by the co. num additional inspections day or night as directed by the co and num submit reports of inspections in an acceptable format within num days .
section num num j before winter suspension conduct an inspection of the project with the co to ensure proper provisions are made for winter travel during the period of suspension .
k provide temporary flagging assistance .
num acceptance .
public traffic work will be evaluated under subsection num .
traffic control devices and services will be evaluated under section num .
measurement and payment num do not measure controlling and protecting public traffic for payment .
see subsection num .
measure temporary traffic control under section num .
measure dust abatement under section num or num .
section num num section num .
soil erosion and sediment control description num this work consists of furnishing constructing and maintaining soil erosion and sediment control devices to eliminate or minimize pollutants in stormwater discharges from the project .
material num conform to the following subsections backfill material num concrete masonry unit numc fertilizer num fiber rolls and socks num floating turbidity curtains num gravel bags num mulch num plastic lining num prefabricated filter insert num riprap num rock mulch num sandbags num sediment filter bags num seed num separation and stabilization geotextile and geotextile filter numa silt fence num tackifiers numa temporary culvert pipe num temporary plastic fence num temporary rolled erosion control products num turf reinforcement mats num water numb construction requirements num qualifications .
submit the following for approval at least num days before earth disturbing operations begin a names of personnel responsible for soil erosion and sediment control and b a résumé for each individual describing their knowledge and experience providing erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention on highway or road construction projects for at least num years .
include certifications in those states where applicable .
num general .
provide soil erosion and sediment control measures according to the contract erosion and sediment control plan contract permits section num and this section .
contract permits amend the requirements of this section .
do not modify the type size or location of controls or practices without approval .
section num num the erosion and sediment control plan reflects special concerns and measures to protect resources .
an alternate erosion and sediment control or stormwater pollution prevention plan with necessary permits may be submitted for approval according to subsection num .
submit alternate erosion and sediment control proposals at least num days before their intended use .
when soil erosion and sediment control measures are not functioning as intended take corrective action to eliminate or minimize pollutants in stormwater discharges from the project .
if wood chips are used do not import without approval from the co. num controls and limitations on work .
before grubbing or grading construct sediment controls around the perimeter of the project including filter barriers diversion and settling structures .
limit the combined grubbing and grading operations areas to num acres num hectares of exposed soil at one time .
construct and implement soil erosion and sediment control measures as follows a construct temporary controls in incremental stages as construction proceeds b construct temporary slope drains diversion channels and earth berms to protect disturbed areas and slopes c when a soil disturbing activity within a portion of the project is complete apply permanent measures to the finished slopes and ditches within num days d when a soil disturbing activity within a portion of the project has temporarily ceased apply temporary measures within num days e construct outlet protection as soon as culverts or other structures are complete f construct and maintain soil erosion and sediment controls on and around soil stockpiles g following each days grading operations shape earthwork to minimize and control erosion from stormwater runoff and h maintain stabilized construction exits to minimize tracking of soil onto existing roads .
num filter barriers .
construct silt fence berms and fiber rolls and socks to reduce the velocity of runoff to allow sediment to settle .
num sediment retention structures .
construct sediment retention structures of the following types a temporary sediment traps .
construct temporary sediment traps to detain runoff from disturbed areas and settle out sediment .
provide outlet protection .
b sediment basins .
construct sediment basins to store runoff and settle out sediment for large drainage areas .
excavate and construct sediment basins according to section num .
construct riser pipes according to section num .
provide outlet protection .
section num num num outlet protection .
construct riprap aprons or basins to reduce water velocity and prevent scour at the outlet of permanent and temporary erosion and sediment control measures .
construct riprap according to section num .
num water crossings .
construct temporary culvert pipe at temporary crossings where construction vehicles cross a live waterway .
num diversions .
construct temporary channels temporary culverts earth berms or sandbags to divert water around disturbed areas and slopes .
use temporary channels temporary culverts pumps sandbags or other methods to divert the flow of live streams for permanent culvert installations and other work .
stabilize channels according to subsection num .
provide outlet protection .
num waterway and slope protection and stabilization .
use the following a plastic lining .
use plastic lining to protect underlying soil from erosion .
place the plastic lining loosely on a smooth soil surface free of projections or depressions that may cause the liner to puncture or tear .
lap transverse joints at least num feet num meter in the direction of flow .
do not use longitudinal joints .
anchor the lining in place using riprap gravel bags or sandbags .
b riprap .
construct riprap for channel lining according to section num. c check dams .
construct riprap gravel bags sandbags fiber rolls and socks or earth berms for temporary check dams to reduce the velocity of runoff in ditches and swales .
d rolled erosion control products .
use rolled erosion control products to stabilize waterways and slopes before or after temporary or permanent seeding .
install according to section num. e temporary slope drains .
use drainpipe riprap or plastic lined waterway for temporary slope drains to channel runoff down slopes .
channel water into the slope drain with an earth berm gravel bag or sandbag headwall constructed at the top of a cut or fill .
anchor slope drains to the slope .
provide outlet protection .
f floating turbidity curtains .
install floating turbidity curtains within a body of water to minimize the migration of silt laden water out of the construction area .
num temporary soil stabilization .
control soil erosion on unprotected slopes .
use the following a temporary cover .
use mulch plastic rolled erosion control product or tackifier .
apply according to the manufacturers recommendations or as approved by the co. b temporary turf establishment .
apply seed and mulch for soil erosion protection at the rates shown in table num .
protect and care for seeded areas including watering until permanent turf establishment is in place .
section num num table num application rates for temporary turf establishment material application rate poundsacre kilogramshectares seed num num wood fiber or grass straw cellulose fiber mulch num num num mulch applied using hydraulic method according to subsection numb .
for other mulch products and application methods use the manufacturers rate as approved by the co. num permanent soil stabilization .
control erosion on completed permanent slopes .
use the following a turf establishment .
apply seed fertilizer and mulch according to section num. b plants trees shrubs vines groundcovers and other plants .
furnish and plant trees shrubs vines groundcovers and other plants according to section num. c sod .
furnish and place sod of perennial turfforming grasses according to section num. d rock mulch .
furnish and place rock on finished surfaces .
num inspection and reporting .
inspect erosion and sediment control measures using approved personnel .
when there are no contract permits conduct erosion and sediment control inspections at least once every num days .
within num hours after each inspection submit an inspection report to the co .
include the following a date and time of the inspection b names and titles of persons making the inspection c summary of the inspection d weather since the last inspection or since the start of work if the first inspection .
for each storm event include the beginning date and time duration rainfall quantity in inches millimeters and whether discharge occurred e weather and description of discharges occurring during the inspection f locations of discharges or other pollutants from the site g locations of erosion and sediment control measures that need maintenance h locations of erosion and sediment control measures that failed to operate as designated or proved inadequate for a particular location i locations where additional erosion and sediment control measures are needed and j other necessary corrective actions including action taken locations dates and times .
section num num num maintenance and cleanup .
maintain temporary erosion and sediment control measures in working condition until the project is complete or the measures are no longer needed .
remove sediment trapped in perimeter protection control measures before deposits reach num percent of the above ground height .
remove sediment from sediment retention structures when their capacity is reduced to num percent of design capacity .
use removed sediment in the work if acceptable or dispose of it according to subsection num .
replace erosion and sediment control measures that can not be maintained and those that are damaged by construction operations .
remove and dispose of temporary erosion and sediment control measures when vegetation is satisfactorily established and drainage ditches and channels are lined and stabilized .
remove and dispose of erosion and sediment control measures according to subsection num .
restore the ground to its natural or intended condition and provide permanent erosion control measures .
num acceptance .
material for erosion and sediment control measures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction maintenance and removal of erosion and sediment control measures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
separation and stabilization geotextile and geotextile filter will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable .
measure temporary soil stabilization on the ground surface .
when measurement is by the pound kilogram weigh the seed in pounds kilograms .
measure excavation for diversion channels and sediment basins under section num .
measure riprap under section num .
measure permanent paved waterways under section num .
measure permanent turf establishment under section num .
measure plants trees shrubs vines groundcovers and other plants under section num .
measure sod under section num .
measure rolled erosion control products under section num .
do not measure replacement items .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for erosion control measures or devices will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount will be paid upon installation .
b an additional num percent of the pay item amount will be prorated based on total work complete .
c the remaining portion of the pay item amount will be paid when the temporary erosion control measure is removed from the project or at final acceptance .
section num num section num .
watering for dust control description num this work consists of furnishing and applying water for the control of dust caused by the work and public travel .
material num conform to the following subsection water numc construction requirements num general .
provide an adequate water supply and apply water uniformly across the traveled way as necessary to control dust .
uniformly apply water using pressuretype distributors pipelines equipped with spray systems or hoses with nozzles .
a project dust control for public benefit .
control dust within the construction limits as necessary including nights weekends and periods of nonwork when the project is open to public traffic .
when the project is not open to public traffic control dust in areas of the project that have adjacent residences or businesses .
control dust on approved active detours established for the project .
apply water at the locations rates and frequencies as ordered .
b other dust control .
control dust on active haul roads in pits and staging areas and on the project during periods not covered in subsection numa .
num acceptance .
water will be evaluated under subsection num .
furnishing and applying water will be evaluated under subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring water for dust control by volume or mass measure in the hauling vehicle or by metering .
do not measure water for dust control applied according to subsection numb .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num num division num earthwork section num num section num .
clearing and grubbing description num this work consists of clearing and grubbing within the clearing limits designated in the plans .
material num conform to the following subsections backfill material num tree wound dressing numg construction requirements num general .
construct erosion control measures according to section num .
perform work within designated limits .
do not damage vegetation designated to remain .
if damage occurs repair or replace the vegetation in an acceptable manner .
where possible preserve vegetation adjacent to bodies of water .
treat cuts or scarred surfaces of trees and shrubs with tree wound dressing .
num clearing .
within the clearing limits clear trees brush downed timber and other vegetation as follows a cut trees so they fall within the clearing limits b in areas of cut slope rounding cut stumps flush with or below the final groundline c in areas outside the excavation embankment and slope rounding limits cut stumps to within num inches num millimeters of the ground and d trim tree branches that extend over the road surface and shoulders to attain a clear height of num feet num meters .
if required remove other branches to present a balanced appearance .
trim according to accepted tree surgery practices .
treat wounds with tree wound dressing .
num grubbing .
grub deep enough to remove stumps roots buried logs moss turf or other vegetative debris as follows a grub areas to be excavated except for cut slope rounding areas b grub embankment areas .
undisturbed stumps less than num inches num millimeters in diameter may be left in place if they protrude less than num inches num millimeters above the original ground and will be covered with more than num inches num millimeters of embankment .
remove all other stumps c grub pits channel changes and ditches only to the depth necessary for the excavation and d backfill stump holes and other grubbing holes with backfill material to the level of the surrounding ground according to subsection num .
compact backfill according to subsection num .
section num num num disposal .
merchantable timber is the contractors property .
dispose of clearing and grubbing debris according to subsection num .
num acceptance .
clearing and grubbing will be evaluated under subsection num .
material for tree wound dressing will be evaluated under subsection num .
backfilling and compacting of stumps and grubbing holes will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable do not make deductions from the area computation unless excluded areas are shown in the plans .
do not measure clearing and grubbing of borrow or material sources .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
additional clearing and grubbing description num this work consists of clearing and grubbing outside the clearing limits specified in section num .
this work also includes scalloping clearing lines clearing vistas thinning vegetation special clearing and grubbing and the removal of individual trees and stumps .
num definitions .
a selective clearing .
clearing where some trees and vegetation is designated to remain .
b selective clearing and grubbing .
clearing and grubbing where some trees and vegetation is designated to remain .
c special clearing and grubbing .
clearing and grubbing where all trees and vegetation are removed .
d removal of individual trees or stumps .
removing individual trees or stumps outside the clearing limits designated in section num or outside areas designated in subsection num a through c. construction requirements num general .
clear and grub according to section num except as modified herein .
do not push pull or fall trees into trees designated to remain .
remove designated debris by methods that prevent damage to vegetation not designated to be removed .
dispose of clearing and grubbing debris according to subsection num .
num selective clearing .
clear and dispose of trees snags brush downed timber and other vegetation designated to be removed .
num selective clearing and grubbing .
clear grub and dispose of trees snags brush downed timber stumps roots buried logs moss turf grass and other vegetation designated to be removed .
num special clearing and grubbing .
clear grub and dispose of trees snags brush downed timber stumps roots buried logs moss turf grass and other vegetation .
num removal of individual trees or stumps .
remove and dispose of designated trees or stumps .
cut trees to within num inches num millimeters of the ground .
num acceptance .
additional clearing and grubbing work will be evaluated under subsection num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring removal of individual trees by the square foot square meter measure the average diameter at the cutoff .
do not measure trees less than num inches num millimeters in diameter at the cutoff .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
removal of structures and obstructions description num this work consists of salvaging removing and disposing of buildings fences structures pavements culverts utilities curbs sidewalks and other obstructions .
material num conform to the following section and subsection backfill material num minor concrete num construction requirements num salvaging material .
salvage with reasonable care material designated to be salvaged .
salvage in readily transportable sections or pieces .
replace or repair members pins nuts plates and related hardware damaged lost or destroyed during the salvage operation .
securely attach parts to adjacent members or pack them in sturdy boxes with the contents clearly marked .
match mark members of salvaged structures .
submit one set of drawings according to section num identifying the members and their respective match marks .
stockpile salvaged material at a designated area on the project .
num removing material .
a submittals .
submit a bridge removal plan at least num days before beginning bridge removal for approval .
include the following num methods and equipment to be used num measures to be used for protecting the environment public adjacent property and workers and num methods to keep debris out of the stream and streambed .
b general .
saw cut sidewalks curbs pavements and structures when partial removal is required .
construct structurally adequate debris shields to contain debris within the construction limits .
do not allow debris to enter waterways travel lanes open to public traffic or areas designated not to be disturbed .
handle material with lead paint contamination according to subsection num .
raze and remove buildings foundations pavements culverts sidewalks curbs fences structures and other obstructions interfering with the work and not designated to remain .
section num num remove structures and obstructions in the roadbed to num inches num millimeters below subgrade elevation .
remove structures and obstructions outside the roadbed to num inches num millimeters below finished ground or to the natural stream bottom .
abandon existing manholes inlets catch basins and spring boxes according to subsection num .
when abandoning an existing culvert pipe remove the upstream and downstream portion of the culvert to within num inches num millimeters of the subgrade or embankment slope .
ensure the abandoned pipe is at least num inches num millimeters from a new culvert or structure .
seal the abandoned culvert ends with a tightfitting plug of concrete at least num inches num millimeters thick .
ensure the structure does not entrap water .
except in excavation areas backfill and compact cavities left by structure removal with backfill material to the lines and grades of the finished ground .
backfill excavated areas according to subsection num .
compact backfill according to subsection num. c concrete removal in repair areas .
saw cut ¾ inch num millimeters deep along boundaries of repair areas .
use powerdriven hand tools to remove existing concrete .
do not damage concrete designated to remain in place .
where the bond between existing concrete and reinforcing steel is destroyed remove concrete adjacent to the steel to provide at least ¾inch nummillimeter clearance for the new concrete to bond to the reinforcing steel .
use care to prevent damage to remaining concrete when achieving the final surface .
clean exposed concrete surfaces that will be in contact with repair material .
provide a residue free surface .
d reinforcing steel .
do not cut or damage reinforcing steel designated to remain in place .
repair or replace damaged bars .
replace deteriorated bars as directed by the co. clean exposed reinforcing steel of coatings or residue that inhibits bonding with the new concrete .
protect the steel from corrosion and contamination .
if the steel becomes corroded or contaminated reclean the steel before placing concrete .
num disposing of material .
dispose of debris unsuitable material and excess material as follows a remove from project .
recycle or dispose of material legally off the project .
submit a statement documenting the nature and quantity of material processed or sold for recycling .
otherwise submit a signed copy of the disposal agreement before disposal begins .
b burn .
obtain necessary burning permits .
submit a copy of the burning permits before burning begins .
burn using high intensity burning processes that produce few emissions .
provide a watchperson during the burning operations .
when burning is complete extinguish the fire so no smoldering debris remains .
dispose of unburned material according to subsection numa .
section num num c bury .
bury debris in trenches or pits in approved areas within the rightofway when approved .
do not bury debris inside the roadway prism limits beneath drainage ditches or in areas subject to freeflowing water .
place debris in alternating layers of num inches num millimeters of debris covered with num inches num millimeters of earth material .
distribute stumps logs and other large pieces to form a dense mass and minimize air voids .
cover the top layer of buried debris with at least num inches num millimeters of compacted earth .
grade and shape the area .
seed and mulch disposal areas on government property according to section num. d hazardous material .
submit a copy of disposal permits .
dispose of material according to federal state and local regulations .
dispose of lead contaminated steel either by transporting to an approved scrap facility for recycling or remelt or remove and dispose of lead contamination in an appropriate waste facility .
num disposal plan .
submit a detailed disposal plan that includes how material will be handled loaded and transported to the disposal facility .
include the name and address of the facility where the material will be taken .
describe steps that will be taken to ensure that lead contamination will be contained throughout the process .
measures may include additional steps or precautions when lifting and handling the steel on site .
num transport and delivery .
include the material safety data sheet msds with the material to the disposal facility .
ensure that loads transported from the site are adequately contained and covered to prevent dispersion en route to the disposal facility .
submit a copy of the receiving report from the disposal facility specifically acknowledging that the material being delivered is contaminated with lead paint .
num lead paint removal .
if the contractor chooses to salvage the steel members the paint may be removed subject to the following requirements a remove lead contaminated paint in an appropriate containment facility b comply with the requirements as listed in subsection num and c manifest and dispose of lead contaminated waste according to the requirements of num cfr num through num resource conservation and recovery act rcra .
num acceptance .
removal of structures and obstructions will be evaluated under subsection num .
backfilling and compacting cavities left by structures will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
excavation and embankment description num this work consists of excavating material and constructing embankments .
this work also includes furnishing hauling stockpiling placing disposing sloping shaping compacting and finishing earthen and rocky material .
num definitions .
a excavation .
excavation consists of the following num roadway excavation .
material excavated from within the rightofway or easement areas except subexcavation covered in subsection numanum and structure excavation covered in sections num and num .
roadway excavation includes all material encountered regardless of its nature or characteristics .
num subexcavation .
material excavated from below subgrade elevation in cut sections or from below the original groundline in embankment sections .
subexcavation excludes the work required by subsection num or num .
num borrow excavation .
material used for embankment construction that is obtained from outside the roadway prism .
borrow excavation includes unclassified borrow select borrow and topping .
b embankment construction .
embankment construction consists of placing and compacting roadway or borrow excavation .
this work includes num preparing foundation for embankment num constructing roadway embankments num benching for sidehill embankments num constructing dikes ramps mounds and berms and num backfilling subexcavated areas holes pits and other depressions .
c conserved topsoil .
excavated material conserved from the roadway excavation and embankment foundation areas that is suitable for growth of grass cover crops or native vegetation .
d waste .
excess and unsuitable roadway excavation and subexcavation that can not be used .
section num num material num conform to the following subsections select borrow num topping num unclassified borrow num water numc construction requirements num preparation for roadway excavation and embankment construction .
clear the area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
road pioneering may proceed concurrently with excavation and embankment .
maintain drainage during pioneering operations .
num conserved topsoil .
conserve topsoil from roadway excavation and embankment foundation areas .
stockpile conserved topsoil in low windrows immediately beyond the rounding limits of cut and embankment slopes or in other approved locations .
separate topsoil from other excavated material .
place conserved topsoil on completed slopes according to section num .
num roadway excavation .
excavate as follows a rock cuts .
blast rock according to section num .
excavate rock cuts to num inches num millimeters below subgrade within the roadbed limits .
backfill to subgrade with topping or other suitable material .
compact the material according to subsection num. b earth cuts .
scarify earth cuts to num inches num millimeters below subgrade within the roadbed limits .
compact the scarified material according to subsection num .
dispose of unsuitable or excess excavation material according to subsection num .
replace shortage of suitable material caused by premature disposal of roadway excavation .
shape to drain and compact the work area to a uniform crosssection at the end of each days operations .
num subexcavation .
excavate material to the required limits .
dispose of unsuitable material according to subsection num .
take crosssections according to section num .
place backfill material in horizontal layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness and compact according to subsection num .
prevent unsuitable material from mixing with backfill .
num borrow excavation .
use suitable roadway excavation in embankment construction .
do not use borrow excavation when it results in excess roadway excavation .
deduct excess borrow excavation from the total borrow excavation quantity .
obtain borrow source approval according to subsection num .
develop and restore borrow sources according to subsections num and num .
do not excavate beyond the established limits .
when applicable shape the borrow source to permit accurate measurements when excavation is complete .
section num num num preparing foundation for embankment construction .
prepare foundation for embankment construction as follows a embankment over natural ground .
remove topsoil and break up the ground surface to a minimum depth of num inches num millimeters by plowing or scarifying .
compact the ground surface according to subsection num. b embankments over an existing asphalt concrete or gravel road surface .
scarify gravel roads to a minimum depth of num inches num millimeters .
scarify or pulverize asphalt and concrete roads to num inches num millimeters below the pavement .
reduce particles to a maximum size of num inches num millimeters and produce a uniform material .
compact the surface according to subsection num. c embankment across ground not capable of supporting equipment .
dump successive loads of embankment material in a uniformly distributed layer to construct the lower portion of the embankment .
limit the layer thickness to the minimum depth necessary to support the equipment .
d embankment on an existing slope steeper than numvnumh .
cut horizontal steps in the existing slope to a sufficient width to accommodate placement and compaction operations and equipment .
step the slope as the embankment is placed and compacted in layers .
begin each step at the intersection of the original ground and the vertical cut of the previous step .
num embankment construction .
incorporate only suitable roadway excavation material into the embankment .
when the supply of suitable roadway excavation is exhausted furnish unclassified borrow to complete the embankment .
construct embankments as follows a general .
at the end of each days operations shape to drain and compact the embankment surface to a uniform crosssection .
eliminate ruts and low spots that could hold water .
during all stages of construction route and distribute hauling and leveling equipment over the width and length of each layer of material .
compact embankment side slopes with a tamping foot roller by walking with a dozer or by overbuilding the fill and then removing excess material to the final slope line .
for slopes numvnum¾h or steeper compact the slopes as embankment construction progresses .
b embankment within the roadway prism .
place embankment material in horizontal layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness .
incorporate oversize boulders or rock fragments into the numinch nummillimeter layers by reducing them in size or placing them individually as required by subsection numc .
compact each layer according to subsection num before placing the next layer .
material composed predominately of boulders or rock fragments too large for numinch nummillimeter layers may be placed in layers up to num inches num millimeters thick .
incorporate oversize boulders or rock fragments into the numinch nummillimeter layer by reducing them in size or placing individual rock fragments and boulders greater than num inches num millimeters in diameter as follows num reduce rock to less than num inches num millimeters in the largest dimension num distribute rock within the embankment to prevent nesting section num num num place layers of embankment material around each rock to a depth not greater than that permitted by subsection numb .
fill voids between rocks and num compact each layer according to subsection numa before placing the next layer .
c embankment outside of roadway prism .
when placing embankment outside the staked roadway prism place material in horizontal layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness .
compact each layer according to subsection num .
num compaction .
for compaction use aashto t num to determine the quantity of material retained on a no .
num nummillimeter sieve .
compact as follows a more than num percent retained on a no .
num nummillimeter sieve .
adjust the moisture content to a level suitable for compaction .
fill the interstices around rock with earth or other fine material as practical .
use compressiontype rollers at speeds less than num feet num meters per second and vibratory rollers at speeds less than num feet num meter per second .
compact each layer of material full width with one of the following and until there is no visible evidence of further consolidation num four roller passes of a vibratory roller having a minimum dynamic force of num pounds num kilonewtons impact per vibration and a minimum frequency of num vibrations per minute num eight roller passes of a numton nummetric ton compressiontype roller or num eight roller passes of a vibratory roller having a minimum dynamic force of num pounds num kilonewtons impact per vibration and a minimum frequency of num vibrations per minute .
increase the compactive effort for layers deeper than num inches num millimeters as follows for each additional num inches num millimeters or fraction thereof increase the number of roller passes in subsection numanum by four passes or for each additional num inches num millimeters or fraction thereof increase the number of roller passes in subsection numanum and num by eight passes .
b num to num percent retained on a no .
num nummillimeter sieve .
classify the material according to aashto m num .
adjust the moisture content of material classified anum through anum to a moisture content suitable for compaction .
adjust the moisture content of material classified anum and anum to within num percent of the optimum moisture content .
use aashto t num to determine the optimum moisture content of the portion of the material passing a no .
num nummillimeter sieve .
multiply this number by the percentage of material passing a no .
num nummillimeter sieve and add num percent to determine the optimum moisture content of the material .
use nonvibratory rollers at speeds less than num feet num meters per second and vibratory rollers at speeds less than num feetnum meter per second .
compact each layer of material full width according to subsection numa .
c less than num percent retained on a no .
num nummillimeter sieve .
classify the material according to aashto m num .
for material classified anum or anum determine the maximum density according to aashto t num method d. for other material classifications determine the optimum moisture content and maximum density according to aashto t num method c. section num num adjust the moisture content of material classified anum through anum to a moisture content suitable for compaction .
adjust the moisture content of material classified anum and anum to within num percent of the optimum moisture content .
use compressiontype or vibratory rollers .
compact each layer of material full width to at least num percent of the maximum density .
determine the inplace density and moisture content according to aashto t num or other approved test procedures .
when required use aashto t num to correct for coarse particles .
num ditches .
slope grade and shape ditches .
remove projecting roots stumps rock or similar matter .
maintain ditches in an open condition and without sticks and other debris .
form furrow ditches by plowing or using other acceptable methods to produce a continuous furrow .
place excavated material on the downhill side so the bottom of the ditch is approximately num inches num millimeters below the crest of the loose material .
clean the ditch using a hand shovel or other suitable method .
shape to provide drainage without overflow .
num sloping shaping and finishing .
complete slopes ditches culverts riprap and other underground minor structures before placing aggregate courses .
slope shape and finish as follows a sloping .
leave earth slopes with uniform roughened surfaces except as described in subsection numb with no noticeable break as viewed from the road .
except in solid rock round tops and bottoms of slopes including the slopes of drainage ditches .
round material overlaying solid rock to the extent practical .
scale rock slopes .
if a slide or slipout occurs on a cut or embankment slope remove or replace the material and repair or restore damage to the work .
bench or key the slope to stabilize the slide .
reshape the cut or embankment slope to an acceptable condition .
b stepped slopes .
where required construct steps on slopes of num⅓vnumh to numvnumh .
construct the steps approximately num inches num millimeters high .
blend the steps into natural ground at the end of the cut .
if the slope contains nonrippable rock outcrops blend steps into the rock .
remove loose material found in transitional area .
except for removing large rocks that may fall scaling stepped slopes is not required .
c shaping .
shape the subgrade to a smooth surface and to the crosssection required .
shape slopes to gradually transition into slope adjustments without noticeable breaks .
at the ends of cuts and at intersections of cuts and embankments adjust slopes in the horizontal and vertical planes to blend into each other or into the natural ground .
d finishing .
remove material larger than num inches num millimeters from the top num inches num millimeters of the roadbed .
remove unsuitable material from the roadbed and replace it with suitable material .
finish roadbeds that are compacted according to subsection numb and c to within num foot num millimeters of the staked line and grade .
finish roadbeds that are compacted according to subsection numa to within num foot num millimeters of the staked line and grade .
finish ditch crosssections to within num feet num millimeters of the staked line and grade .
maintain proper ditch drainage .
num disposal of unsuitable or excess material .
dispose of unsuitable or excess material according to subsection numa .
section num num when there is a pay item for waste shape and compact the waste material in its final location .
do not mix clearing or other material not subject to payment with the waste material .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for embankment and conserved topsoil will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and embankment construction will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
subexcavation will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable a roadway excavation .
measure roadway excavation in its original position as follows num include the following volumes in roadway excavation a roadway prism excavation b rock material excavated and removed from below subgrade in cut sections c unsuitable material below subgrade and unsuitable material beneath embankment areas when a pay item for subexcavation is not listed in the bid schedule d ditches except furrow ditches measured under a separate pay item e conserved topsoil f borrow material used in the work when a pay item for borrow is not listed in the bid schedule g loose scattered rocks removed and placed as required within the roadway h conserved material taken from preexisting stockpiles and used in section num work except topsoil measured under section num and i slide and slipout material not attributable to the contractors method of operation .
num do not include the following in roadway excavation a overburden and other spoil material from borrow sources b overbreakage from the backslope in rock excavation c water or other liquid material d material used for purposes other than required e roadbed material scarified in place and not removed f material excavated when stepping cut slopes g material excavated when rounding cut slopes section num num h preparing foundations for embankment construction i material excavated when benching for embankments j slide or slipout material attributable to the contractors method of operation k conserved material taken from stockpiles constructed at the option of the contractor l material excavated outside the established slope limits and m road pioneering for the convenience of the contractor .
num when both roadway excavation and embankment construction pay items are listed in the bid schedule measure roadway excavation only for the following a unsuitable material below subgrade in cuts and unsuitable material beneath embankment areas when a pay item for subexcavation is not listed in the bid schedule b slide and slipout material not attributable to the contractors method of operations and c drainage ditches channel changes and diversion ditches .
b unclassified borrow select borrow and topping .
when measuring by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in its original position .
if borrow excavation is measured by the cubic yard cubic meter inplace take initial crosssections of the ground surface after stripping overburden .
upon completion of excavation and after the borrow source waste material is returned to the source retake crosssections before replacing the overburden .
do not measure borrow excavation until suitable roadway excavation is depleted .
c embankment construction .
measure embankment construction in its final position .
do not make deductions from the embankment construction quantity for the volume of minor structures .
num include the following volumes in embankment construction a roadway embankments b material used to backfill subexcavated areas holes pits and other depressions c material used to restore obliterated roadbeds to original contours and d material used for dikes ramps mounds and berms .
num do not include the following in embankment construction a preparing foundations for embankment construction b adjustments for subsidence or settlement of the embankment or of the foundation on which the embankment is placed and c material used to round fill slopes .
d rounding cut slopes .
measure rounding cut slopes horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
section num num e waste .
measure waste by the cubic yard cubic meter in its final position .
take initial crosssections of the ground surface after stripping overburden .
upon completion of the waste placement retake crosssections before replacing overburden .
f slope scaling .
measure slope scaling by the cubic yard cubic meter in the hauling vehicle .
g subexcavation .
measure subexcavation by the cubic yard cubic meter in its original position .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time source topping num measured and tested for conformance num num classificationnum aashto m num num per soil type and source of material source of material yes before using in work unclassified borrow num select borrow num gradation aashto t num t num liquid limit aashto r num t num method a section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time production topping num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method dnum or t num method cnum num per soil type but not less than num per each num ydnum num mnum processed material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per layer inplace no before placement of next layer unclassified borrow num moisture density aashto t num method dnum or t num method cnum num per soil type but not less than num per each num ydnum num mnum processed material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per layer inplace no before placement of next layer section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time production continued select borrow num measured and tested for conformance num classification aashto m num num per soil type but not less than num for each day of production processed material yes before using in work gradation aashto t num t num liquid limit aashto r num t num method a moisture density aashto t num method dnum or t num method cnum num per soil type but not less than num per each num ydnum num mnum density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per layer inplace no before placement of next layer section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time production continued earth embankment num measured and tested for conformance num classification aashto m num num per soil type source of material yes before using in work moisture density aashto t num method dnum or t num method cnum num per soil type but not less than num per each num ydnum num mnum density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per layer inplace no before placement of next layer top of subgrade num density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per layer inplace no before placement of next layer finished product roadbed num measured and tested for conformance num final line grade field measured determined by the co determined by the co no before placement of next layer num not required when using governmentprovided source .
num minimum num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
rock blasting description num this work consists of rock fragmentation blasting using production and controlled blasting techniques to construct engineered rock cuts .
num definitions .
a production blasting .
blasting using widely spaced blast holes that typically contain larger explosive charges to expedite movement and fragmentation for rock removal .
b controlled blasting .
blasting that includes presplit blasting and cushion blasting hole techniques .
controlled blasting uses closelyspaced and carefully aligned blast holes that typically contain lighter charges than production holes to produce stable aesthetically pleasing rock faces with minimal blast damage .
controlled blast holes are the first row of blast holes normally located within num inches num millimeters of the top of the staked slope .
num presplit blasting .
presplit blasting detonates closely spaced backslope holes before drilling for production blasting or before detonating the production blasting holes to produce a highly controlled smooth cut face .
num cushion blasting .
cushion blasting is similar to presplitting except that the detonation of the cushion holes along the backslope is detonated immediately after the detonation of the production and buffer holes generally resulting in a more natural cut face appearance .
construction requirements num regulations .
comply with federal state and local regulations for the purchase transportation storage and use of explosive material .
federal regulations include the following a safety and health .
osha num cfr part num subpart u. b storage security and accountability .
bureau of alcohol tobacco and firearms batf num cfr part num commerce in explosives .
c shipment .
dot num cfr parts num num. d national park service .
for projects in national park service lands comply with national park service directors order no .
num explosives use and blasting safety .
num qualifications .
submit the following for approval at least num days before drilling and blasting operations begin a blasterincharge .
furnish an individual who can directly supervise the drilling and blasting crew during drilling loading and detonation of charges .
include the following num name of blasterincharge section num num num a résumé showing at least num years experience as a blasterincharge on projects with similar work num copy of a valid blaster license accepted by the state where the project is located for the type of blasting required and num five references with knowledge of qualifications and reliability .
include name relationship and current telephone number for each reference .
b blasting crew personnel .
names of personnel and evidence they have completed at least num hours of blasting safety training in the last num years or have at least num years of blasting experience .
c drillers .
names and evidence they are proficient in drilling methods required to perform the work .
d vibration specialist .
name and résumé showing at least num years experience as a vibration specialist on projects with similar work .
num blasting plans .
submit proof of applicable permits licenses and a general blasting plan signed by the blasterincharge at least num days before drilling and blasting operations .
blasting plans are not required for boulder reduction blasts mudcapping or blockholing .
a general blasting plan .
submit a general blasting plan for review and approval by the co .
include the following num procedures and safety precautions for transporting handling storing loading and detonating explosives conducting pre and postblast surveys monitoring blasts managing misfires and removing and disposing of excess explosives .
num explosives transportation and storage plan including a name address and telephone number of explosives suppliers b description and license number of explosives transport vehicles routes to be traveled proposed hours of travel and driver qualifications c magazine and daybox locations d explosives and accessories inventory system and e contact information for the person responsible for security of project blasting material and supplies .
num area security plan including explosives and general site security methods of site communication pre and postblast signage and audible signaling systems road closure requirements and preblast notification for affected agencies or entities .
num manufacturers msds and product data sheets for proposed explosives primers initiators and related blasting devices and accessories .
num excavation plans and equipment lists for preblast scaling and pioneered access roads and benches for drilling and blasting operations .
section num num num typical plan and section views for both production and controlled blasting including stationing intended for each typical plan maximum blast length free face burden hole spacing hole inclination hole depth hole diameter stemming depth subdrill depth powder factor charge per delay initiation method and sequence and delay times .
num methods for limiting dust and noise .
num fire watch plan including number of postblast observers and duration of the fire watch .
num contingency plan for blast flyrock containment including the names and qualifications of those responsible for preparing containment system designs .
do not deliver explosives to the project until the general blasting plan is accepted .
submit revisions and updates within num hours of changes in the above information .
b sitespecific blasting plans and general plan revisions and updates .
submit sitespecific blasting plans after approval of the general blasting plan or at times there is a change in drilling and blasting methods provided in the general blasting plan .
allow num days for approval .
do not begin drilling until the plan is approved .
include the following num proposed excavation sequence num station limits and plan view of the proposed blast showing how the proposed blast fits into the lift excavation sequence num elevations of the tops and bottoms of each lift num scaled drawings for each blast showing access containment plan and section views of drill patterns clearing limits free face burden blast hole locations blast hole spacing subdrill depths lift height blast hole diameters and blast hole angles num loading diagram for each blast showing powder factor charge per delay type and quantity of explosives primers initiators locations of decking and range of stemming depths for substantial variations within the drill pattern num initiation method and sequence of blast holes for each blast .
include delay times delay system and down hole firing times num flyrock control measures num estimated volume of inplace rock to be blasted .
include the total length of production and controlled blast hole num location and orientation of significant joints fractures faulting bedding planes or other rock mass structural features to be accounted for in the sitespecific blasting plan and num postblast rockfall containment designs and procedures .
num preblast condition survey and vibration monitoring and control .
the contractor is responsible for damage resulting from blast related ground vibrations and airblast overpressures .
determine the need for vibration monitoring depending on soil and rock conditions blasting parameters as outlined in the blasting plan and proximity of buildings structures utilities and sensitive natural features that may be subject to damage from ground vibrations or airblasts .
if vibration monitoring is required conform to the following requirements section num num a if not specified in the contract establish referenceable blasting criteria for buildings structures utilities and natural features that conform to federal state or local regulations .
present blasting criteria in terms of distance of the facility or feature from blasting maximum allowable peak particle velocity limits versus structure type maximum allowable peak particle velocity versus peak frequency and air overpressure structure damage limits .
b conduct a preblast condition survey of nearby buildings structures utilities and natural features potentially damaged by blastingrelated ground vibrations or airblast .
document the natural frequency of each affected structure or feature .
use a survey method acceptable to the contractors insurance company .
submit a copy of preblast condition survey records with the sitespecific blasting plans for co review .
c control ground vibrations and airblast overpressures with properly designed delay sequences and maximum allowable charge weights per delay .
verify allowable charge weights per delay by conducting representative trial blasts and measuring ground vibrations and airblast overpressure levels .
conduct test blasts with blast plan modifications that limit ground vibrations and airblast overpressures to levels that will not cause damage to nearby buildings structures utilities and natural features as determined by the vibration specialist .
d when ground vibration or airblast damage is possible monitor each blast with digital recording seismographs and airblast monitoring equipment calibrated within the last year and approved by the co .
locate monitoring equipment as directed by the vibration specialist .
place at least three recording stations between the blast area and closest susceptible structures utilities or natural features .
place at least one station on the structure .
for ground vibration monitoring use seismographs capable of recording particle velocity displacement and acceleration for three mutually perpendicular components of vibration .
use a seismograph with a lower linear response limit over the response frequency range of not more than num hertz and upper limit not less than num hertz .
use sensors having lower thresholds not higher than num inches num millimeters num inches num millimeters per second and numg .
use seismographs capable of producing a permanent digital time history file for each ground motion episode .
ensure blasting operations incorporate collected data and findings from vibration monitoring by having the vibration specialist interpret seismograph and airblast records .
num test blasting .
before beginning fullscale drilling and blasting demonstrate adequacy of the sitespecific blasting plan by drilling blasting and excavating a test blast of up to num cubic yards num cubic meters with proposed containment measures inplace .
conduct the test at an approved location within the planned excavation area .
a test blast is unacceptable when it results in oversized fragmentation excessive or uncontrolled flyrock potentially damaging ground vibrations or airblasts unplanned overbreak excessive damage to the final rock face or unwanted overhangs .
when a test blast is unacceptable revise the sitespecific blasting plan and conduct an additional test blasts until the combination of blast hole pattern spacing controlled blast hole alignment and charges produce acceptable results .
num blasting .
use explosives and initiating devices less than numyear old .
locate explosives magazines at sites approved by the co .
inspect the preblast area and submit the proposed extent of preblast clearing and scaling for approval .
section num num use angle or fandrilled holes as needed during initial pioneering operations to obtain the desired face .
controlled blasting requirements are applicable to pioneering work .
record and maintain a log of each blast hole drilled identifying the depth color and character of the cuttings penetration rate hole collar location and hole orientation and other pertinent information .
before initiating the blast prepare a blast plan map and submit it showing designated hole numbers along with individual hole logs completed dated and signed by the driller .
ensure blast holes are free of obstructions for the entire depth before placing charges .
take necessary precautions when placing charges so caving of material from the walls of the holes and the hole collar will not occur .
mitigate uncontrolled gas pressure loss during blasting and excessive blast noise by stemming the upper portion of blast holes with appropriate dry granular material passing the ½inch nummillimeter sieve .
do not stem holes with drill cuttings .
blast according to the approved sitespecific blasting plan .
use blasting mats rockfall containment systems and other protective devices to prevent damage to surrounding features .
stop drilling and blasting operations and submit a revised sitespecific blasting plan according to subsection numb when the following occur slopes are unstable slopes exceed overbreak tolerances unwanted overhangs ridges or ledges are created excessive blast damage occurs poor fragmentation results in oversize material requiring secondary blasting and rehandling safety of the public is jeopardized property or natural features are endangered excessive or uncontrolled flyrock is generated excessive ground vibration or airblast overpressures occurs where damage to buildings structures utilities or natural features is possible or desired slope or rock face conditions are not produced .
remove or stabilize cut face rock that is loose hanging or potentially dangerous after each blast .
scale by methods approved by the co. leave minor irregularities or surface variations in place if they do not create a hazard .
excavate and remove material outside of the planned neat line slopes which is unstable and constitutes a potential hazard .
do not drill the next lift until slope stabilization and blast cleanup work is complete .
a production blasting .
when conducting cushion blasting or presplitting drill a lighterloaded buffer row of production holes on a parallel plane adjacent to the controlled blast line to minimize blast damage to the final slope .
section num num drill production blast holes a maximum of num inches num millimeters in diameter to a sufficient depth such that unbroken rock does not extend above the finish surface .
drill production blast holes to the design depth .
if more than num percent of the production blast holes in a lift do not conform to the design depth requirements redrill the shallow holes to the proper .
except when subdrilling do not drill production blast holes below the base plane of the controlled blast holes .
drill production blast holes within two drill hole diameters of the planned collar location .
if more than num percent of the drill hole collars in a lift are out of tolerance fill each hole outside of the location tolerance with crushed stone and redrill at the proper .
detonate production holes in a controlled delay sequence .
b controlled blasting .
use angled or fan drilled holes for pioneering the tops of rock cuts and preparing working platforms .
use equipment or methods approved by the co for areas not accessible to track drill equipment .
before drilling completely remove overburden soil and loose or decomposed rock along the top of the excavation for a distance of at least num feet num meters beyond the end of the production hole drilling limits or to the end of the cut .
use controlled blasting to form the final cut face on rock cuts where the staked slope ratio is num⅓vnumh or steeper and the slope height is more than num feet num meters above the ditch grade .
use drilling equipment that accurately controls the angle the drill as it enters the rock .
select a lift height and conduct drilling operations so the blast hole spacing and downhole alignment does not vary more than num inches num millimeters from the proposed spacing and alignment .
if more than num percent of the holes exceed the variance reduce the lift height and modify drilling operations until the holes are within tolerance .
drill holes a maximum of num inches num millimeters in diameter and within num inches num millimeters of the staked collar location .
fill and redrill blast holes outside of the location tolerance when more than num percent of the hole collars in a lift are outside of the location tolerance use crushed stone to fill the blast holes before redrilling .
drill the controlled blast hole line at least num feet num meters beyond loaded production holes or to the end of the cut .
do not exceed num feet num meters for bench height or drill hole length .
limit subdrilling of holes to onehalf of the hole spacing or num inches num millimeters whichever is deeper .
offset lifts up to num inches num millimeters horizontally to allow for drill equipment clearance .
remove benches resulting from the drilling offset .
compensate for drift that may occur in the upper lifts .
adjust the drill inclination angle or the initial drill collar location to obtain the required typical section .
limit drilling to onehalf of the hole spacing or num inches num millimeters whichever is deeper .
do not use bulk ammonium nitrate and fuel oil for controlled blasting .
only standard explosives manufactured specifically for controlled blasting will be used in controlled blast holes unless approved by the co .
section num num maximum diameter of explosives used in controlled blast holes will be no greater than onehalf the diameter of the presplit hole .
num presplitting .
do not presplit final slopes and rock faces .
when presplitting is allowed in the plans either presplit along the slope face before drilling for production blasting or presplit the slope face in conjunction with production blasting .
num cushion blasting .
perform cushion blasting to produce rough natural looking rock slopes .
use the existing geologic structure to create rock surfaces terraces and ridges that blend with adjacent undisturbed rock faces .
preserve existing rock outcrops to the extent practical to vary the cut face slope composition color and texture .
num horizontal blasting .
with co approval only use horizontal drill holes instead of or in conjunction with vertical cushion blasting drill holes to produce natural looking rock slopes mitigate drill hole traces assist pioneering access for drill bench excavation or to excavate sliver rock cuts where vertical drilling is not feasible .
when required preserve or create soil pockets and ledges for revegetation .
locate size and shape these features to replicate the vegetated areas on the undisturbed rock faces .
incorporate these features into the sitespecific blasting plans .
do not create features by overshooting or selectively removing damaged rock .
num reporting .
a postblast .
prepare an postblast report for blasts .
submit the report within num days following a blast and before drilling for the next blast .
include the following num results of the blast overbreak blast damage noise levels flyrock drill trace retention fragmentation material containment material rehandling requirements and misfires submit proposed changes for future sitespecific blasting plans that will produce acceptable results if blasting objectives were not met .
submit proposed repairs or stabilization plans for unstable or blast damaged backslopes num a detailed blasting plan amended to show significant changes in pattern loading or timing num drilling logs for each hole completed dated and signed by the driller that identify the depth color and character of the cuttings .
also include the penetration rate hole collar location hole orientation and conditions that adversely affected drilling or explosives loading operations num depth measurements of production and controlled blast holes num a drawing or sketch showing the direction of blast the face or faces hole numbers and the physical blast layout num measurement of overbreak quantities following lift mucking num date and time of loading and detonating the blast and num name and signature of the blasterincharge .
b vibration and airblast reporting .
submit a vibration and airblast report within num days of a blast for review by the co. do not drill until directed by the co .
include the following num type of vibration or airblast recording station used and instrument identification numbers section num num num name of vibration specialist observing the blast and interpreting vibration and airblast data num blast identification number and location of blast num distance and direction of ground vibration and airblast overpressure recording stations from the blast area num type of material ground vibration recording stations were sitting on at the time of the blast num maximum applicable charge weight per delay num peak displacement particle velocity and frequency recorded at each ground vibration sensor location num peak overpressure recorded at each airblast sensor location num dated and signed copy of all instrument records num postblast condition survey noting changes from the preblast survey and num comments on success of the blast in terms of adherence to established ground vibration or air blast criteria and management practices .
when failing to meet ground vibration and airblast criteria and management objectives submit proposed changes to future sitespecific blasting plans that will produce acceptable results .
c closeout .
submit a written statement signed by the blasterincharge certifying num blastholes loaded with explosive material have been either detonated or unloaded and disposed of properly and num blasting is complete and explosive material has been removed from the project site .
num acceptance .
material for rock blasting will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
rock blasting will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring controlled blasting by the square foot square meter measure the face blast as shown in the blasting plan .
when measuring controlled blast holes by the linear foot meter measure the actual length of drilling recorded in the post blast reports .
controlled blast hole includes the row of holes lying closest to the trim line .
do not measure presplit blast holes whose misalignment is more than num inches num millimeters .
do not measure production blast holes .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num section num .
reserved section num num section num .
earthwork geosynthetics description num this work consists of furnishing and installing geotextile in separation stabilization and filter applications geogrid in stabilization applications and geomembrane in moisture barrier applications .
geosynthethics are designated according to the tables in section num .
material num conform to the following subsections geomembrane num geotextile num stabilization geogrid num construction requirements num general .
identify store and handle geosynthetics according to astm dnum and the manufacturers recommendations .
elevate and protect geosynthetic rolls with a waterproof cover if stored outdoors .
limit geosynthetics exposure to less than num days of ultraviolet radiation .
for seams sewn onsite conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
obtain approval of the seam before installation .
use thread consisting of high strength polypropylene or polyester .
do not use nylon thread .
use thread that is resistant to ultraviolet radiation and a contrasting color to the geotextile .
submit a seam assembly description and a sample of the sewn material at least num days before installation when geosynthetic joints are sewn as follows a assembly description .
include the seam type seam allowance stitch type sewing thread tex ticket numbers and types stitch density and stitch gauge .
b sewn seam samples .
sew seam samples using the same equipment and procedures used to sew production seams .
submit samples that have at least num feet num meters of sewn seam and are at least num feet num meters wide .
if production seams are sewn in both the machine and crossmachine directions provide sewn seam samples that are oriented in both the machine and crossmachine directions .
replace or repair geosynthetic that is torn or punctured .
remove the damaged area and place a patch of the same type of geosynthetic overlapping num inches num millimeters beyond the damaged area or sew a seam around the damaged area .
num geotextile and geogrid separation and stabilization applications .
a surface preparation .
before placing the geotextile geogrid or both prepare the surface as follows section num num num existing ground .
cut trees and shrubs flush with the ground surface .
do not remove the topsoil and vegetation mat .
clear the area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
remove sharp objects and large rocks .
fill depressions or holes with suitable material to provide a smooth surface .
num subgrade .
prepare the subgrade according to subsections numc and d. num subexcavation .
perform subexcavation according to subsection num. b geotextile or geogrid placement .
place geogrid on top of geotextile when both are shown at the same elevation in the plans .
place the geosynthetic smooth taut and wrinkle free on the underlying surface .
conform to curves .
overlap in the direction of construction .
overlap at least num inches num millimeters at the ends and sides of adjoining sheets or sew the joints according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not place longitudinal overlaps below anticipated wheel loads .
hold the geosynthetic in place with pins staples or piles of cover material .
c backfilling .
num first layer placement and compaction .
end dump the backfill material onto the geotextile or geogrid from the edge of the geosynthetic or from previously placed cover material .
do not operate equipment directly on the geosynthetic .
spread the enddumped pile of cover material maintaining a num inch num millimeters lift over the geosynthetic .
avoid sudden stops starts or turns of the construction equipment .
fill ruts from construction equipment with additional cover material .
do not blade material down to remove ruts .
if rutting exceeds num inches num millimeters during placement decrease the construction equipment size decrease the equipment weight or increase the first lift thickness as directed by the co .
compact according to subsection num .
do not use sheepsfoot or studded compaction equipment .
compact the cover material with pneumatictire or nonvibratory smooth drum rollers .
num subsequent layer placement and compaction .
place subsequent layers according to subsection num .
compact according to subsection num .
vibratory rollers may be used unless pumping or foundation failures occur .
repair damaged areas and then use only nonvibratory rollers .
num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid .
see section num for reinforcement geotextile and geogrid placement .
num geotextile filter applications .
a geotextile placement .
for slope or wave protection place the long dimension of the geotextile down the slope .
for stream bank protection place the long dimension of the geotextile parallel to the centerline of the channel .
overlap or sow seams at the ends and sides of adjoining sheets .
num overlapping .
overlap the uphill or upstream sheet over the downhill or downstream sheet .
for above water applications overlap the geotextile at least num inches num millimeters .
for underwater applications overlap the geotextile at least num inches num millimeters .
section num num num sewing .
sew the geotextile seam according to the manufacturers recommendations .
offset end joints of adjacent sheets at least num feet num meters .
use key trenches or aprons at the crest and toe of slopes to hold the geotextile in place .
as an alternative use anchor pins at least num inches num millimeters long and spaced at num inch num millimeters centers to hold the geotextile sheets in place .
b backfilling .
place aggregate slope protection or riprap on the geotextile starting at the toe of the slope and proceeding upward .
place riprap onto the geotextile from a height of less than num inches num millimeters .
place slope protection rock or aggregate backfill onto the geotextile from a height less than num inch num millimeters .
do not allow stones weighing more than num pounds num kilograms to roll down the slope .
in underwater applications place the geotextile and cover material in the same day .
num geomembrane applications .
submit a geomembrane installation plan at least num days before installing the geomembrane .
include a drawing of the panel layout identifying the location of seams .
include a seam detail and a written description of the seaming procedure .
a surface preparation .
provide a smooth flat firm unyielding foundation for the geomembrane with no sudden sharp or abrupt changes or break in grade .
remove rocks stones sticks sharp objects and debris protruding more than ½ inch num millimeters above the prepared surface .
b geomembrane placement .
orient seams parallel to the line of maximum slope .
use sandbags or piles of cover material to hold the geomembrane in place .
do not drive equipment directly on the geomembrane .
c backfilling .
place backfill material within the same work shift that the geomembrane is installed .
end dump backfill material onto the edge of previously placed cover material and roll it into place .
do not push material along the geomembrane which can result in damage or wrinkling .
num acceptance .
geosynthetics will be evaluated under subsection num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of geosynthetics .
geosynthetic installation will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
sewn joints will be evaluated under subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
when measuring geosynthetics by the square yard square meter measure on the plane parallel to the slope face .
do not measure overlapping material .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay item listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
structure excavation and backfill for selected major structures description num this work consists of excavating material for the construction of selected structures .
this work also includes preserving channels shoring and bracing constructing cofferdams sealing foundations dewatering preparing foundations backfilling and subsequent removal of safety features and cofferdams .
material num conform to the following section and subsections foundation fill num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum structural backfill num structural concrete num construction requirements num general .
follow osha safety regulations num cfr part num subpart p excavations for sloping the sides of excavations using shoring and bracing and using other safety features .
when sides of excavations are sloped for safety considerations submit one copy of the design that demonstrates conformity with osha regulations .
where support systems shield systems or other protective systems are to be used design the shoring according to section num .
submit drawings and construction details according to subsection num .
clear the area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
request approval from the co as to the character and suitability of the foundation material when the excavation is complete .
provide a firm foundation of uniform density throughout its length and width .
saw cut existing pavements or concrete structures adjacent to the area to be excavated that are designated to remain .
where necessary blast rock according to section num .
conserve suitable material for structural backfill from excavated material .
do not deposit excavated material in or near a waterway .
do not stockpile excavated material or allow equipment closer than num inches num millimeters from the edge of the excavation .
use suitable material in embankment construction when approved .
dispose of unsuitable or excess material according to subsection num .
remove safety features when no longer necessary .
remove shoring and bracing to at least num inches num millimeters below the surface of the finished ground .
section num num num channel preservation .
perform work in or next to a running waterway as follows a excavate and conserve material inside cofferdams sheeting or other separations such as dikes or sandbags b do not disturb the natural bed of the waterway adjacent to the work and c backfill the excavation to original groundline with conserved material .
num cofferdams .
use cofferdams when excavating under water or when the excavation is affected by groundwater .
submit drawings showing proposed methods and construction details of cofferdams according to subsection num and section num .
design and construct cofferdams that conform to the following a extend below the bottom of the footing b brace to withstand pressure without buckling and secured in place to prevent tipping or movement c construct watertight as practical d provide sufficient clearance for the placement of forms and the inspection of their exteriors e provide for dewatering f protect fresh concrete from damage and g prevent damage to the foundation by erosion .
remove cofferdam material down to the natural bed of the waterway or to the top of seal whichever is lower .
remove cofferdam material outside the waterway to at least num inches num millimeters below the surface of the finished ground .
num foundation seal .
seal the foundation area from water by placing seal concrete when the area can not be pumped reasonably free of water .
design seal concrete mix according to subsection num .
furnish and place seal concrete according to section num .
maintain the water level inside the cofferdam at the same level as the water outside the cofferdam while placing a foundation seal .
vent or port the cofferdam at low water level when a foundation seal is placed in tidal water .
do not dewater a concretesealed cofferdam until the seal concrete strength is sufficient to withstand the hydrostatic pressure .
num dewatering .
remove water as necessary to perform the work .
dispose of water according to federal state and local regulations .
section num num num foundation preparation .
prepare foundations as follows a footings placed on bedrock .
excavate to the specified elevation .
clean the foundation surface of deleterious material .
clean and grout seams and crevices .
place foundation fill to provide a level bearing pad for footing .
b footings placed on an excavated surface other than bedrock .
excavate material to foundation grade and compact the foundation before footing is placed .
c footings keyed into undisturbed material .
excavate the foundation to the limits of the footing and compact the foundation .
where material does not stand vertically fill the space between the limits of the footing and the undisturbed material with concrete .
fill only to the top of the excavation if the excavation is below the top of the footing .
concrete placed against steel sheet piles in cofferdams is considered as being against undisturbed material .
d unstable material below footing elevation .
excavate unstable material below foundation grade as directed by the co and backfill with foundation fill .
place foundation fill in horizontal layers that do not exceed num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness .
compact each layer according to subsection num. e foundations using piles .
where foundation seals are required drive the piles before placing seal concrete unless otherwise specified .
remove loose and displaced material and reshape the bottom of the excavation to the foundation elevation .
grade and compact the bed to receive the footing .
num backfill .
place structural backfill in horizontal layers that do not exceed num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness .
compact each layer according to subsection num .
place structural backfill layers evenly on all sides of the structure as appropriate .
extend each layer to the limits of the excavation or to natural ground .
do not place structural backfill against concrete until num percent of the design strength is achieved .
backfill in or next to a running waterway according to subsection num .
num compacting .
determine optimum moisture content and maximum dry density according to aashto t num method c. adjust the moisture content of the backfill material to a moisture content suitable for compaction .
compact material placed in all layers to at least num percent of the maximum density .
determine the inplace density and moisture content according to aashto t num or other approved test procedures .
do not apply density requirements as measured by aashto t num to material incapable of being tested or compacted to maximum values determined by aashto t num .
for these material fill the voids around the rocky material in each layer with earth or other fine material .
compact each layer until there is no visible evidence of further consolidation .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for structural backfill and foundation fill will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num material for grout will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
grout will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
structure excavation and backfill work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
clearing and removal of obstructions will be evaluated under sections num and num .
seal concrete will be evaluated under section num .
shoring bracing and cofferdams will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring structural excavation by the cubic yard cubic meter in its original position do not include the following volumes in structure excavation a material excavated outside the vertical planes located num inches num millimeters outside and parallel to the limits of the footings or foundations b material included within the staked limits of the excavation such as contiguous channel changes and ditches for which measurement is covered under other sections c water or other liquid material d material excavated before measurement of the original ground e material rehandled except when the contract specifically requires excavation after embankment placement or f excavation for cofferdam seals .
when measuring foundation fill and structural backfill by the cubic yard cubic meter in place measure the volume placed inside the vertical planes located num inches num millimeters outside and parallel to the limits of the footings or foundations .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for structure excavation shoring and bracing and cofferdams will be full compensation for excavation to a depth of num feet num meters below the lowest elevation shown in the plans for each foundation structure .
when the excavation exceeds num feet num meters either the contractor or the co may request an equitable price adjustment for the depth in excess of num feet num meters .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time source foundation fillnum num measured and tested for conformance num num classification aashto m num num per soil type source of material yes before using in work gradation aashto t num t num structural backfillnum num plasticity index aashto r num t num t num gradation aashto t num t num production foundation fill num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum inplace no before placing next layer structural backfill num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per lift inplace no before placing next layer numnot required when using governmentprovided source .
num minimum of num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
structure excavation and backfill description num this work consists of excavating material for the construction of structures except those specifically designated under section num .
this work also includes preserving channels shoring and bracing sealing foundations dewatering preparing foundations bedding and backfilling .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections backfill material num bedding material num foundation fill num lean concrete backfill num structural concrete class s seal num unclassified borrow num construction requirements num general .
clear the area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
excavate trenches or foundation pits according to subsection num .
excavate to foundation grade without disturbing the trench or foundation surface .
foundation grade is the elevation at the bottom of the bedding for installing the structure .
num channel preservation .
preserve channels according to subsection num except excavate inside separations such as dikes or sandbags .
num foundation seal .
when foundation seals are necessary construct a foundation seal according to subsection num .
num dewatering .
when dewatering is necessary dewater according to subsection num .
num foundation preparation .
excavate unsuitable material when encountered at foundation grade as directed by the co. where a footing is required to be keyed into undisturbed material prepare foundation and construct footing according to subsection numc .
backfill and compact with foundation fill according to subsection numd .
num bedding .
place bedding as follows a for box culverts and structures other than pipe culverts .
construct bedding when specified .
place and grade bedding material in compacted layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in depth .
compact each layer according to subsection num .
section num num b for pipe culverts .
level the foundation .
place uncompacted bedding material over the foundation in a layer of uniform thickness .
lay a numinch nummillimeter thickness of bedding for pipes with diameters of num to num inches num to num millimeters .
lay a numinch nummillimeter thickness of bedding for pipe with diameters larger than num inches num millimeters .
recess the bedding to receive the joints for pipes with belled joints .
place the culvert on the uncompacted bedding layer and backfill according to subsection numb .
num backfill .
backfill as follows a general .
place backfill layers evenly on all sides of the structure .
extend each layer to the limits of the excavation or natural ground .
place backfill material in compacted layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in depth .
do not place backfill material against concrete until num percent of the design strength is achieved .
compact each layer according to subsection num. b pipe culverts .
backfill according to one of the following num pipe culverts .
place and compact backfill material in evenly balanced layers on each side of the pipe to a height of num inches num millimeters above the top of the pipe culvert .
complete backfilling to the top of the trench .
place and compact backfill material in the trench in layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in depth according to subsection num .
num pipe culverts with lean concrete backfill .
place and anchor pipe to prevent floating and movement .
backfill using lean concrete according to section num. c structural plate structures .
place and compact backfill material to a height of num inches num millimeters above the top of the structural plate structure .
when applicable complete backfilling and compacting according to subsection num. d repair existing pavement areas .
see subsection num .
num compacting .
determine optimum moisture content and maximum dry density according to aashto t num method c. adjust the moisture content of the backfill material to a moisture content suitable for compaction .
compact material placed in all layers to at least num percent of the maximum density .
determine the inplace density and moisture content according to aashto t num or other approved test procedures .
do not apply density requirements as measured by aashto t num to material incapable of being tested or compacted to maximum values determined by aashto t num .
for these material fill the voids around the rock in each layer with earth or other fine material .
compact each layer until there is no visible evidence of further consolidation .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for backfill bedding and foundation fill will be evaluated under subsections num and num except lean concrete for bedding or backfill will be evaluated according to section num .
section num num structural excavation and backfill work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
shoring and bracing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
clearing and removal of obstructions will be evaluated under sections num and num .
seal concrete will be evaluated under section num .
measurement and payment num do not measure structure excavation and backfill for payment .
see subsection num .
measure foundation fill under section num .
do not measure excavation and concrete for cofferdam seals for payment .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time source backfill materialnum num measured and tested for conformance num num classification aashto m num num per soil type source of material yes before using in work gradation aashto t num t num bedding materialnum num foundation fillnum num classification aashto m num gradation aashto t num t num unclassified borrownum num classification aashto m num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time production backfill material num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per lift inplace no before placing next layer bedding material num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per lift inplace no before placing next layer foundation fill num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per lift inplace no before placing next layer unclassified borrow num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per lift inplace no before placing next layer num not required when using governmentprovided source .
num minimum of num points per proctor .
num section num .
reserved section num num section num .
roadway obliteration description num this work consists of obliterating or closing roadways and other areas outside the roadway prism .
roadway obliteration methods are designated as follows a method num .
obliterate the roadway by restoring to approximate original ground contours .
keep excavated material within the original construction limits .
finish slopes to provide gradual transitions in slope adjustments without noticeable breaks .
b method num .
close roads by filling ditches and outsloping the roadbed to drain .
remove and slope embankment material at localized drainages to restore the natural drainage patterns .
eliminate ruts and low spots that could hold water .
construction requirements num conform to the following when obliterating or closing roadways a rigid material .
num nonasphalt material .
break concrete pavements curbs gutters sidewalks and other nonasphalt rigid material into pieces with maximum dimension of num inches num millimeters when burying according to subsection numc .
as an alternative to breaking and burying remove the rigid material from the project and dispose of it according to subsection numa .
num asphalt material .
dispose of asphalt material in a manner consistent with state and local regulations .
asphalt material may be considered hazardous waste .
submit copies of the disposal permits .
where no regulations exist dispose of the material as described in subsection numanum .
b nonrigid material .
num nonasphalt material .
scarify or rip the gravel crushed stone or other nonrigid surface base and subbase material .
mix the scarified or ripped material with the underlying soil .
bury the mixture under at least num inches num millimeters of soil .
num asphalt contaminated material .
dispose of asphalt contaminated material according to subsection numanum .
num waterbars and barriers .
construct barriers to prevent vehicle access and waterbars as shown in the plans .
num acceptance .
roadway obliteration will be evaluated under subsection num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
linear grading description num this work consists of constructing roadbeds within the specified alignment and grade tolerances .
construction requirements num roadway preparation .
clear the area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
num roadway excavation and embankment .
construct the roadbeds according to the applicable requirements of section num except as modified herein .
adjust the moisture content of embankment material to a moisture content suitable for compaction .
place embankment material in numinch nummillimeter layers and compact each layer according to subsection numa .
where compacting with rollers is not practical use approved mechanical or vibratory compaction equipment .
construct approach connections to existing roads parking areas and trails .
construct new approaches .
num grading tolerance .
do not encroach on stream channels impact wetlands or extend beyond rightofway or easement limits .
do not make alignment or profile grade adjustments that adversely affect drainage .
construct the roadbed within the following grading tolerances a alignment centerline .
alignment may be shifted a maximum of num feet num meters left or right of the planned centerline .
curve radii may be reduced by up to num percent .
do not construct curves with radii less than num feet num meters .
compound curves are permitted .
b profile grade .
profile grade may be shifted a maximum of num feet num meters up or down from the plan elevation provided the new grade tangent does not vary more than num percent from the plan grade tangent .
connect revised forward and back grade tangents with a uniform vertical curve consistent with the design .
num acceptance .
linear grading will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
clearing and removal of obstructions will be evaluated under sections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable .
do not measure changes in the clearing and grubbing quantity caused by alignment adjustments under subsection num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
subgrade stabilization description num this work consists of processing and incorporating lime limefly ash or hydraulic cement into the upper layer of subgrade .
material num conform to the following subsections chemical admixtures num fly ash numa hydraulic cement num lime for soil stabilization numb water numc construction requirements num proportioning .
submit a subgrade stabilization mix design at least num days before production .
include compressive strength values for at least three application rates with at least one application rate above and one below the strength shown in table num .
table num subgrade stabilization compressive strength requirements stabilization mixture test procedure average unconfined compressive strength minimum of num specimens limesoil astm dnum procedure b num pounds per square inch num megapascalsnum limefly ashsoil astm dnum procedure b num pounds per square inch num megapascalsnum cementsoil cementfly ashsoil or fly ashsoil astm dnum method a num pounds per square inch num megapascalsnum num at numday cure at num f num c. num at numday cure .
include the following with the mix design as applicable a source of each component material b results of the applicable tests including optimum moisture content after treatment hydration moisture rate maximum dry density after treatment atterberg limits before and after treatment and recommended application rates of stabilizing material and section num num c when requested by the co num numpound numkilogram sample of the subgrade soil num numpound numkilogram sample of the fly ash num numpound numkilogram sample of the lime num numpound numkilogram sample of the cement and num numpound numkilogram sample of each chemical admixtures .
begin production after the mix design is approved .
furnish a new mix design if there is a material source change .
num production startup procedures .
conduct a prestabilization preparatory phase meeting at least num days before the start of stabilizing operations according to subsection numa .
provide at least num days notice before beginning production .
num general .
store lime fly ash hydraulic cement and chemical admixtures in closed weatherproof containers .
prepare the subgrade according to subsection num .
scarify or pulverize the subgrade to the required depth .
use a rotary mixer with direct water injection capabilities to adequately blend the material and to produce a homogeneous mixture within num percent of the optimum moisture content .
at the end of each production day shape the subgrade surface to provide positive drainage .
provide a construction joint according to subsection num for tying into existing stabilized subgrade .
num application .
do not apply lime fly ash or hydraulic cement when weather conditions cause excessive material loss or when the air temperature may fall below num f num c within num hours .
apply material when the subgrade material temperature is at least num f num c. adjust the subgrade material moisture content to num to num percent above optimum .
apply fly ash by the dry method .
apply lime and cement by either the dry or slurry method .
a dry method .
uniformly apply the stabilizers using a metered spreader approved by the co. a motor grader is not an approved spreader .
apply water using approved methods to obtain the proper moisture content for mixing and compaction .
if quicklime and fly ash are preblended limit the maximum particle size of the quicklime to ⅛ inch num millimeters to avoid segregation .
b slurry method .
mix material with water .
report the percent solids in the slurry to the co for each production day .
apply the slurry using either trucks with approved distributors or rotary mixers .
equip the distributor truck or rotary mixer tank with an agitator to keep the stabilizers suspended in water .
make successive passes over the material to obtain the proper moisture and additive content .
section num num num mixing .
keep traffic except mixing equipment off the spread material .
use a rotary mixer .
a lime mixtures .
num preliminary mixing .
adjust the moisture content of the mixture to optimum plus necessary hydration moisture .
use the mix design hydration moisture rate .
thoroughly mix the lime soil and water to obtain a homogeneous friable mixture .
complete the mixing on the same day lime is applied .
check to ensure lime is fully hydrated and add additional water if necessary .
mellow the mixture for num to num days at a moisture content of num to num percent above optimum as directed by the co. num final mixing .
remix until num percent of the mixture except hard and durable particles passes a num½inch nummillimeter sieve and at least num percent of the soil portion of the mixture passes a no .
num nummillimeter sieve when tested according to aashto t num in the nondried condition .
b limefly ash mixtures .
mix according to subsection numanum .
use either a preblended limefly ash mixture or mix the lime and fly ash in separate operations .
if the lime and fly ash are mixed separately mix the lime first and mix the fly ash within num days of lime mixing .
adjust the moisture content of the limefly ash mixture to num to num percent above optimum .
mix the material to prevent formation of fly ash balls .
complete the mixing within num hours after adding the fly ash .
c cement fly ash or cementfly ash mixtures .
add water to adjust the moisture content of the mixture to num to num percent above optimum .
mix the material until num percent of the soil portion of the mixture hard and durable particles passes a num½inch nummillimeter sieve and at least num percent of the soil portion of the mixture passes a no .
num nummillimeter sieve when tested according to aashto t num in the nondried condition .
complete the mixing within num hours after the cement fly ash or both are added .
num compacting and finishing .
immediately after final mixing spread and compact the mixture .
use a vibratory sheepfoot roller to achieve compaction .
use pneumatictire and smoothdrum rollers for finish rolling .
compact the mixture to at least num percent of maximum dry density from the approved mix design .
complete compaction operations within num hours of completion of mixing .
finish the compacted subgrade to within plus or minus num foot num millimeters of the staked line grade and crosssection .
check the surface with a numfoot nummeter straightedge .
add or remove material to correct surface deviations in excess of ¾ inches in num feet num millimeters in num meters between two contacts of the straightedge with the surface .
when adding material scarify the subgrade to at least num inches num millimeters .
recompact the area to restore the required density and strength .
for subsection numb or c mixtures complete compaction operations within num hours of adding the cement fly ash or both .
section num num num curing .
keep the subgrade continuously moist and within num percent of optimum moisture content until the next course is placed .
apply water under pressure through a spray bar equipped with nozzles which produce a fine uniform spray .
place the next course within num days after compacting and finishing .
if the subgrade deforms loses density or ravels before placement of the next course correct the damaged subgrade .
traffic may be allowed on the stabilized subgrade num hours after compaction and finishing if approved by the co. num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for chemical admixtures fly ash lime hydraulic cement and water will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
subgrade stabilization work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
reconditioning of subgrade will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable .
measure width horizontally to include the top of subgrade width and allowable widening .
measure length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time mix design subgrade stabilization measured and tested for conformance num proportioning subsection num num per submitted mix design existing roadbed subgrade yes num days before production production stabilized material measured and tested for conformance num moisturedensity aashto t num method cnum num per soil type but not less than num for each day of production processed material behind mixer yes when requested before using in work gradation aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per layer density aashto t num or other approved procedures inplace no before placing next layer compressive strength numday cure astm dnum dnum as applicable processed material behind mixer yes when requested num minimum of num points per proctor .
num at numday cure at numf num c. compact sampled material immediately according to procedure b .
do not complete the proportioning and mixing of sections num and num .
report average unconfined compressive strength from at least three specimens .
num at numday cure .
report average unconfined compressive strength from at least three specimens .
num num division num slope reinforcement and retaining walls section num num section num .
riprap description num this work consists of furnishing and placing riprap for bank protection slope protection drainage structures and erosion control .
riprap acceptance methods are designated according to table num .
if no acceptance method is designated use method a. riprap classes are designated according to table num .
geotextile filters are designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections geotextile num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum riprap num construction requirements num general .
perform the work under section num .
dress the slope to produce a smooth surface .
if geotextile filter is required place according to section num .
num placed riprap .
placed riprap is rock placed on a prepared surface to form a wellgraded mass .
place riprap to its full thickness in one operation to avoid displacing the underlying material .
do not place riprap material by methods that cause segregation or damage to the prepared surface .
place or rearrange individual rocks by mechanical or hand methods to obtain a dense uniform blanket with a reasonably smooth surface .
num keyed riprap .
keyed riprap is rock placed on a prepared surface and set into place by impact pressure .
place rock for keyed riprap according to subsection num .
set the riprap into place by exerting impact pressure with a hydraulicpowered bucket or an approximate numpound numkilogram flatfaced mass .
repeated impacts should be made until the rock is firmly seated and forms a reasonably uniform surface without reducing the effective sizes of the rocks .
do not use impact pressure on riprap below the water surface .
num grouted riprap .
grouted riprap is rock placed or keyed on a prepared surface with the voids filled with grout .
section num num place rock for grouted riprap according to subsection num or num .
thoroughly moisten the rocks and wash excess fines from the riprap or to the underside of the riprap .
do not place grout unless the air temperature is at or above num f num c within the nearsurface voids of the riprap .
place the grout in a manner to prevent segregation .
begin placing grout at the lowest elevation of the riprap .
fill voids without unseating the rocks .
do not exceed numfoot nummeter thickness for each layer of grouted riprap .
allow num days curing time before adding the next layer of riprap and grout .
provide weep holes through the grouted riprap as required .
keep the grouted riprap moist for num days after the work is completed and protect it from freezing for at least num days after grouting .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
rock for riprap will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
material for grout will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
acceptance method a riprap construction will be evaluated under subsection num .
acceptance method b riprap construction will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
placing grout will be evaluated under subsection num .
geotextile filters will be evaluated under section num .
structure excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring riprap by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source riprap num measured and tested for conformance num num apparent specific gravity absorption aashto t num num per material type source of material yes before using in work soundness using sodium sulfate aashto t num la abrasion aashto t num production riprap num process control num size methods a b see note num num per num ydnum num mnum per class inplace measured and tested for conformance num num gradationnum method b flh t num num per num ydnum num mnum per class stockpile or inplacenum no num hours num notify co at least num days before performing test .
num verify riprap class by confirming that the largest accessible rock has an intermediate dimension greater than the upper limit of the dnum size range specified in table num .
num point of sampling to be approved by co .
section num num section num .
rockery special rock embankment and rock buttress description num this work consists of constructing rockeries special rock embankments and rock buttresses .
geotextile filters are designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections foundation fill num geotextile num granular rock backdrain num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum rock for buttresses num rock for rockeries num rock for special rock embankment num construction requirements num rockery .
verify the limits of the rockeries .
notify the co if planned rockery lengths heights or both are inadequate to intersect with adjacent slopes .
submit crosssections verifying intersections for approval .
construct rockeries as follows a excavation .
perform the work under sections num and num as required .
do not excavate more areas for rockeries than can be replaced with rockery construction in one shift unless shoring is provided .
protect backslopes from damage by surface water .
b erection .
remove sharp objects from the backslope before installing geotextile filter .
anchor geotextile filter to the excavation backslope to withstand backfilling operations .
overlap the geotextile filter at least num inches num millimeters at seams .
reinforce damaged fabric with a patch of the same type of geotextile filter by overlapping the patch num inches num millimeters beyond the damaged area in all directions .
furnish and install drain systems according to section num when specified .
do not connect collector pipes to storm water retention systems unless approved by the co. seat rocks firmly on a prepared foundation .
section num num place rocks to avoid continuous joints in either the vertical or horizontal direction .
locate at least one bearing point a distance no greater than num inches num millimeters from the face of the rockery .
place each rock to ensure it bears on at least two rocks below .
place incrementally smaller rocks as construction proceeds in successive lifts .
slope the top surface of each rock towards the back of the rockery at an inclination of at least num percent .
choke voids from the drain side of the rockery in each successive lift .
choke voids greater than num inches num millimeters with a rock large enough to fill the void .
backfill with granular rock backdrain concurrent with rock placement until level with the top of rock .
place granular rock backdrain in horizontal layers not to exceed num inches num millimeters compacted depth .
compact each layer according to subsection num .
compact areas not accessible to rollers with other approved methods .
num special rock embankment and rock buttress .
verify the limits of embankments and buttresses .
notify the co if the embankment or buttress lengths heights or both are inadequate to intersect with adjacent slopes .
perform the work under sections num or num as required .
when specified place geotextile filter according to section num .
place rocks in a stable orientation with minimal voids to produce a random pattern .
construct the exposed face of the rock mass reasonably uniform with projections beyond the line of the slope that are no greater than num inches num millimeters for mechanicallyplaced rock or num inches num millimeters for handplaced rock .
use rock smaller than the minimum rock size to choke the larger rock solidly in position and to fill voids between the large rocks .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for rockeries special rock embankments and rock buttresses will be evaluated under subsections num num and num .
construction of rockeries special rock embankments and rock buttresses will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
roadway excavation will be evaluated under section num .
geotextile filters will be evaluated under section num .
structure excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring rockeries by the square feet square meter of rockery front face measure the rockery from the bottom of the base rock elevation to the top of the cap rock elevation .
measure front face on a plane parallel to the rockery face .
section num num when measuring special rock embankment and rock buttress by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source rock for buttresses num measured and tested for conformance num num rock breadth and thickness subsection numanum num per rock type source of material no before using in work apparent specific gravity aashto t num yes not required when using government provided source absorption durability index course aashto t num rock for rockeries num apparent specific gravity num per rock type source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source absorption la abrasion aashto t num durability index course aashto t num soundness using sodium sulfate aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production rock for special rock embankment num process control num size see note num num per num ydnum num mnum inplace no num hours rock for buttresses num num per num ydnum num mnum rock for rockeries num see note num num per lift of rock per rockery num for mechanically placed embankments verify rock size by confirming that the largest accessible rock has an intermediate dimension greater than the dnum size specified in table num .
also confirm that the smallest accessible rock has an intermediate dimension within the lower dnum size range specified in table num .
for hand placed embankments verify rock size by confirming that the largest accessible rock has an intermediate dimension greater than the dnum size specified in table num .
also confirm that the smallest accessible rock has an intermediate dimension within the dnum size range specified in table num .
num verify rock size by confirming that the largest accessible rock has a width greater than the minimum width specified in the rockery design table and rockery detail sheets in the plans .
section num num section num .
gabions and revet mattresses description num this work consists of constructing rock filled gabion structures and revet mattresses .
a gabions baskets .
a rock filled wire enclosure having a height of num inches num millimeters or more .
b revet mattresses .
a rock filled wire enclosure having a thickness of less than num inches num millimeters .
geotextile filters are designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections backfill material num gabion and revet mattress material num gabion and revet mattress rock num geotextile num structural backfill num construction requirements num general .
verify the limits of the structure .
submit drawings according to subsection num .
see section num for contractordesigned gabion walls .
perform excavation and backfill according to section num .
num basket assembly .
furnish twisted wire or welded wire baskets .
do not damage wire coatings during basket assembly structure erection cell filling or backfilling .
rotate the basket panels into position and join the vertical edges with fasteners according to subsection num .
temporary fasteners may be used for basket assembly if they are supplemented during structure erection with permanent fasteners according to subsection num .
rotate the diaphragms into position and join the vertical edges according to subsection num .
num structure erection .
place the empty gabion baskets on the foundation and interconnect the adjacent baskets along the top and vertical edges using permanent fasteners .
where lacing wire is used wrap the wire with alternating single and double loops every other mesh opening and not more than num inches num millimeters apart .
where spiral binders are used crimp the ends to secure the binders in place .
where alternate fasteners are used space the fasteners in every mesh opening and not more than num inches num millimeters apart .
section num num interconnect each vertical layer of baskets to the underlying layer of baskets along the front back and sides .
stagger the vertical joints between baskets of adjacent rows and layers by at least onehalf the cell length .
num cell filling .
remove kinks and folds in the wire mesh and properly align the baskets .
place rock carefully in the basket cells to prevent bulging of the baskets and to minimize voids in the rock fill .
maintain the basket alignment .
place stiffeners in each unrestrained exterior basket cell greater than num inches num millimeters in height .
this includes interior basket cells left temporarily unrestrained .
place stiffeners concurrently with rock placement .
fill the cells in a row or layer to ensure no cell is filled more than num inches num millimeters above an adjacent cell .
repeat this process until the basket is full and the lid bears on the final rock layer .
secure the lid to the sides ends and diaphragms according to subsection num .
make exposed basket surfaces smooth and neat with no sharp rock edges projecting through the wire mesh .
num backfilling .
place a geotextile filter over the back face of the gabion structure .
concurrently with the cell filling operation backfill the area behind the gabion structure with structural backfill according to subsection num .
compact each layer according to subsection num except use an acceptable lightweight mechanical or vibratory compactor within num inches num millimeters of the gabion structure .
num revet mattresses .
place a geotextile filter according to section num .
construct revet mattresses according to subsections num through num .
anchor the mattresses in place according to the manufacturers recommendations .
place geotextile filter against the vertical edges of the mattress and backfill against the geotextile filter using backfill material .
overfill revet mattresses by num to num inches num to num millimeters .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for gabion structures and revet mattresses will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of gabion structures and revet mattresses will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
geotextile filters will be evaluated under section num .
structure excavation structural backfill and backfill material will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring gabions by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the structure .
measure foundation fill under section num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num section num .
reserved section num num section num .
mechanicallystablilized earth walls description num this work consists of constructing mechanicallystabilized earth mse walls .
geotextile filters are designated according to table num .
reinforcement geotextile and geogrid are designated according to tables num and num .
material num conform to the following section and subsections concrete masonry units numa geotextile num mechanicallystabilized earth wall material num minor concrete num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid num select granular backfill num unclassified borrow num construction requirements num general .
verify limits of the wall installation .
submit installation drawings according to subsection num .
see section num for contractordesigned mse walls .
perform the work under section num .
grade the foundation for a width equal to the length of reinforcing elements plus the additional width shown in the plans .
when required as determined by the contractor design and construct temporary shoring with consideration of maintenance of traffic requirements in section num .
see section num for temporary shoring .
for concrete panel and blockfaced walls provide a precast reinforced or a nonreinforced castinplace concrete leveling pad .
cure castinplace leveling pads at least num hours before placing wall panels .
num wall erection .
erect the wall according to the drawings and manufacturers recommendations .
have an field representative from the wall system manufacturer on site during the startup of wall erection .
construct mse walls to the tolerance requirements of table num .
section num num table num construction tolerance facing type vertical tolerancenum horizontal tolerancenum horizontal straight edge point checknum precast concrete panel masonry block units num inch num mm num inch num mm num inch num mm welded wire gabions num½ inch num mm num½ inch num mm num inch num mm num wall vertical tolerance at top of wall for every num feet num meters of wall height .
for example num feet num meter wall height multiply numvalue .
num wall horizontal tolerance at top of wall for every num feet num meters of wall height .
num maximum horizontal deviation at a point in the wall from a numfoot nummeter straightedge placed horizontally or vertically on the theoretical plane of the design face .
a precast concrete panelfaced .
erect panels by lifting devices connected to the upper edge of the panel .
make the joint openings ¾¼ inch num millimeters wide .
install joint material according to the drawings .
cover joints on the backside of the panels with a numinch nummillimeter wide strip of geotextile filter .
overlap geotextile filter splices at least num inches num millimeters .
hold the panels in position with temporary wedges or bracing during backfilling operations .
b wirefaced .
place backing mats in successive horizontal lifts as backfill placement proceeds .
connect tighten and anchor soil reinforcement elements to the wall facing units before placing backfill .
do not place reinforcing elements below the corresponding connection elevations .
pull and anchor the reinforcement mesh taut before placing additional backfill .
do not use hardware cloth or geosynthetic material to retain backfill at the face of the wall .
c gabionfaced .
place the first lift of backfill before filling the gabion baskets .
construct gabion structures according to section num .
lay reinforcement mesh horizontally on compacted fill and normal to the face of the wall .
connect the gabion facing unit to reinforcement mesh with spiral binders or tie wire at numinch nummillimeter nominal spacing with alternating single and double locked loops .
pull and anchor the reinforcement mesh taut before placing additional backfill .
d concrete masonry blockfaced .
place the first course of modular block wall units on top of and in full contact with the leveling pad .
place units side by side for the full length of the wall such that adjoining blocks are located according to the manufacturers recommendations .
place units to ensure only the front face of the unit is visible .
check for proper elevation and alignment every two courses .
install connection devices alignment devices or both as required by design .
fill voids in and around units with unit fill as required by manufacturers installation guidelines to meet the required connection strength .
place geotextile filter between unit fill and select granular backfill .
if the unit fill is required to meet connection strength specifications completely fill each course of block before proceeding to the next course .
place reinforcement no more than two times the block depth or num inches num millimeters whichever is less .
remove excess material from the top of the units before installing each succeeding block course .
section num num num backfilling .
backfill the stabilized volume with select granular backfill according to subsection num .
place select granular backfill material from the back of the wall face to the end of the reinforcement .
ensure that no voids exist below the reinforcement .
compact each layer according to subsection num except use an acceptable lightweight mechanical or vibratory compactor within num inches num millimeters of the wall face .
consolidate facing backfill by rodding or other approved means to produce a uniform tight facing fill .
where the stabilized volume supports spread footings for bridges or other structural loads compact the top num feet num meters to at least num percent of the maximum density .
do not damage or disturb the facing or reinforcing elements .
do not operate equipment directly on top of the reinforcing mesh or strips .
correct damaged misaligned or distorted wall elements .
backfill and compact behind the stabilized volume with unclassified borrow according to subsections num and num .
at the end of the days operation slope the last lift of backfill away from the wall face to direct surface runoff away from the wall .
do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the wall construction area .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for mechanicallystabilized earth walls listed under subsection num will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of concrete face panels .
construction of mechanicallystabilized earth walls will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
geotextile filters and reinforcement geotextile and geogrid will be evaluated under section num .
structure excavation select granular backfill and unclassified borrow will be evaluated under section num .
gabions will be evaluated under section num .
concrete leveling pad will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring mechanicallystabilized earth walls by the square foot square meter measure the front face of wall excluding footings .
when measuring select granular backfill within the stabilized volume by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
measure foundation fill under section num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay item listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source select granular backfill num measured and tested for conformance num num gradation aashto t num t num num per soil type source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source angle of internal friction aashto t num and subsection numanum soundness using sodium sulfate aashto t num plasticity index aashto r num t num t num resistivitynum aashto t num phnum aashto t num sulfate contentnum aashto t num chloride contentnum aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production select granular backfill num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method cnum num per soil type source of material yes before using in work density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per lift inplace no before placing next layer num required for mse walls with metallic reinforcements .
num required for mse walls with geosynthetic reinforcements .
num tests for sulfate and chloride content are not required when resistivity is greater than num ohm centimeters .
num minimum of num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
permanent ground anchors description num this work consists of furnishing and installing permanent ground anchors .
material num conform to the following subsections anchor tendons num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a professional engineer onsite supervisor and installation personnel with experience installing and testing permanent ground anchors .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least five ground anchor projects of similar complexity over the past num years .
include project names locations and contact information for project owners .
num submittal .
at least num days before starting ground anchor work submit the following according to subsection num a start date b method of excavation to ensure slope stability c ground anchor construction sequence d ground anchor types sizes spacings depths installation angles bond zone lengths and ultimate tendon strengths for the range of material to be encountered e tendons couplers bearing plates facing items and additional hardware with manufacturers msds and product data sheets specifications catalog cuts and mill certificates f manufacturer recommendations for tendon and hardware handling storing assembly and working temperature ranges g grout type mix design mixing equipment placement procedures and numday grout compressive strength test results h procedures and material for repairing corrosion protection coatings in the field i drilling methods and equipment section num num j drill hole diameters to achieve the specified pullout resistance k alternative drilling and grouting methods such as grout additives l additional material needed to achieve required bond capacities such as grout socks m methods to ensure borehole stability during excavation and grout placement n ground anchor testing methods and equipment including type and capacity of reaction load system drawings supporting calculations for structural components of the ground anchor load test apparatus and calculations for soil bearing and settlement below the reaction frame and o identification number and calibration test certification for each jack pressure gauge and electronic load cell .
clearly indicate the serial number of each component of the testing assembly on calibration graphs .
submit results from calibration tests conducted by an independent testing laboratory within the previous num days .
allow num days for submittal review .
num tendon fabrication .
a general .
size tendons to ensure num the design load does not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon and num the maximum test load does not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
b bond length .
determine the bond length necessary to develop the design load shown in the drawings .
use a minimum bond length of num feet num meters in rock and num feet num meters in soil .
provide corrosion protection of the tendon bond length with a cement grout cover .
where encapsulation of the tendon is required protect the tendon bond length from corrosion by encapsulating it in a groutfilled corrugated plastic or deformed steel tube or by coating it with fusionbonded epoxy .
place the grout inside the tube either before or after the tendon is placed in the drill hole .
centralize the tendon within the tube with a minimum ⅛inch nummillimeter grout cover .
c centralizers .
use spacers along the tendon bond length of a multielement tendon to separate each of the individual elements of the tendon .
use centralizers to ensure at least ½ inch num millimeters of grout cover over the tendon bond length or tendon bond length encapsulation as appropriate .
use centralizers that do not impede the free flow of grout up the bore hole .
position centralizers within num feet num meters from the top of the tendon bond length within num inches num millimeters from the bottom of the tendon bond length and so their centertocenter spacing does not exceed num feet num meters .
centralizers are not required on hollowstemaugured tendons if the ground anchor is grouted through the auger and the hole is maintained full of a stiff grout during extraction of the auger .
a grout is considered stiff if its slump is less than num inches num millimeters .
section num num d unbonded length .
provide minimum unbonded length of num feet num meters for steel bars and num feet num meters for steel strands .
num if the entire drill hole is grouted in one operation provide corrosion protection of the unbonded length with a sheath completely filled with corrosioninhibiting grease corrosioninhibiting grout or a heatshrinkable tube internally coated with an elastic adhesive .
if grease is used under the sheath completely coat the unbonded tendon length fill spaces between individual elements of multielement tendon with grease and provide measures to prevent grease from escaping at the ends of the sheath .
if the sheath is grout filled provide a separate bondbreaker along the unbonded length of the tendon .
num if a greasefilled sheath corrosion protection is provided and the drill hole above the bond length is grouted after the ground anchor is locked off grout the tendon inside a second sheath .
where restressable ground anchors are used provide restressable anchorage compatible with the posttensioning system provided .
if multielement tendons are used properly seat the wedges as recommended by the manufacturer for the posttensioning system provided .
e bearing plates .
size the bearing plates to ensure num the bending stresses in the plate do not exceed the yield strength of the steel when a load equal to num percent of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength of the tendon is applied and num the average bearing stress of the bearing plate does not exceed that recommended in the pti guide specification for posttensioning materials .
weld trumpet to bearing plate .
make the inside diameter of the trumpet equal to or larger than the hole in the bearing plate .
make the trumpet long enough to accommodate movements during stressing and testing .
for multiple or single element tendons with encapsulation over the unbounded length make the trumpet at least num inches num millimeters beyond the structural fascia and soil backslope interface to allow a transition from the unbounded length to the anchorhead without damaging encapsulation .
fill the trumpet of restressable ground anchors with corrosioninhibiting grease .
provide a permanent bunan synthetic rubber seal or an approved equal between the trumpet and the unbonded length corrosion protection .
fill the trumpets of nonrestressable ground anchors with grout .
provide a numinch nummillimeter minimum tightlyfitting temporary seal between the trumpet and the unbonded length corrosion protection .
num handling and storing material .
handle and store tendons in a manner to avoid damage or corrosion .
replace tendons exhibiting abrasions cuts welds weld splatter corrosion or pitting .
repair or replace tendons exhibiting damage to encapsulation or sheathing .
degrease the bond length of tendons and remove solvent residue before installation .
section num num num installation .
a drilling .
drill ground anchor holes within num inches num millimeters of the required location .
drill the longitudinal axis of the drill hole parallel to the longitudinal axis of the tendon .
install the ground anchor within three degrees of the required inclination from horizontal .
install the ground anchor with a horizontal angle within three degrees of a line drawn perpendicular to the plane of the structure .
do not extend ground anchors beyond the rightofway or easement limits .
insert the tendon in the drill hole to the required depth without driving or forcing .
where the tendon can not be completely inserted remove the tendon and clean or redrill the hole to permit insertion .
b grouting .
num equipment .
use a positive displacement grout pump equipped with a pressure gage capable of measuring pressures of at least num pounds per square inch num megapascal or twice the required grout pressure whichever is greater .
provide a secondary pressure capability of at least num pounds per square inch num megapascal to clean out grout or dirt blockages in hoses tremie tubes or casings .
use a high speed high shear grout mixer with a minimum operating speed of num revolutions per minute to produce a wellmixed grout that is free of lumps or other indications of prior cement hydration .
furnish holding tanks with a variable speed highefficiency paddle that maintains a thoroughly mixed grout for pumping .
num procedures .
grout tendons into drill holes using a neat hydraulic cement grout placed in one continuous operation .
inject the grout from the lowest point of the drill hole .
the grout may be placed either before or after insertion of the tendon .
record the quantity of the grout and the grout pressure for each ground anchor .
control the grout pressures to avoid excessive heaving or fracturing .
except as indicated below the grout above the top of the bond length may be placed at the same time as the bond length grout but do not placed it under pressure .
do not place grout at the top of the drill hole in contact with the back of the structure or the bottom of the trumpet .
if the ground anchor is installed in a finegrained soil using drill holes larger than num inches num millimeters in diameter place the grout above the top of the bond length after the ground anchor has been tested and stressed .
the entire drill hole may be grouted at one time if it can be demonstrated that the ground anchor does not derive a significant portion of its loadcarrying capacity from the soil above the bond length .
use pressure grouting for grout protected tendons anchored in rock .
after sealing the drill hole pressure inject grout until a numpound per square inch nummegapascal grout pressure at the top of the drill hole is maintained for num minutes .
c finishing .
after grouting is complete fill the grout tube with grout if it will remain in the hole .
wait at least num days before loading the tendon .
extend the corrosion protection surrounding the unbonded length up beyond the bottom seal of the trumpet or num inches num millimeters into the trumpet if no trumpet seal is provided .
trim the corrosion protection surrounding the tendon so it does not contact the bearing plate of the anchorhead during testing and stressing .
section num num place the bearing plate and anchorhead so the axis of the tendon is within three degrees of perpendicular to the bearing plate and the axis of the tendon passes through the center of the bearing plate without bending the tendon .
if grout protected tendons or fusionbonded epoxy encapsulations are used electronically isolate the bearing plate anchorhead and trumpet from the surrounding concrete soldier pile or metallic element embedded in the structure .
place trumpet grease during construction .
place trumpet grout after the ground anchor has been tested and stressed .
completely cover anchorages permanently exposed to the atmosphere with a corrosioninhibiting grease or grout .
inspect the trumpet and anchorage grout levels num hours after initial grout placement .
if needed refill the trumpet or anchorage with grout .
num testing and stressing .
a testing equipment .
conform to the following num dial gauges .
use two dial gauges capable of measuring to num inch num millimeters and with sufficient travel to measure the theoretical elastic elongation of the total length at the maximum test load without resetting accounting for elongation in both the bonded and unbonded zones .
align the gauges parallel to the axis of the anchor or pile and support the gauges independently from the hydraulic jack ground anchor or reaction frame .
num hydraulic jack pressure gauge and load cell .
apply test loads with a hydraulic jack and measure with a calibrated pressure gauge and electronic load cell .
use a hydraulic jack and pressure gauge with a pressure range not exceeding twice the anticipated maximum test pressure and calibrated as a unit by an independent firm within num days of the start of work .
use a pressure gauge graduated in numpound per square inch nummegapascal increments or less .
use a jack with ram travel sufficient to allow testing without resetting .
num reference gauge .
have the reference gauge calibrated with the test jack and pressure gauge .
keep the reference gauge at the project site .
num reaction frame .
provide a reaction frame designed by a professional engineer to meet the requirements of the site resist the maximum test loads and prevent excessive deformation of the bearing surface .
b stressing .
place testing equipment over the ground anchor tendon to ensure the jack bearing plates load cells and stressing assembly are axially aligned with the tendon and the tendon is centered within the equipment .
do not apply loads greater than num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
section num num place the reference pressure gauge in series with the pressure gauge jack and load cell so they need not be unloaded and repositioned during a test .
raise the load from one increment to another .
hold the load just long enough to measure and record the ground anchor movement to the nearest num inch num millimeters with respect to an independent fixed reference point .
repump the jack as necessary to maintain a constant load .
monitor the load with a pressure gauge .
if the load measured by the pressure gauge and the load measured by the reference pressure gauge differ by more than num percent recalibrate the jack pressure gauge and reference pressure gauge .
num performance tests .
the co will designate locations for sacrificial ground anchors for performance tests .
test according to tables num and num .
table num performance test load sequence test sequence test load increment al numd numd numd numd numd numd loadhold test reduce to lockoff load num num num num num num num minutes al alignment load no greater than num percent of d numd applied to the ground anchor before setting the movement recording devices .
zero dial gauges after the first setting of a .
d design load .
hold the load to within num percent and measure and record the ground anchor movement during the loadhold test at num num num num num num and num minutes .
when the ground anchor movement between num minute and num minutes exceeds num inches num millimeter maintain the maximum test load an additional num minutes and record the movement at num num num num and num minutes .
num proof tests .
test according to tables num and num .
table num proof test load sequence test load increment al numd numd numd numd numd numd loadhold test reduce to lockoff load num minutes al alignment load .
see alignment load note in table num .
d design load .
hold the load to within num percent and measure and record the ground anchor movement during the loadhold test at num num num num num num and num minutes .
when the ground anchor movement between num minute and num minutes exceeds num inches num millimeter maintain the maximum test load an additional num minutes recording movement at num num num num and num minutes .
section num num c lock off .
reduce the load to the specified lockoff load and transfer the load to the anchorage device .
after transferring the load and before removing the jack measure the liftoff load .
if the load is not within num percent of the specified lockoff load reset the anchorage and remeasure the liftoff load .
repeat as necessary .
num test results and reporting .
plot the ground anchor movement versus the maximum load for each test sequence in tables num and num and plot the residual movement of the tendon at each alignment load versus the highest previously applied load .
provide preliminary results to the co for each ground anchor tested before testing personnel leave the site .
submit detailed verification and proof test load and deflection data in a tabular format .
submit a graph that plots total ground anchor head movement versus load the aline and the bline .
the aline is defined as num multiplied by the theoretical free test length elastic elongation .
the bline is defined as the theoretical free test length elastic elongation plus num multiplied by the theoretical bonded length elastic elongation .
allow num days for the co to conduct a review of the data and approve ground anchor installation .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for ground anchors will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification for the ground anchor material .
construction of ground anchors will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installed ground anchors will be evaluated based on one of the following performance or proof test results a after a numminute hold the ground anchor carries the maximum test load with less than num inches num millimeter of movement between num and num minutes and the total movement at the maximum test load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the unbonded length .
b after a numminute hold which is only conducted after numminute hold test fails the ground anchor carries the maximum test load with a movement rate that does not exceed num inch num millimeters per log cycle of time and the total movement at the maximum test load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the unbonded length .
replace ground anchors with unacceptable performance or proof test results .
do not retest failed ground anchors .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure performance tests that indicate acceptable installations .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate quality fine num measured and tested for conformance num num quality aashto m num num per material type source of material yes before producing mix design neat hydraulic cement grout num numanum measured and tested for conformance num flow astm cnum num per mix design yes when requested compressive strength numday aashto t num astm cnum production performance test ground anchor measured and tested for conformance num deformation subsection numbnum num or num min installation no num days proof test ground anchor subsection numbnum each anchor num prepare and test grout cube specimens according to astm cnum .
make grout cubes for testing from random batches of grout as directed .
normally strength testing for permanent ground anchors will not be required as system performance will be measured by load holding each anchor .
grout cube testing will be required if admixtures are used or irregularities occur in anchor testing .
section num num section num .
contractordesigned retaining walls description num this work consists of designing various types of retaining walls .
wall types include gabion mechanicallystabilized earth permanent ground anchor reinforced concrete soil nail reinforced soil slopes micropiles and other wall systems .
material num conform to the following sections driven piles num gabions num mechanicallystabilized earth walls num micropiles num permanent ground anchors num reinforced concrete retaining walls num reinforced soil slopes num reinforcing steel num soil nail retaining walls num structural concrete num construction requirements num general .
the designersupplier furnishing the proposed retaining wall is responsible for the stability of the structure .
do not qualify the responsibility for the design or restrict the use of the drawings or calculations for the proposed alternate .
indemnify the government from claims for infringement of proprietary rights by others without the consent of the patent holders or licensees .
verify the limits of structure installation .
arrange and conduct a predesign conference following selection of the structure designersupplier and before design work starts to discuss structure selection constructability and design parameters methods and limitations .
include the co subcontractors supplier and the suppliers design engineer .
num submittals .
at least num days before starting construction submit the following according to subsection num a plan and elevation drawings for each structure containing the following num a plan view of the structure showing a horizontal offset from the construction centerline to the face of the structure at defining points along the base including start and end stations b location length coverage ratio and type of reinforcementanchorage as applicable such as strip mesh grid geosynthetic fabric anchor section num num c centerline and size of drainage structure or drainage pipe behind passing through or passing under the structure and d location length and offset from the face of wall to guardrail or guardwall features or parapet structures .
num an elevation view of the structure showing a elevation and station at horizontal and vertical break points and at least every num feet num meters along the top of the structure at the face b elevation and station at the top of leveling pads and footings at the top and tip of piling and at least every num feet num meters along the structure base c length and type of reinforcement anchorage structure module and lagging d distance and elevation along the structure face to all steps in the base footings leveling pads or lagging e distance along the structure face to where changes in reinforcement or anchor lengths occur f construction joints and g original and final groundline .
num a typical crosssection view showing a type and depth of facing elements and structural connections to reinforcing and anchorage elements b structure batter or face slope c length spacing and type of reinforcement anchorage structure module and corresponding limits of excavation and reinforced fill placement zones d location of guardrail or guardwall features or parapet structures including embedment depths offset from structure facing and connection details with structure reinforcementanchorage e original and final groundline including rightofway limits and f estimated or known location of subsurface soil and rock units .
num general construction notes .
num horizontal and vertical curve data affecting the structure including match lines or other details to relate structure stationing to centerline stationing .
num material list and summary of quantities .
include the gradation for facing rock .
facing rock should be sufficiently sized to prevent migration of the rock through the facing basket for the chosen wall system .
b dimensions and schedules of reinforcing steel including reinforcing bar bending details dowels studs or both for attaching the facing .
section num num c details and dimensions for foundations and leveling pads including steps in the footings or leveling pads .
d details and dimensions for num panels modules soldier piles and lagging necessary to construct the structure num reinforcing steel in structural elements num details of proposed splices in reinforcements num location of mesh strip attachment or anchor devices embedded in facing panels and num anchors and soldier piling including the spacing and size of piles and the spacing and angle of anchors .
e details for the installation of structure drainage features including strip sheet edge blanket and underdrain systems and associated piping f details for constructing structures around drainage features utilities lighting foundations traffic barriers and other obstructions .
g details for terminating structures and adjacent slope construction .
h architectural treatment details .
i design notes including a description of symbols terminology and computer programs used in the design of the structure .
specify the bearing pressure beneath the structure footing stabilized earth mass or soldier piles .
j verification of design criteria and soil rock and reinforcement parameters for each structure .
include results from creep durability construction induced damage and junction strength tests as applicable .
k design calculations including assessment of temporary excavation stability and internal and external stability of earth retaining structures .
include joint splice and facing connection capacity calculations .
include a checklist showing each of the items specified in these requirements have been addressed in the design .
submit num sets of drawings with the initial submission .
one set will be returned with corrections if necessary .
if revisions are required make corrections and resubmit three revised sets .
num design and construction .
design and construct the wall according to the approved drawings and the following sections as applicable a gabions .
see section num. b mechanicallystabilized earth walls .
see section num. c permanent ground anchor walls .
see sections num num and num. d reinforced concrete retaining walls .
see section num .
section num num e soil nail retaining walls .
see section num. f reinforced soil slopes .
see section num. g micropiles .
see section num .
update drawings when plan dimensions are revised due to field conditions or for other reasons .
num acceptance .
design of the retaining walls will be evaluated under subsection num and the applicable sections listed in subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for contractordesigned retaining walls will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount will be paid when the design submittal is approved .
b an additional num percent of the pay item amount will be paid when num percent of the retaining wall construction is complete .
c payment of the remaining portion of the pay item amount will be paid when num percent of the retaining wall construction is complete .
section num num section num .
reinforced concrete retaining walls description num this work consists of constructing reinforced concrete retaining walls .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections forms and falsework num reinforcing steel num sealants fillers and seals num structural backfill num structural concrete num construction requirements num general .
verify the limits of the wall installation .
prepare and submit forms falsework drawings and drainage provisions according to section num .
see section num for contractordesigned reinforced concrete retaining walls .
perform the work under section num .
after excavation is complete request approval as to the character and suitability of the foundation material .
allow the co num hours to review and approve the foundation before constructing the footing .
num reinforcing steel .
submit order lists and bending diagrams according to subsections num and num .
fabricate reinforcing steel according to subsection num .
ship and protect material according to subsections num num and num .
place fasten and splice reinforcing steel according to subsections num num and num .
num structural concrete .
design concrete mixture according to subsection num .
store handle batch and mix material and deliver concrete according to subsections num through num .
provide quality control according to section num and subsection num .
construct wall according to subsections num through num .
num backfilling .
backfill the area behind the wall with structural backfill according to subsection num .
compact each layer according to subsection num except use an approved lightweight mechanical or vibratory compactor within num inches num millimeters of the wall .
do not place structural backfill against concrete until num percent of the design strength is achieved .
num acceptance .
reinforced concrete retaining wall material and construction will be evaluated as follows forms and falsework drawings will be evaluated under section num .
structure excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
section num num structural concrete will be evaluated under section num .
reinforcing steel will be evaluated under section num .
material for joint fillers sealants tie bars dowel bars and hook bolts will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring retaining walls by the square foot square meter measure by the front face of wall excluding footings .
measure foundation fill under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement adjusted according to subsection num for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for reinforced concrete retaining wall will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the material pay factor .
the material pay factor is calculated as follows pfa num num numpf where pf pay factor for concrete as determined under section num .
section num num section num .
soil nail retaining walls description num this work consists of constructing soil nail retaining walls .
material num conform to the following section and subsections bolts and nuts numd centralizers and spacers nume geocomposite drain num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum shotcrete num soil nails num structural backfill num structural carbon steel bearing plates numa welded stud sheer connectors num construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a professional engineer onsite supervisors and installation personnel with experience installing and testing soil nails .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least five soil nail retaining wall projects of similar complexity over the past num years .
include project names locations and contact information for project owners .
num submittal .
at least num days before starting soil nail retaining wall work submit the following according to subsection num a start date b method of excavation to ensure wall and slope stability c retaining wall construction sequence d soil nail types sizes spacings depths and installation angles bond zone lengths and ultimate tendon strengths for the range of material to be encountered e tendons couplers bearing plates facing items and additional hardware with manufacturers product data sheets specifications catalog cuts and mill certificates f manufacturer recommendations for tendon and hardware handling storing assembly and working temperature ranges section num num g grout type mix design mixing equipment placement procedures and numday and numday grout compressive strength test results h procedures and material for repairing corrosion protection coatings in the field and for applying epoxy finish coatings on end hardware i drilling methods and equipment j .
drill hole diameter to achieve the specified pullout resistance k alternative drilling and grouting methods such as grout additives l additional material needed to achieve required bond capacities such as grout socks m methods to ensure borehole stability during excavation and grout placement n soil nail testing methods and equipment including type and capacity of reaction load system drawings and supporting calculations for structural components of the soil nail load test apparatus and o identification number and calibration test certification for each jack pressure gauge and electronic load cell .
clearly indicate the serial number of each component of the testing assembly on calibration graphs .
submit results from calibration tests conducted by an independent testing laboratory within the previous num days .
num general .
see section num for contractordesigned soil nail retaining walls .
verify the limits of the wall installation .
clear the work area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
excavate according to section num .
excavate for the wall in staged lifts concurrent with soil nail installation and shotcrete placement .
do not allow the exposed unsupported final excavation face cut height to exceed the vertical soil nail spacing plus the required reinforcing lap or the shortterm standup height of the ground whichever is less .
do not excavate to the next lower lift until soil nail installation reinforced shotcrete placement attachment of bearing plates and nuts and soil nail testing have been completed and accepted for the current lift .
cure grout and shotcrete at least num hours or attain the specified numday compressive strength before excavating the next underlying lift .
application of the shotcrete may be delayed up to num hours if it can be demonstrated the delay will not adversely affect the excavation face stability .
num tendon fabrication .
provide tendons designed to carry loads consistent with the approved design .
thread tendon ends so they are capable of withstanding the approved test loads in addition to accommodating the attachment of the bearing plate beveled washer nut or other appurtenances as required by the manufacturers specifications and the contract .
section num num limit coupling of tendons to two per installation .
use couplers manufactured with a center stop to ensure equal length of thread connects each section .
do not use couplers that interfere with the flow of grout .
protect couplings from corrosion using the same corrosion protection used on the soil nail tendon assembly .
use centralizers to position the tendon within num inch num millimeters of the center of the drill hole .
use centralizers that do not impede the free flow of grout into the drill hole .
position centralizers within num inches num millimeters from the top and bottom of the tendon and so their centertocenter spacing does not exceed num feet num meters .
secure centralizers to the tendon to prevent shift during handling or inserting into the drill hole .
num handling and storing material .
see subsection num .
num installation .
a drilling .
drill soil nail holes at the required locations and orientations .
use drilling equipment and methods suitable for the ground conditions .
do not use water drilling slurry or other fluids for drilling or removing cuttings .
insert the soil nail tendon into the hole .
clean or redrill drill holes where the tendon with centralizers can not be completely inserted without forcing or driving .
b grouting .
use a positive displacement grout pump according to subsection numb num .
grout tendons into drill holes using a neat hydraulic cement grout .
mix grout as recommended by the cement supplier at the specified watertocementitious material ratio .
inject grout within num minutes of adding the cement to the water or within num minutes after mixing when the ambient temperature is num f num c or higher .
do not allow the grout temperature to exceed num f num c. grout the drill hole within num hours of completing drilling .
inject the grout at the lowest point of each drill hole .
place primary and secondary grout stages in one continuous operations .
keep the outlet end of the grout tube below the surface of the grout as the tube is withdrawn to prevent voids .
control grout pressures to avoid ground heaving or fracturing .
record the quantity of injected grout and the grout pressure for each soil nail installation .
after grouting is complete fill the grout tube with grout if it will remain in the hole .
maintain the temporary unbonded length of proof test soil nails open for later grouting .
if the unbonded test length of production proof test soil nails can not be satisfactorily grouted after testing install a new soil nail in its place .
request approval for alternate soil nail installation methods including grout socks grout admixtures or both when conditions prove necessary .
provide the co with an onsite demonstration as part of the request .
num testing and stressing .
a testing equipment .
see subsection numa .
section num num b stressing .
place stressing equipment over the soil nail so that the jack bearing plates load cells and stressing assembly are axially aligned with the tendon and the tendon is centered within the equipment .
do not apply loads greater than num percent of the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon for grade num num bars or num percent of the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon for grade num num or num bars .
do not test soil nails until the soil nail grout and shotcrete facing have cured for at least num hours and attained the specified numday compressive strength .
place the reference pressure gauge in series with the pressure gauge and jack so they need not be unloaded and repositioned during a test .
raise the load from one increment to another .
hold the load for the required time beginning immediately after the load is applied and record the soil nail head movement to the nearest num inch num millimeters with respect to an independent fixed reference point .
repump the jack as necessary to maintain a constant load .
monitor the load with a pressure gauge .
if the load measured by the pressure gauge and the load measured by the reference pressure gauge differ by more than num percent recalibrate the jack pressure gauge and reference pressure gauge .
num verification test .
the co will designate locations for sacrificial soil nails for verification tests .
provide verification test soil nails with a minimum unbonded length of num feet num meters and a minimum bonded length of num feet num meters .
use the following formula to determine the maximum bonded length d s y bv q cf a l max num where lbvmax maximum verification test soil nail bonded length feet meters c num for grades num num and num num bars and num for grade num num bars fy bar yield or ultimate stress pounds per square inch kilonewtons per square meter as bar steel area square inches square meters qd allowable pullout resistance pounds per foot kilonewtons per meter determine the design test load by the following equation d bv q l dtl where dtl design test load pounds kilonewtons lbv bonded test length feet meters as determined from test residual elongation qd allowable pullout resistance pounds per foot kilonewtons per meter section num num provide a larger bar size if necessary for safety and test according to tables num and num .
table num verification test load schedule test load increment hold time minutes al num numdtl num numdtl num numdtl num numdtl num numdtl num numdtl loadhold test num numdtl num numdtl maximum acceptance load num numdtl or failure num num dtl or failure num al num al alignment load no greater than num percent of dtl numdtl applied to the soil nail before setting the movement recording devices .
zero dial gauges after the first setting of al .
dtl design test load .
hold the load to within num percent and measure and record soil nail movement at num num num num num num num num num and num minutes .
a verification test is acceptable based on the criteria in table num .
table num verification test soil nail acceptance criteria total loadtest hold movement total movement at maximum load pullout failurenum num inches num millimeters between num and num minutes aline criteria greater than num of the apparent elastic elongation of the test soil nail unbonded length .
no pullout at num dtl bline criteria less than the apparent elastic elongation of the test soil nail unbonded length and half of the bond length .
num pullout failure is the inability to further increase the test load while there is continued pullout movement of the test soil nail .
record the pullout failure load as part of the test data .
provide the co a written report confirming soil nail geometry construction testing details and verification test results .
the test results must be reviewed and approved by the co before installing production soil nails .
if the soil nail verification is unacceptable establish the cause and make design or construction modifications .
submit modifications requiring changes to the structure and retest the new system as directed by the co .
section num num num proof tests .
the co will designate production soil nails for proof testing .
provide production proof test soil nails with a minimum temporary unbonded length of num feet num meters and a minimum bonded length of num feet num meters .
use the following formula to determine the maximum bonded length d s y bp q cf a l num max where lbpmax maximum proof test soil nail bonded length feet meters c num for grade num num and num num bars and num for grade num num bars fy bar yield or ultimate stress pounds per square inch kilonewton per square meter as bar steel area square inches square meters qd allowable pullout resistance pounds per foot kilonewtons per meter determine the design test load by the following equation d bp q l dtl where dtl design test load pounds kilonewtons lbp bonded test length feet meters as determined by test residual elongation qd allowable pullout resistance pounds per foot kilonewtons per meter section num num test according to tables num and num .
table num proof test load schedule test load increment hold time minutes al until stable numdtl numdtl numdtl numdtl numdtl numdtl maximum acceptance load num al num al see alignment load note in table num .
dtl design test load .
for load and resistance factor design dtl nominal load φ resistance factor γ load factor .
hold the load to within num percent and measure and record soil nail movement at num num num num num and num minutes .
if the soil nail movement between num and num minutes exceeds num inches num millimeter continue measuring and recording soil nail movement at num num num and num minutes .
c test results and reporting .
provide preliminary results to the co for each soil nail tested before testing personnel leave the site .
submit detailed verification and proof test load and deflection data in a tabular format .
submit a graph that plots total soil nail movement versus load the aline and the bline .
the aline is defined as num multiplied by the theoretical free test length elastic elongation .
the bline is defined as the theoretical free test length elastic elongation plus num multiplied by the theoretical bond length elastic elongation .
allow num days for the co to conduct a review of the data and approve ground anchor installation .
num wall drainage network .
install required elements of the wall drainage network such as geocomposite sheet drain pvc connector pipes and weep holes before shotcreting each lift .
center geocomposite sheet drains between soil nail columns with the geotextile filter side against the ground .
add additional sheet drain at wet locations and as requested by the co .
secure sheet drains to the excavated face to prevent shotcrete from contaminating the ground side of the geotextile .
construct sheet drain splices according to the manufacturers recommendations .
install foot drains at the bottom of the wall according to section num .
num wall construction .
place welded wire steel mesh and reinforcing steel according to section num .
construct a shotcrete construction facing according to section num .
completely fill ungrouted zones of soil nail drill holes or other voids with shotcrete .
attach a bearing plate and nut to each soil nail head .
uniformly seat the plate by tightening the nut with a hand wrench while the shotcrete is still plastic .
where uniform contact between the plate and the shotcrete can not be provided set the plate in a bed of grout and tighten the nut with a hand wrench after the grout has set for num hours .
section num num construct wall elements to tolerances shown in table num .
table num wall element construction tolerances wall element tolerance horizontal location of headed studs from plan location ⅜ inch num millimeters location of headed studs on bearing plate from plan location ¼ inch num millimeters soil nail head bearing plate deviation from parallel to wall face num degrees num permanent wall facing .
construct the permanent wall facing according to the applicable section below .
a shotcretefaced walls .
construct according to section num and the construction tolerances shown in table num. b concretefaced walls .
construct according to section num. c simulated stone masonry .
construct according to section num. d stone masonry .
construct according to section num .
table num permanent shotcrete facing construction tolerances facing finish tolerance inch millimeter complete thickness of shotcrete from plan dimension troweled or screeded finish ⅝ num shot finish num⅛ num planeness of finish face surface gap under a numfoot nummeter straightedge troweled or screeded finish ⅝ num shot finish num⅛ num num backfilling behind wall facing upper cantilever section .
backfill behind the wall with structural backfill according to subsection num .
use light mechanical tamper to compact within num inches num millimeters behind the wall facing section .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for the soil nails will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of soil nails .
construction of soil nails will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installed soil nails will be evaluated based on the criteria in table num .
section num num table num proof soil nail acceptance criteria total loadhold movement total movement at maximum load pullout failurenum num inches num millimeter between num and num minutes or num inches num millimeters between num and num minutesnum aline criteria greater than num of the apparent elastic elongation of the test soil nail unbonded length .
no pullout at num dtl bline criteria less than the apparent elastic elongation of the test soil nail unbonded length and half of the bond length .
num and the rate of movement is linear or decreasing throughout the loadhold period .
num pullout failure is the inability to further increase the test load while there is continued pullout movement of the test soil nail .
record the pullout failure load as part of the test data .
if a prooftested soil nail is unacceptable replace some or all of the installed production soil nails between the unacceptable proof test soil nail and the next proof test soil nail in the row as directed by the co. alternatively install additional proof test soil nails within this area to ensure that the acceptance criteria is met within this area .
propose alternative installation and testing methods before installing additional soil nails .
when ground conditions soil nail installation methods or testing procedures change conduct additional verification testing before proceeding with production soil nail installation .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring soil nail retaining walls by the square foot square meter measure the front wall face .
when verification test soil nails are measured by the each do not measure failed verification test soil nails or additional verification test soil nails installed to verify alternative soil nail installation methods proposed by the contractor .
when production soil nails are measured by the linear foot meter measure along bar centerline from the line of the wall excavation face to the tip of the soil nail .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks mix design neat hydraulic cement grout numanum measured and tested for conformance num compressive strengthnum aashto t num num per mix design source of material yes num days before production production verification test soil nail measured and tested for conformance num performance subsection numbnum each soil nail installed no num days proof test soil nail subsection numbnum num days num at numday and numday .
section num num section num .
rock bolts and dowels description num this work consists of furnishing and installing rock bolts and dowels .
rock bolts are pre or posttensioned fully grouted deformed steel bars that actively reinforce a rock mass .
rock dowels are untensioned fully grouted deformed steel bars that passively reinforce a rock mass .
material num conform to the following section and subsections minor concrete num nonshrink grout numb polyester resin grout numd reinforcing bars dowels numb rock bolts num construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a professional engineer onsite supervisors and installation personnel with experience installing and testing rock bolts or dowels .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least five rock bolt or dowel projects of similar complexity over the past num years .
include project names locations and contact information for project owners .
num submittals .
at least num days before starting bolt or dowel installation work submit the following according to subsection num a start date b method of access excavation scaling and drilling c rock bolt or dowel construction sequence d rock bolt or dowel type length and diameter .
if threads are cut into deformed bars size the bar based on the loads specified e couplers bearing plates washers and stressing anchorages with manufacturers product data sheets specifications catalog cuts and mill certificates f manufacturer recommendations for tendon and hardware handling storing and working temperature ranges section num num g grout type mix design placement procedures and manufacturers product data sheets num polyester resin grout .
a manufacturer certification for gel time shelf life compressive strength and storage and working temperature ranges and b number diameter and length of resin cartridges with bar spin speed travel speed and spin time for each tendon and hole size combination .
num cement grout .
mixing equipment and numday grout compressive strength test results .
a twostage cement grouting .
means for determining the level of primary grout in the hole and b singlestage cement grouting .
fabrication details for proposed bondbreaker in the free stressing zone when applicable .
h manufacturer certification for corrosionresistant bar coating and procedures and material for repairing corrosion protection coatings in the field i details for placing stressing and testing tendons .
schedule of a test installation to demonstrate rock bolt or dowel installation testing equipment and procedures and countersink finishing if applicable j for rock bolts a detailed procedure for placing the anchor head assembly bearing plate and nut below the exposed rock surface or for removing the anchor head assembly following final lockoff without impacting the tendon design load .
include details for a countersink and colored grout or epoxy patch when applicable k methods for verifying hole diameters l special installation methods such as upwardly inclined reinforcements grouting across open joints or debrisfilled discontinuities used to ensure a fullygrouted wellprotected installation when applicable m report documentation examples including installation and testing report formats and n identification number and calibration test certification for each jack pressure gauge and electronic load cell .
clearly indicate the serial number of each component of the testing assembly on calibration graphs .
submit results from calibration tests conducted by an independent testing laboratory within the previous num days .
num rock bolt fabrication .
a general .
fabricate rock bolts according to pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors .
size tendons to ensure num the design load does not exceed num percent of minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon and num the maximum test load does not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
section num num b couplers .
couple only fullygrouted anchors .
couple sections together only when the design length exceeds the standard commercially available bar lengths .
use couplers with a center stop to ensure equal length of thread connects each section .
do not use couplings that interfere with the flow of grout .
c anchorage .
for the stressing anchorage use a steel bearing plate washers flat hardened beveled or spherical as required and a nut capable of developing num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
d centralizers .
for cement grouted rock bolts place centralizers along the tendon at numfoot nummeter centers with at least one centralizer per rock bolt .
locate the lowermost centralizer within num inches num millimeters of the end .
use centralizers of sufficient strength to support the anchor bar in the drilled hole .
num handling and storing material .
handle and store tendons according to astm dnum the manufacturers recommendations and subsection num .
store polyester resin grout cartridges according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not use polyester resin grout cartridges that are expired damaged frozen hardened or otherwise defective .
num installation .
a drilling .
provide equipment capable of drilling straight and uniformdiameter holes .
do not use water or drilling slurry .
drill rock bolt and dowel hole collars and hole depths within num inches num millimeters of the required location and depth .
size drill holes to provide at least num inches num millimeters of grout cover over the bond zone portion of the tendon .
clean drill holes of cuttings sludge and debris .
b grouting .
install the rock anchor within num hours of completing the drill hole .
orient reinforcement within num degrees of the specified angle .
num cement grout installations .
use a positive displacement grout pump according to subsection numbnum .
install the tendon and batch and inject grout according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for singlestage cementgrouted tendons do not grout beyond the top of the bondbreaker assemblage along the freestressing length before tensioning the tendon .
place the grout in one continuous operation .
control grout pressures to avoid ground heaving or fracturing .
fill the grout tube with grout if it will remain in the hole .
record the quantity of injected grout and the grout pressure for each installation .
notify the co of grout quantity overruns including the reason for the overrun and proposed actions to minimize future overruns .
obtain approval for alternative grouting methods .
num resin grout installations .
insert the approved number and size of resin cartridges to fully cover the bond zone and fill the drill hole to the collar .
follow the approved procedures for tendon spin speed travel speed and spin time for resin used .
use spin adapters during tendon installation to avoid damaging the finished end tendon threads .
a rock bolts .
fully grout the bond zone with fastset resin and the remainder of the hole with slowset resin or cement grout for combination grout installations .
section num num b rock dowels .
use a single resin grout with set time sufficient for complete installation .
c bearing plate installation .
place the bearing plate so at least three quarters of the plates surface is in contact with a rock face .
construct a bearing pad approved by the co if the rock face is irregular or unsound or the axis of the tendon is greater than num degrees from perpendicular to the bearing plate when the axis of the tendon passes through the center of the bearing plate without bending the tendon .
use beveled washers if the axis of the tendon is greater than num degrees from perpendicular to the bearing plate .
allow at least num inches num millimeters of tendon length beyond the nut .
for dowels when the grout has reached final set per the manufacturers recommendations or a minimum compressive strength of num percent of the numday compressive strength install the bearing plate washers and nut and apply a torque of num footpounds num newtonmeters to ensure proper seating against the rock face .
after loadtesting tension and lockoff of rock bolts place nonstructural filler cement grout or polyester resin grout for the entire free stressing length .
remove excess grout from the rock face and anchor assembly .
paint exposed parts of the rock bolt bearing plate and nut with an approved corrosionprotection paint or epoxy patching compound .
when covers are required rock bolt the anchorage cover to the bearing plate and completely fill cover with grout after the rock anchor has been tested and finally lockedoff .
after the grout has achieved initial set demonstrate to the co that the anchorage cover is completely filled with grout .
for rock bolt and dowel installations ensure the tendon is fully grouted to the collar of the hole .
num rock bolt testing stressing and finishing .
conduct testing of tensioned and untensioned rock bolts according to pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors .
trim the corrosion protection surrounding the free stressing length of the tendon so it does not contact the bearing plate during testing and stressing .
for singlestage cementgrouted tendons tension the tendon after the bond zone grout is set and reaches sufficient pullout strength .
for twostage cementgrouted tendons tension the tendon after the bond zone grout is set and reaches sufficient pullout strength and before the free stressing length is grouted .
for resingrouted tendons tension the tendon after the fastset resin fully sets in the bond zone and before the slowset resin begins to set in the free stressing length .
for mechanicallyanchored tendons tension the tendon immediately following insertion in the hole and before fully grouting .
a performance tests .
use the same equipment tendons drill hole specifications grout posttensioning and installation methods as used for production installations to verify required bond strengths in the anchorage zone before final grouting of the stressing length .
for twostage grouted posttensioned rock bolts and singlestage grouted posttensioned rock bolts employing bond breakers conduct performance tests on sacrificial or production installations .
for pretensioned installations conduct performance tests on sacrificial installations .
when changes or modifications in the equipment tendons drill hole specifications or installation methods occur conduct another performance test as approved by the co .
section num num tension rock bolts to num percent of the design load with a calibrated hollowram hydraulic jack for a holding time of not more than num minutes .
take load and extension measurements during tensioning with a measuring device such as a dial gauge or vernier scale capable of measuring to num inches num millimeters .
a rock bolt is acceptable if both of the following conditions are satisfied num the total elastic movement obtained at the maximum test load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the free stressing length and num the rock bolt will carry the maximum test load with a creep rate that does not exceed num inches num millimeter between num and num minutes or num inches num millimeters per log cycle between the num and num minute readings .
perform at least two successful performance tests for each different rock unit anchor type and proposed drillinginstallationgrouting method before beginning production rock bolt installation .
when a performance test fails modify the design or construction procedure as needed and conduct another performance test on a replacement production installation .
conduct performance tests at locations approved by the co. b proof tests .
conduct proof testing on production pre and posttensioned rock bolt installations .
proof test each production rock bolt to num percent of the design load .
if no loss of load occurs in num minutes the rock bolt is approve .
when a proof test fails or results vary significantly from the performance test result document the expected reasons for failure modify the design or construction procedure and conduct an additional performance test on a replacement production rock bolt installation .
obtain approval from the co for the location of replacement anchors .
after tensioning and achieving a successful rock bolt proof test lock off the load at num percent of the design load and grout the remaining portion of the rock bolt as appropriate .
num rock dowel liftoff testing and finishing .
conduct testing of rock dowels according to pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors .
test only fully grouted dowels .
conduct at least five successful liftoff tests in succession for each different rock unit anchor type and proposed drillinginstallationgrouting method .
gradually load lift off test reinforcements to num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the dowel tendon and monitor the pressure gage to verify the anchor is holding the design load for at least num minutes .
if the anchors do not pull out test num percent of the remaining dowels .
if pressure is lost on the pressure gage due to anchorage movement replace the dowel and conduct liftoff tests on an additional five anchors in succession until all are satisfactory .
num test results and reporting .
submit test results to co for review .
maintain daily records of rock bolt and dowel work in a manner acceptable to the co including a asbuilt drawings depicting the location of each anchor noting anchor designation date drilled and grouted total anchor length bonded length free stressing length grout mix grout volume average grout pressure hole diameter size of tendon tendon inclination and installation comments .
submit asbuilt drawings according to section num after work completion .
section num num b performance and proof test data forms including the anchor designation bonded length free stressing length stressing length date of stressing operation signature of stressing operator or inspector required elongation and associated gage pressure actual elongation and associated gage pressure identification numbers of jacking equipment comments and a table including incremental jack pressure jack load and movement .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for rock bolts and dowels will be evaluated under subsections num num and num .
construction of rock bolts and dowels will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
grouting will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installed rock bolts and dowels will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate quality fine num measured and tested for conformance num num quality aashto m num num per material type source of material yes before producing mix design grout numb measured and tested for conformance num flow astm cnum num per mix design source of material yes when requested before producing compressive strength numday astm cnum production performance test for rock bolts measured and tested for conformance num deformation subsection numa subsection numa installation no num hours proof test for rock bolts subsection numb each bolt section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued liftoff test for rock dowel measured and tested for conformance num deformation subsection num subsection num section num num section num .
reinforced soil slopes description num this work consists of constructing reinforced soil slopes .
material num conform to the following subsections backfill material num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid num construction requirements num submittals .
at least num days before starting reinforced soil slope construction submit the following according to subsection num a manufacturers certification .
certification and test results indicating the proposed soil reinforcement reinforced embankment and facing material meets requirements b splice details .
detail proposed splices in soil reinforcement and c facing details .
provide installation methods and connection details for facing system .
num general .
see section num for contractordesigned reinforced soil slope systems .
verify the limits of the reinforced soil slope installation .
clear the area of vegetation and obstructions according to sections num and num .
conserve topsoil according to subsection num .
prepare and compact foundation soils according to subsection num .
grade the foundation soils supporting the reinforced soil slope for a width equal to the length of the lowest soil reinforcement level .
bench cut slope surfaces to key the reinforced soil slope into the existing embankment .
num soil reinforcement and facing .
lay each layer of soil reinforcement flat pull tight and hold in place with pins soil piles or other approved methods .
construct the reinforced soil slope to achieve the slopes specified and roadbed tolerances according to subsection numd .
grade and compact backfill material according to subsections num and num before placing the next soil reinforcement layer .
maintain a minimum cover of num inches num millimeters over the reinforcement during spreading and compacting of fill material .
avoid sudden stops starts or turns of the equipment .
do not use sheepsfootrollers .
use lightweight mechanical tampers rollers vibratory systems or other methods for compaction within num inches num millimeters of the slope face .
place backfill material in a manner that tensions the reinforcement working from the slope face to the back of reinforcement .
section num num do not leave reinforcement exposed at end of shift .
at the end of each shift shape to drain and compact the work area to a uniform crosssection .
at the end of the days operation slope the last lift of backfill away from the slope face to direct surface runoff away from the slope .
num acceptance .
material for reinforced soil slopes will be evaluated under subsections num num and num .
construction of reinforced soil slopes will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
when measuring reinforced soil slope backfill within the stabilized volume by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num num division num aggregate and base courses section num num section num .
untreated aggregate courses description num this work consists of constructing one or more courses of aggregate on a prepared surface .
subbase and base aggregate grading is designated according to table num .
surface course aggregate grading is designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections subbase base and surface course aggregate num water numc construction requirements num general .
prepare the surface on which the aggregate course is placed according to section num or num as applicable .
after a representative quantity of aggregate is produced submit proposed target values for the appropriate sieve sizes along with a representative numpound numkilogram sample at least num days before incorporating the aggregate into the work .
set target values within the gradation ranges shown in table num or num for the required grading .
num mixing and spreading .
determine the optimum moisture content according to aashto t num method d. mix the aggregate and adjust the moisture content to obtain a uniform mixture with a moisture content within num percent of the optimum moisture content .
spread and shape the mixture on the prepared surface in a uniform layer .
do not place the mixture in a layer exceeding num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness .
when more than one layer is necessary compact each layer according to subsection num before placing the next layer .
route hauling equipment uniformly over the full width of the surface to minimize rutting or uneven compaction .
num compacting .
determine the maximum density of the mixture according to aashto t num method d. compact each layer full width .
roll from the sides to the center parallel to the centerline of the road .
along curbs headers walls and places not accessible to the roller compact the material with approved tampers or compactors .
compact each layer to at least num percent of maximum density .
determine the inplace density and moisture content according to aashto t num or other approved test procedures .
section num num num surface tolerance .
if grade finishing stakes are required finish the surface to within num feet num millimeters from staked line and grade elevation .
if grade finishing stakes are not required shape the surface to the required template and check the surface with a numfoot nummeter straightedge .
defective areas are surface deviations in excess of ½ inch num millimeters in num feet num meters between two contacts of the straightedge with the surface .
correct defective areas by loosening the material adding or removing material reshaping and compacting .
num maintenance .
maintain the aggregate course to the correct line grade and crosssection by blading watering rolling or combination thereof until placement of the next course .
correct defects according to subsection num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements including the category for quality characteristics .
aggregate gradation and surface course plasticity index will be evaluated under subsection num .
other aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num. a aggregate gradation .
the upper and lower specification limits are equal to the calculated mean of all test results plus or minus the allowable deviations shown in tables num and num except as follows num if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve exceeds the maximum gradation value shown in table num or num then the upper specification is equal to the maximum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the maximum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
num if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve is less than the minimum gradation value shown in table num or num then the upper specification is equal to the minimum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the minimum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
b plasticity index .
the upper and lower specification limits for surface courses are shown in subsection numcnum .
construction of untreated aggregate courses will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring aggregate by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
when measuring aggregate by the square yard square meter measure the length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
measure the width horizontally to include the top of aggregate width including designed widenings .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement adjusted according to subsection num for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate quality numa b c measured and tested for conformance num num la abrasion coarse aashto t num num per type source of material source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided sources soundness using sodium sulfate coarse fine aashto t num fractured faces astm dnum liquid limit aashto rnum t num method a surface course aggregate numc plasticity index aashto r num t num t num crusher belt or after processing section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source continued subbase base or surface course aggregate numb c process control num gradation aashto t num tnum num per day per stockpile minimum crusher belt no num hours not required when using a precrushed commercial source fractured faces astm dnum surface course aggregate numc plasticity index aashto r num t num t num crusher belt or after processing production subbase course grading a b statistical num gradation aashto t num t num num per num tons num metric tons from windrow or roadbed after processing yes num hours no .
num num mm i no .
num numµm i other specified sieves ii section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued base course grading c d e statistical num gradation aashto t num t num num per num tons num metric tons from windrow or roadbed after processing yes num hours ⅜ inch num mm i no .
num num mm i no .
num numµm i other specified sieves ii subbase base course grading a b c d e measured and tested for conformance num liquid limit aashto r num t num method a num per num tons num metric tons from windrow or roadbed after processing yes num hours moisture density max density aashto t num method d num num per type source of material stockpile or production output density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num tons num metric tons inplace after compaction no end of shift moisture content inplace section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued surface course aggregate statistical num gradation aashto t num t num num per num tons num metric tons from windrow or roadbed after processing yes num hours no .
num num mm i no .
num num µm i no .
num num µm i other specified sieves ii plasticity index i aashto r num t num t num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density max density aashto t num method d num num per type source of material stockpile or production output yes density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num tons num metric tons inplace after compaction no end of shift moisture content inplace fractured faces astm dnum num per num tons num metric tons from windrow on roadbed after processing yes num hours section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product subbase base and surface course measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co surface of final course no before placement of next layer or as requested num minimum of num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
minor crushed aggregate description num this work consists of furnishing and placing crushed aggregate for bedding backfill and roadway aggregates on a prepared surface .
material num conform to the following subsections crushed aggregate num water numc construction requirements num preparing surface .
a roadway aggregate .
prepare the surface on which the aggregate course is placed according to section num. b bedding and backfill aggregate .
shape compact and finish the surface to the required lines grade elevation and crosssection according to section num .
num placing crushed aggregate .
a roadway aggregate .
mix the aggregate and adjust the moisture content to obtain a uniform mixture .
adjust the moisture content to obtain proper compaction .
spread and shape in uniform layers not to exceed num inches num millimeters compacted thickness .
where more than one layer is necessary compact the underlying layer according to subsection num. b bedding and backfill aggregate .
place and shape the mixture in layers that when compacted do not exceed num inches num millimeters in depth .
num compacting and finishing crushed aggregate .
a roadway aggregate .
when no compaction method is specified use either method .
finish surface according to subsection num .
num method num .
compact each layer according to subsection numa .
roll from the sides to the center parallel to the centerline of the road .
compact the material along curbs headers walls and places not accessible to a roller with approved tampers or compactors .
compactive effort may be decreased if inplace densities show that less compactive effort is required under method num .
num method num .
compact each layer according to subsection num. b bedding and backfill aggregate .
compact each layer according to subsection num .
section num num num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
crushed aggregate will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification including gradation and quality properties for each source .
construction of roadway aggregate courses will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
method num compaction will be evaluated under subsection num .
placement of bedding and backfill aggregate will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring crushed aggregate by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
when measuring aggregate by the square yard square meter measure the length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
measure the width horizontally to include the top of aggregate width including designed widenings .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production crushed aggregate measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method d num num per aggregate supplied production output or stockpile no num hours density aashto tnum or other approved procedures num per num tons num metric tons inplace after compaction end of shift for method num compaction only crushed aggregate process control num moisture content inplace finished product crushed aggregate measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co surface of final course no before placement of next layer or as requested num minimum of num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
road reconditioning description num this work consists of reconditioning ditches shoulders roadbeds aggregate surfaces or the entire road .
material num conform to the following subsection water numc construction requirements num ditch reconditioning .
remove slide material sediment vegetation and other debris from existing ditches and culvert inletsoutlets .
reshape ditches and culvert inletsoutlets to achieve positive drainage and uniform ditch width depth and grade .
dispose of waste at designated sites or according to subsection num .
num shoulder reconditioning .
remove slide material vegetation and other debris from existing shoulders including shoulders in parking areas turnouts and other widened areas .
repair soft and unstable areas according to subsection num .
reshape shoulders to the widths and slopes shown in the plans .
dispose of waste at designated sites or according to subsection num .
num roadbed reconditioning .
remove organic deleterious and material larger than num inches num millimeters from the top num inches num millimeters of subgrade .
dispose of waste according to subsection num .
repair soft and unstable areas according to subsection num .
scarify surface to a numinch nummillimeter depth .
remove irregularities and shape to a uniform surface .
finish earth surfaces to within num feet num millimeters and rock surfaces to within num feet num millimeters of required line grade and crosssection .
compact according to subsection num .
num aggregate surface reconditioning .
repair soft and unstable areas to the full aggregate surface depth and according to subsection num .
scarify the thickness of aggregate surfacing material or to num inches num millimeters whichever is less .
remove irregularities and shape to a uniform surface .
finish and compact the surface according to subsection num .
num roadway reconditioning .
perform applicable work described in subsections num through num .
maintain existing cross slope and crown or as shown in the plans .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
road reconditioning work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure waste under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production existing roadbed material or aggregate surfacing measured and tested for conformance num classification aashto m num num per soil type roadbed yes before using in work moisture density aashto t num method d num or aashto t num method cnum num per mixture or change in material processed material no density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum inplace after compaction end of shift for subsection numc cases only process control num moisture content inplace finished product aggregate surface reconditioning num measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determine by the co surface of final course no before placement of next layer or as requested num minimum of num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
full depth reclamation description num this work consists of pulverizing an existing pavement and base inplace adding crushed aggregate if required mixing this material with water and shaping and compacting the mix to produce a base .
material num conform to the following subsections crushed aggregate num water numc construction requirements num general .
establish profile and cross slope control .
maintain the existing cross slope or crown if none is established .
before pulverizing remove and dispose of unsuitable material as directed by the co .
replace unsuitable material with crushed aggregate according to subsection num .
protect manholes valve covers and other buried facilities from damage .
num adding crushed aggregate .
if required add crushed aggregate to bring the finished surface to the established line grade and crosssection .
num pulverizing .
furnish a road reclaimer that is a selfpropelled b specifically manufactured for inplace reclamation c capable of reducing the existing material to the required size d equipped with at least an numfoot nummeter cutting width e equipped with standard automatic depth controls adjustable in increments of ½ inch num millimeters and f equipped with sufficient horsepower to constantly pulverize to the required depth in a single pass .
use the reclaimer to pulverize the existing roadway material inplace until num percent passes the numinch nummillimeter sieve .
reprocess or remove larger particles and dispose of them according to subsection num .
section num num num mixing and spreading .
add water as necessary to adjust the moisture content of the mixture to within num percent of the optimum for compaction .
mix to produce a homogenous full depth mixture .
spread the mixture uniformly across the existing roadbed to provide a final compacted shape according to the established line grade and crosssection .
num compacting .
compact using one of the following methods a method num .
compact material full width according to subsection numa .
b method num .
compact material according to subsection num .
num surface tolerance .
see subsection num .
num maintenance .
see subsection num .
overlay the base within num days after compacting .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
crushed aggregate will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of full depth reclamation will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable .
measure crushed aggregate under section num .
measure removal and disposal of unsuitable material under sections num and num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production pulverized material measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method d num num per change in material behind reclaimer before compaction yes before using in work density aashto t num num per num ydnum num mnum inplace after compaction no end of shift for method num compaction only process control num moisture content inplace aashto t num or other approved methods minimum num per num ydnum num mnum upon completion of test gradation aashto t num behind reclaimer before compaction minus numinch nummm sieve requirement only finished product finished pulverized material measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co completed fdr surface no before placement of next layer or as requested num minimum of num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
full depth reclamation with cement description num this work consists of pulverizing an existing pavement and base inplace adding crushed aggregate if required mixing this material with cement and water and shaping and compacting the mix to produce a stabilized base .
material num conform to the following subsections crushed aggregate num hydraulic cement num water numc construction requirements num proportioning .
collect representative samples of the pavement and base from the project .
process and blend these material to achieve a gradation representative of the inplace pulverized material .
estimate the median cement content by mass to meet the requirements of table num .
at this median cement content and at cement contents num percent above and below this median determine the optimum moisture content maximum density and the parameters included in table num .
table num soilaggregatecement mix design parameters material or property requirement unconfined compressive strength astm dnum method anum average strength num specimens num psi num mpa min .
maximum strength of a single specimen break num psi num mpa or less loss in mass aashto t num aashto t num num cycles num max .
num at numday cure at num f num c according to astm dnum .
section num num submit a mix design for approval num days before production which includes the following a optimum cement content conforming to the requirements of table num b maximum density and moisture content at the optimum cement content according to aashto t num minimum of num points c source of each component material d results of all tests and applicable charts and graphs e gradation and proportion of imported crushed aggregate f numpound numkilogram sample of the pavement base and imported crushed aggregate if requested and g numpound numkilogram sample of portland cement if requested .
begin production only after the mix design is approved .
submit a new mix design if the co requests due to a change in material .
num general .
see subsection num .
num production startup procedures .
a preparatory phase meeting .
conduct a prestabilization preparatory phase meeting at least num days before the start of stabilizing operations according to subsection numa .
b control strip .
provide num days notice before beginning production .
on the first day of production stabilize a numfoot nummeter control strip onelane wide at the designated lift thickness and mix design proportions .
construct the control strip on the project at an approved location .
construct the control strip using construction procedures intended for the entire project .
take nuclear gauge density readings behind each roller pass to determine the roller pattern necessary to achieve the specification requirements in subsection num .
cease production after construction of the control strip until the stabilized base layer and the control strip are evaluated for acceptance .
repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
see subsection num for the disposition of material in unacceptable control strips .
accepted control strips may remain in place and will be accepted and measured as a part of the completed base .
when a control strip is accepted full production may begin .
use these startup procedures when changing construction procedures when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num or the beginning of a new construction season .
num adding crushed aggregate .
see subsection num .
num pulverizing .
see subsection num .
section num num num applying cement .
do not add cement when the underlying surface is frozen muddy or when conditions allow for excessive loss to eroding or blowing .
begin cement application when the air temperature is above num f num c and is expected to stay above num f num c for num hours .
apply cement by one of the following methods a dry method .
use a metered mechanical spreader to uniformly apply the cement .
use canvas or similar skirts around the spreader box to minimize dust .
b slurry method .
use approved equipment and dispersal processes to uniformly apply a cement and water slurry without pooling or run off .
equip slurry tanks with an agitator to keep the cement suspended in water .
apply the slurry to the pulverized material with num minutes from time water first contacts the cement .
make successive passes over the material if necessary to obtain the proper moisture and cement content for mixing and compacting .
num mixing .
begin mixing within num minutes after cement application .
use a road reclaimer conforming to subsection num .
add water as necessary to adjust the moisture content of the mixture to within num percent of optimum as indicated in the approved mix design .
continue mixing until the cement is uniformly distributed within the in situ material creating a homogeneous full depth layer .
complete mixing within num hour of the cement application .
num compacting and finishing .
compact the processed material uniformly to at least num percent of maximum density as determined from aashto t num .
furnish rollers sized and configured to achieve the required compaction and finishing .
operate rollers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
compact the processed material full width by rolling from the sides to the center parallel to the centerline of the road .
along curbs headers walls and places not accessible to the roller compact the material with approved tampers or compactors .
during compaction and final grading maintain the moisture content of the mixture to within num percent of optimum .
do not leave areas of stabilized material uncompacted or undisturbed for more than num minutes .
complete compaction within num hour after mixing .
finish the compacted surface according to subsection num to produce a surface that is smooth dense and free of compaction planes ridges or loose material .
clean the compacted surface of loose material dirt or other deleterious material by approved methods .
complete finishing operations within num hours from the start of mixing including corrections to irregularities in the surface .
num construction joints .
when cement application operations are delayed or stopped for more than num hours make a transverse construction joint by cutting back into the completed work to form an approximately vertical face .
tie new work into the completed work by remixing approximately num inches num millimeters of the completed course .
num curing .
cure the layer at least num day before placing the next course by one of the methods below a water method .
keep the surface continuously moist by applying water through a spray bar equipped with nozzles producing a fine uniform spray .
during the first num hours of curing use a water truck with side spray to avoid driving on the newly stabilized layer .
b prime coat method .
seal the surface by placing an inverted prime coat according to subsection numb .
provide and maintain a continuous film over the surface .
section num num if approved by the co allow local automobile traffic on the cement stabilized layer num hours after finishing operations are complete .
limit traffic speeds to num miles num kilometers per hour .
stop traffic if there is surface marring or deformation .
do not allow truck traffic other than equipment necessary to complete the next course on the cement stabilized layer until the next course is placed .
num maintenance .
maintain the cement stabilized layer to the correct line grade and crosssection until placement of the next course .
if the cement stabilized layer loses stability density or finish before placement of the next course reprocess recompact and add cement as necessary to restore the strength of the damaged material .
overlay the stabilized base within num days after compacting .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
crushed aggregate will be evaluated under subsection num .
cement will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of full depth reclamation with cement will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
prime coat will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure crushed aggregate under section num .
measure prime coat under section num .
measure removal and disposal of unsuitable material under section num or num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks mix design full depth reclamation fdr with cement mixture measured and tested for conformance num all subsection num num per submitted mix design existing roadway yes minimum num days before production production startup control strip fdr with cement material measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num num minimum behind reclaimer before compaction no upon completion of test minus numinch nummm sieve requirement only moisture density max density aashto t num num minimum yes minimum num points per proctor moisture content inplace aashto t num num minimum inplace after compaction no density aashto t num or other approved methods subsection numb section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production fdr with cement material measured and tested for conformance num moisture density maximum density aashto t num num per change of material behind reclaimer before compaction yes before using in work minimum num points per proctor density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num ydnum num mnum inplace after compaction no end of shift process control num gradation aashto t num minimum num per num ydnum num mnum behind reclaimer before compaction upon completion of test monitor percent passing the numinch nummm and no .
num num mm sieves moisture content inplace aashto t num or other approved methods inplace after compaction unconfined compression strength numday table num minimum num per day behind reclaimer before compaction num days numday cure finished product fdr with cement material measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co completed fdr surface no before placement of next layer or as requested section num num section num .
full depth reclamation with asphalt description num this work consists of pulverizing an existing pavement and base inplace adding crushed aggregate if required mixing this material with emulsified asphalt or foamed asphalt and shaping and compacting the mix to produce a stabilized base .
the mixture may also include cement or fly ash .
emulsified asphalt grade is designated according to aashto m num aashto m num or subsection num .
asphalt binder grade is designated according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
material num conform to the following section and subsections asphalt binder num crushed aggregate num emulsified asphalt num fly ash class c numa fog seal num portland cement numa water numc construction requirements num proportioning .
collect representative samples of the pavement and aggregate base from the project .
replace removed pavement with asphalt concrete conforming to subsection numb or approved cold patch material .
design a mix according to flh t num conforming to the requirements of table num .
when using foamed asphalt supply a binder conforming to the requirements of table num .
submit the mix design and the following for approval num days before production a optimum emulsified or foamed asphalt binder content based on total mass of mixture b source and grade of emulsified or foamed asphalt binder c optimum moisture content for compaction based on total mass of mixture d recommended cement or fly ash content e maximum wet and dry density for the mixture at the recommended proportions of binder water and cement or fly ash according to aashto t num method d f gradation and proportion of imported crushed aggregate g results of tests and applicable graphs section num num h a representative numpound numkilogram sample of pavement base and imported crushed aggregate if requested i three numgallon num liter samples of emulsified or asphalt binder if requested j numpound numkilogram sample of portland cement or fly ash if requested and k optimum percent of injection water for foaming based on total mass of asphalt binder when using foamed asphalt for the binder .
begin production only after the mix design is approved .
submit a new mix design if there is a change in a material source .
table num asphalt stabilized base course mix design requirements binder type material or property requirement emulsified asphalt and foamed asphalt indirect tensile strength aashto t num num tensile strength wet num psi num kpa minimum tensile strength ratio tsr num minimum num follow the modified aashto t num procedures as indicated in flh t num .
table num foamed asphalt binder property requirements property requirement foamed asphalt expansion characteristics at num num num f num num num cnum asphalt expansion ratio num minimum halflife of foamed expansion num seconds minimum num see flh t num for test procedures .
num general .
see subsection num .
num production startup procedures .
a preparatory phase meeting .
conduct a prestabilization preparatory phase meeting at least num days before the start of stabilizing operations according to subsection numa .
b control strip .
provide num days notice before beginning production .
on the first day of production stabilize a numfoot nummeter long control strip onelane wide and at the designated lift thickness .
construct the control strip on the project at an approved location .
construct the control strip using the construction procedures intended for the entire project .
cease production after construction of the control strip until the stabilized base layer and the control strip are evaluated and verified for approval .
section num num after the reclaimer has pulverized and mixed one reclaimer width for num feet nummeter of the control strip and before compaction dig a test pit to evaluate the mixing and distribution of the asphalt .
if homogeneous mixing is not occurring modify the process and pulverize mix and verify another num feet nummeter .
continue until acceptable mixing and distribution of asphalt is obtained .
take three random loose mix samples within the control strip and verify that num percent passes the numinch nummillimeter sieve .
take nuclear gauge density readings behind each roller pass according to aashto t num to determine the roller pattern necessary to achieve at least num percent of the maximum wet density .
determine the maximum wet density by sampling processed material from behind the reclaimer before compaction and testing the material according to aashto t num method d. repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
see subsection num for the disposition of material in unacceptable control strips .
accepted control strips may remain in place and will be accepted and measured as a part of the completed base .
c control strip verification .
the control strip is verified when the specified density gradation and moisture content is obtained .
full production may begin once control strip is verified .
provide the co with the reclaimer speed emulsified or foamed asphalt application temperature and asphalt and water line pressures used on the verified control strip .
use these startup procedures when changing construction procedures when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num or the beginning of a new construction season .
num adding crushed aggregate .
see subsection num .
num pulverizing and mixing .
a when using emulsified or foamed asphalt furnish a road reclaimer that is num selfpropelled num specifically manufactured for inplace reclamation num capable of reducing the existing material to the required size num equipped with at least an numfoot nummeter cutting width num equipped with standard automatic depth controls adjustable in increments of ½ inch num millimeters num equipped with independent asphalt application nozzles capable of being turned off individually and verified open and working from within the operator cabin and num equipped with an asphalt and water application control system including full width spray bars and positive displacement pumps automatically interlocked to the machine speed .
b in addition to the above when using foamed asphalt furnish a road reclaimer that is num equipped with an exterior test nozzle to verify proper foaming action section num num num equipped with individual expansion chambers for each nozzle where asphalt binder and water is injected under pressure through individual orifices for atomization and foam expansion num equipped with an internal electric heat cleaning system to selfclean foaming nozzles num equipped with maximum nozzle spacing of num inches num millimeters and num equipped with a compressor capable of providing at least num pounds per square inch num kilopascals of pressure .
use the reclaimer to pulverize the existing roadway material inplace until num percent passes the numinch nummillimeter sieve .
reprocess or remove larger particles and dispose of them according to subsection num .
num applying cement or fly ash .
do not apply cement or fly ash when conditions allow for excessive loss to blowing .
use a metered mechanical spreader to uniformly apply cement or fly ash on the roadway surface .
use canvas or similar skirts around the spreader box to minimize dust .
num applying asphalt .
a requirements for emulsified and foamed asphalt .
apply emulsified or foamed asphalt when the surface and air temperatures in the shade are at least num ºf num ºc .
do not begin applying emulsified asphalt during periods of fog rain or when temperatures below num f num c are anticipated within num hours .
automatically adjust the asphalt and water flow based the reclaimer speed and recycled material mass for the approved mix design .
maintain the asphalt temperature within the range recommended by the supplier .
complete pulverizing and mixing operations in continuous one lanewidth segments up to ½ mile num kilometers in length .
mix the pulverized roadway material with emulsified asphalt binder other additives and the necessary mixing water for optimum dispersion .
if two passes are used shape and compact the reclaimed material with a steel drum roller after the first pass to provide depth control for the second pass of the reclaimer .
add the required quantity of emulsified or foamed asphalt during the final pass of the reclaimer .
verify that the emulsified or foamed asphalt is evenly dispersed and coating the pulverized material .
dig test pits within the mix at least every ¼ mile num kilometers and observe the distribution of the emulsified or foamed asphalt in each pit .
b additional requirements for foamed asphalt .
do not use foamed asphalt with an application temperature below num f num c. do not apply foamed asphalt on previously treated foamed asphalt areas .
num compacting and finishing .
compact and finish each segment before beginning mixing operations on the next segment .
maintain the moisture content of the mixture within num percent of optimum .
section num num compact the processed material uniformly to at least num percent of the maximum wet density as determined from the control strip .
if material changes reestablish the maximum wet density according to subsection numb .
determine the inplace density according to aashto t num .
use at least three rollers primary secondary and finish rollers sized and configured to achieve the required compaction and finish .
operate rollers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
compact the processed material full width by rolling the material between the reclaimer wheel paths first then from the sides to the center parallel to the centerline of the road .
along curbs headers walls and places not accessible to the roller compact the material with approved tampers or compactors .
shape and grade the mixture to the correct lines grades and crosssection .
finish the compacted surface according to subsection num to produce a surface that is smooth dense and free of compaction planes ridges or loose material .
clean the compacted surface of loose material dirt or other deleterious material by approved methods .
do not leave uncompleted segments at the end of the work day .
num construction joints .
a longitudinal joints .
make longitudinal joints coincide with each change in crossslope regardless of the overlap width .
provide a minimum longitudinal overlap of num inches num millimeters .
b transverse joints .
after full depth reclamation operations stop ensure continuity across transverse joints by cutting back into the completed work for a distance recommended by the manufacturer of the reclaimer .
num curing and maintenance .
a emulsified asphalt .
keep traffic and equipment off the stabilized base for at least num hour after completing compaction .
do not allow traffic and construction equipment on the stabilized base until it is sufficiently stable to withstand marring and permanent deformation .
b foamed asphalt .
before opening the stabilized base to traffic and after completing compaction moisten the surface and roll with a pneumatictire roller to create a tight and closed surface .
continue to keep the surface moist until placement of the next course or final surface .
if required place a fog seal on the surface of the stabilized base after final compaction according to section num .
route hauling and other construction equipment uniformly over the full width of the recycled surface to minimize nonuniform compaction .
maintain the emulsified asphalt stabilized layer to the correct line grade and crosssection until placement of the next course or final riding surface .
if the stabilized layer loses stability density or finish before placement of the next course reprocess and recompact as necessary to restore the strength of the damaged material .
overlay the stabilized base material within num days after compacting .
section num num num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
crushed aggregate will be evaluated under subsection num .
cement or fly ash will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
emulsified and foamed asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num num and table num .
blotter material will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of full depth reclamation with asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure crushed aggregate under section num .
measure removal and disposal of unsuitable material under sections num and num .
measure fog seal under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source emulsified asphalt measured and tested for conformance num quality subsection num num per type source of material asphalt supplier yes minimum num days before production asphalt binder foamed subsection num table num mix design full depth reclamation fdr with asphalt mixture measured and tested for conformance num all subsection num flh t num num per submitted mix design existing roadway yes minimum num days before production section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production startup control strip asphalt binder foamed measured and tested for conformance num binder temperature subsection num num minimum temperature gaugenum no upon completing test halflife expansion ratio table num flh t num test nozzle on reclaimer fdr with asphalt material measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num num minimum behind reclaimer before compaction no minus numinch nummm sieve requirement only moisturedensity wet densitynum aashto t num method d num minimum moisture content inplace aashto t num num minimum inplace after compaction density aashto t num inplace after compaction report wet density visual inspection num homogeneous mixing subsection numb subsection numb behind reclaimer before compaction section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production fdr asphalt material measured and tested for conformance num moisture density wet densitynum aashto t num method d num per change in material behind reclaimer before compaction no before using in work density aashto t num num per num ydnum num mnum inplace after compaction end of shift report wet density process control num gradation aashto t num minimum num per num ydnum num mnum behind reclaimer before compaction no upon completion of test moisture content aashto t num num per lane mile lane kilometer homogeneous mixing subsection numb minimum num per num ydnum num mnum binder content of mix calculation yield rate minimum num per tank load indirect tensile strengthnum aashto t num as modified by flh t num num per num ydnum num mnum num days section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued asphalt binder foamed process control num binder temperature subsection num num per tank load temperature gaugenum no upon completing test halflife expansion ratio table num flh t num test nozzle on reclaimer finished product fdr with asphalt material measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co completed fdr surface no before placement of next layer or as requested num at least num points per proctor .
num immediately after collecting sample transport to a field material laboratory and compact for indirect tensile strength testing .
num measure asphalt binder temperature with a calibrated thermometer .
num section num .
reserved section num .
reserved section num num section num .
emulsified asphalttreated base course description num this work consists of constructing an emulsified asphalttreated base course on a prepared surface .
base aggregate grading is designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections base course aggregate num emulsified asphalt num water numc construction requirements num general .
prepare the surface on which the emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base course is placed according to section num or num as applicable .
submit at least num days before incorporating the aggregate into the work a a proposed target values within the gradation ranges shown in table num for the required grading and b a representative numpound numkilogram aggregate sample .
end placement and resubmit new target values if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve differs from the target value by more than the allowable deviation for that sieve .
num mixing and spreading .
use a stationary pugmill with weighing volumetric or other gauging equipment capable of controlling the material entering the mixer .
interlock the controls for the aggregate feed with the emulsified asphalt and water controls to ensure uniform introduction of material into the mixer .
determine the optimum moisture content of the mixture according to aashto t num method d. add aggregate and water to the mixer then add num percent emulsified asphalt by mass of aggregate .
adjust the total liquid content emulsified asphalt and water to within num percent of the optimum moisture content at the time of compaction .
mix until particles are uniformly coated .
place the treated aggregate after mixing .
spread the mixture on the prepared surface in a uniform layer .
shape the mixture to the required line grade and crosssection .
route hauling equipment uniformly over the full width of the surface to minimize rutting or uneven compaction .
num compacting .
compact the mixture according to subsection num .
num surface tolerance .
finish the surface according to subsection num .
section num num num maintenance .
maintain the emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base course according to subsection num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements including the category for quality characteristics .
emulsified asphalt will be evaluated under subsection num .
aggregate gradation sepnum sepnum index sep and fractured faces will be evaluated under subsection num. a aggregate gradation .
the upper and lower specification limits are equal to the calculated mean of all test results plus or minus the allowable deviations shown in table num except as follows num if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve exceeds the maximum gradation value shown in table num the upper specification is equal to the maximum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the maximum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
num if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve is less than the minimum gradation value shown in table num the upper specification is equal to the minimum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the minimum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
b sep. see table num note num .
the lower specification limit is num. c fractured faces .
the lower specification limit is num percent .
other aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of emulsified asphalttreated base course will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the hauling vehicle .
when measuring emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base by the square yard square meter measure the length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
measure the width horizontally to include the top of emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base width and allowable widening .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement adjusted according to subsection num for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate quality num measured and tested for conformance num num la abrasion coarse aashto t num num per rock type not less than num per material sourcenum source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided sources soundness using sodium sulfate aashto t num aggregate base grading c d e num process control num gradation aashto t num tnum minimum num per day per stockpile crusher belt no num hours fractured faces astm dnum section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production aggregate base grading c d e measured and tested for conformance num moisture density max density aashto t num method d num num per type source of material stockpile or production output yes before using in work emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base grading c d e num statistical num gradation aashto t num num per num tons num metric tons inplace after compaction yes num hours ⅜ inch num mm i no .
num num mm i no .
num num µm ii no .
num num µm fractured faces i astm dnum sand equivalent aashto t num alternate method no .
num reference method belt feed before adding emulsified asphalt sep i see note num no emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base grading c d e measured and tested for conformance num density aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num tons num metric tons but not less than num per layer inplace after compaction no before placing next layer section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product emulsified asphalttreated aggregate base measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co completed base surface no before placement of next layer or as requested num submit at least five reports but not less than one report per rock type for each source .
submit reports dated within num year of intended use and include rock type and sample location .
obtain samples representative of aggregates being furnished .
num sep sepnum sepnum index is a measure of a materials ability to perform based on the quality and quantity of fines present .
quality is represented by the sand equivalent se and quantity is represented by the percent passing the no .
num numµm sieve pnum num .
sep is computed as follows for se num sep sepnum num num and for se num sep se numse pnum num .
where se plastic fines in graded aggregates and soils by using the sand equivalent test .
see aashto t num alternate method no.num reference method .
pnum num material finer than the no .
num num µm sieve in mineral aggregates by washing .
see aashto t num .
num at least num points per proctor .
section num num section num .
cold inplace recycled asphalt base course description num this work consists of milling an existing asphalt pavement mixing the milled material with emulsified asphalt and lime relaying the material in a onepass operation and compacting the material to produce a recycled asphalt base .
cold inplace recycled asphalt base course compaction is designated type a or b according to subsection numb .
emulsified asphalt grade is designated according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
material num conform to the following section and subsections emulsified asphalt num fog seal num lime numc water numc construction requirements num composition of mix jmf .
collect representative samples of the existing pavement to be milled .
replace removed pavement with asphalt concrete conforming to subsection numb or approved cold patch material .
design a mix according to flh t num and table num mix design parameters .
submit the jmf and the following for approval num days before production a optimum emulsified asphalt binder content based on total mass of mixture b source and grade of emulsified asphalt binder c optimum moisture content for dispersion and compaction based on total mass of mixture d lime content e maximum density for the mixture f bulk specific gravity for the mixture g results of tests and applicable charts and graphs h a representative numpound numkilogram sample of pavement if requested i three numgallon num liter samples of emulsified asphalt binder if requested and section num num j numpound num kilogram sample of lime if requested .
begin production only after the mix design is approved .
submit a new mix design if there is a change in a material source .
table num cold inplace recycled asphalt base course mix design parameter material or property requirement indirect tensile strength aashto t num num tensile strength dry num psi num kpa minimum tensile strength ratio tsr num minimum raveling test astm dnum num hour cure at num f num c num humiditynum average mass loss num maximum num follow the modified aashto t num procedures as indicated in flh t num .
num use the listed testing conditions for the raveling test unless otherwise directed by the co. num general .
see subsection num .
clear grub and remove vegetation and debris within num inches num millimeters of the pavement to be recycled according to section num .
clean the pavement and edge of pavement of loose material dirt vegetation and other deleterious material .
num equipment .
furnish a selfpropelled recycling train with the following major units a pavement milling machine .
provide the following num automatic depth controls to maintain the cutting depth to within plus or minus ¼ inch num millimeters num positive means cross slope elevation control num capability of milling the existing asphalt pavement material to the required depth in a single path and num num feet num meters minimum cutter width .
b crushing unit .
capable of screening and crushing material to the required size before mixing with emulsified asphalt .
c pugmill and proportioning equipment .
provide the following num capable of continuously mixing the milled material with emulsified asphalt water lime and other additives to produce a uniform and homogenous mixture num belt scale for continuous weighing of milled and sized material with an interlocked computer controlled liquid metering device capable of automatically adjusting the flow of asphalt emulsion to the mass of milled material coming into the mixer num proportioning equipment capable of applying emulsified asphalt and water to within plus or minus num percent of the required quantity by mass of milled material section num num num proportioning equipment with a digital meter for monitoring the flow rate and total milled material emulsified asphalt and water applied and num capable of placing the mixture in a windrow without segregation .
d paver .
provide a paver conforming to subsection num that is capable of picking up the entire windrow and feeding it into the paver hopper .
do not heat the screed .
e rollers .
provide doubledrum steel wheel and pneumatictire rollers in sufficient quantity and size to obtain the required density .
provide pneumatictire rollers weighing a minimum num tons num metric tons .
num weather limitations .
do not begin work when fog showers rain frost temperatures below num ºf num c are anticipated within num hours .
place cold inplace recycled asphalt base on a dry unfrozen surface when the air temperature in the shade and the road surface temperature are num ºf num c and rising .
num production startup procedures .
a preparatory phase meeting .
conduct a prerecycling preparatory phase meeting at least num days before the start of recycling operations according to subsection numa .
b control strip .
provide num days notice before beginning production .
construct the control strip on the project at an approved location .
recycle a numfoot nummeter long control strip onelane wide and at the designated lift thickness .
use the construction procedures intended for the entire project .
cease production after construction of the control strip until the recycled base layer and the control strip are evaluated and verified for acceptance .
acquire three random samples of milled material from the control strip after the material has passed through the crushing unit but before emulsified asphalt is added for type a compaction .
verify that num percent passes the num½inch nummillimeter sieve .
take density readings behind each roller pass to determine the roller pattern necessary to achieve the maximum inplace density break point of compaction curve according to astm dnum .
use the bulk specific gravity value from the mix design as a benchmark for evaluating the maximum inplace density achieved .
repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
see subsection num for the disposition of material in unacceptable control strips .
accepted control strips may remain in place and will be measured as a part of the completed base course .
full production may begin when a control strip is verified .
provide the co with the maximum inplace density achieved type a compaction application rates of the emulsified asphalt water and other additives used on the accepted control strip .
use these startup procedures when changing construction procedures when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num or the beginning of a new construction season .
num pavement recycling and mixing .
mill the existing pavement to the required depth and width .
reduce oversize particles to a maximum size of num½ inch num millimeters .
section num num when lime is required at the milling head or in the pugmill incorporate lime slurry to within plus or minus num percent of the approved application rate .
produce the lime slurry using quicklime or hydrated lime and water in a slurry production unit equipped with scales and meters accurate to within num percent by mass .
agitate the transport and feed tanks to provide a consistent and pumpable lime slurry .
combine milled material with emulsified asphalt water and lime at the approved application rates to produce a homogenous and uniformlycoated mixture .
maintain the emulsified asphalt temperature within the range recommended by the supplier .
do not disturb underlying material .
synchronize the recycling rate to allow for continuous operation of recycling train equipment .
continuously monitor and evaluate the milling mixing and placing operations to assure optimum quality of the recycled asphalt base course .
adjust application rates in coordination with the co based upon material variations .
num spreading compacting and finishing .
a spreading .
spread and finish the recycled mix to the required line grade and elevation .
b compacting .
begin compaction within num minutes of spreading .
use pneumatictire rollers until no displacement is observed .
use steelwheel rollers either in static or lowamplitude vibratory mode to achieve final density and eliminate pneumatictire roller marks .
do not park or idle rollers on uncompacted material .
compact using the designated type num type a compaction .
use roller patterns established during the control strip .
compact the recycled mix to obtain a minimum density of num percent of the control strip density .
measure inplace density according to astm dnum .
if an area fails to meet required density rework and recompact the area .
if applications rates of the emulsified asphalt from the approved mix design are changed by more than num percent by mass of milled material or if other material conditions distinctly change reestablish roller pattern according to subsection numb .
num type b compaction .
compact the recycled mix using the following equipment sequence and number of roller passes a four to six roller passes with a double drum vibratory roller having a minimum mass of num tons num metric tons and equipped with frequency and amplitude controls .
b four to six roller passes with a pneumatictire roller having a minimum mass of num pounds num kilograms per wheel and a contact pressure of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals .
c two to four roller passes with a static steelwheel roller with a minimum pressure of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals .
compact the material with approved tampers or compactors along curbs headers walls and places not accessible to the roller .
section num num c finishing .
produce a surface that is smooth dense and free of ruts ridges and loose material .
measure pavement surface according to subsection num except defective areas are deviations between the surface and the bottom of the straightedge in excess of ⅜ inches num millimeters measured between a two contacts of the straightedge or at the end of the straightedge .
d fog seal .
place a fog seal on the surface of the recycled asphalt base .
use emulsified asphalt diluted to num percent by volume with water and apply it at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter .
when necessary place blotter according to section num .
num construction joints .
a longitudinal joints .
make longitudinal joints coincide with each change in crossslope .
provide a minimum longitudinal overlap of num inches num millimeters .
b transverse joints .
at the beginning of each days recycling operations or after extended work stoppages ensure continuity across transverse joints by cutting back into the completed work for a distance recommended by the manufacturer of the cold recycling equipment .
num curing and maintenance .
keep traffic and construction equipment off of the recycled asphalt base for at least num hours after completing compaction and until it is sufficiently stable to withstand raveling marring and permanent deformation .
route hauling and other construction equipment uniformly over the full width of the recycled asphalt base to minimize nonuniform compaction .
maintain the recycled asphalt base to the correct line grade and crosssection .
provide additional rolling with a steel wheel roller to recompact and maintain a dense surface .
use a power broom to remove loose particles .
if the recycled asphalt base loses stability density or finish reprocess and recompact as necessary to restore the strength of the damaged material .
place the next course or final surface when the moisture content of the recycled asphalt base is reduced to num percent or less according to aashto t num but within num days after recycling regardless of moisture content .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
emulsified asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
lime will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
blotter material will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of the cold inplace recycled asphalt base course will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
type a compaction will be evaluated under subsection num .
pavement smoothness will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure fog seal under section num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source asphalt binder measured and tested for conformance num quality aashto m num aashto m num subsection num num per type and source of material asphalt supplier yes minimum num days before production design emulsified asphalt mix design measured and tested for conformance num all subsection num flh t num num per submitted mix design existing roadway yes minimum num days before production for type a compaction only production startup control strip emulsified asphalt mixture measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num num minimum before emulsion addition no upon completing test bulk specific gravity density flh t num num minimum loose mix in windrow for type a compaction only density astm dnum subsection numb subsection numb inplace after compaction depth of cut num minimum both ends of milling drum section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production emulsified asphalt material measured and tested for conformance num bulk specific gravity density flh t num num per change in material loose mix in windrow no upon completion of test for type a compaction only density astm dnum subsection numb num per num ydnum num mnum inplace after compaction end of shift depth of cut num per num ft num m both ends of milling drum process control num gradation aashto t num minimum num per num ydnum num mnum before emulsion addition no upon completion of test indirect tensile strengthnum aashto t num as modified by flh t num num per num ydnum num mnum num days emulsified asphalt material application rates calculation of yield rate subsection num minimum num per tank load section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product cold recycled asphalt base measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance straightedge measurement subsection numc continuously after compaction finished recycled base surface no num hours num transport samples immediately to a field material laboratory for indirect tensile strength compaction .
compact within num hour of sampling .
section num num section num .
stabilized aggregate surface course description num this work consists of constructing a stabilized aggregate surface course with either imported or inplace aggregate .
aggregate stabilization is designated as imported aggregate course or inplace aggregate course .
aggregate grading is designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections calcium chloride flakes numb surface course aggregate imported num water numc construction requirements num proportioning .
determine the proportioning quantities of aggregate calcium chloride flakes and water required .
sample the imported aggregate or aggregate course before beginning stabilization operations .
determine the maximum density and optimum moisture content according aashto t num method d. the co will provide the target calcium chloride content by mass of the material at num percent of the maximum density .
set target water content at the time of mixing between num percent below optimum and optimum moisture content .
num general .
after a representative quantity of imported aggregate is produced submit proposed target values for the appropriate sieve sizes to the co. set target values for the aggregate within the gradation ranges shown in table num .
list the percent passing for sieve sizes shown in table num .
store calcium chloride flakes in closed weatherproof containers .
begin application or mixing operations only when the ambient air temperature is num f num c or above and is not expected to fall below num f num c within num hours .
construct stabilized aggregate course when the underlying layer is dry and unfrozen .
a imported aggregate course .
prepare the underlying surface according to subsection num. b inplace aggregate course .
prepare the surface according to subsection num .
num mixing and placing .
a inplace mixing .
when imported aggregates are used spread aggregate on the prepared surface in a uniform layer to the specified width .
section num num for an imported or inplace aggregate course maintain the quantities of calcium chloride and water content to within the following tolerances num calcium chloride num percent by total dry mass num water num percent by total dry mass do not spread calcium chloride flakes in windy conditions that will result in loss of calcium chloride or dusting .
do not spread more calcium chloride flakes than can be incorporated within one hour .
spread calcium chloride flakes uniformly across the prepared aggregate surface .
use distributor or rotary mixing equipment capable of metering and applying calcium chloride flakes and water uniformly across the full width of the surface to be mixed .
for distribution equipment verify the application rate by performing weight yield test panels for the first load of each distributor truck .
for rotary mixing equipment verify the application rate by calculating yields .
mix the calcium chloride flakes into the aggregate course with rotary mixing equipment capable of uniformly mixing the material full depth in one pass .
shape the aggregate course to the required crosssection after mixing is complete .
route hauling equipment uniformly over the full width of the aggregate surface to minimize rutting or uneven compaction .
b pugmill mixing .
aggregates calcium chloride flakes and water may be mixed using a stationary pugmill with weighing or metering equipment capable of controlling the material entering the mixer .
interlock the metering controls for the aggregate feed with those of the calcium chloride flakes and water to ensure uniform introduction of material into the mixer .
maintain the quantities of aggregate calcium chloride flakes and water based on the total dry mass to within the following tolerances num aggregate num percent by total dry mass num calcium chloride num percent by total dry mass num water num percent by total dry mass haul and spread the material on the prepared surface in a uniform layer immediately after mixing .
maintain the moisture content from optimum to num percent below optimum while placing and spreading the mixture .
shape the aggregate course to the required crosssection .
route hauling equipment uniformly over the full width of the surface to minimize rutting or uneven compaction .
num compacting and finishing .
compact the mixture according to subsection num .
finish the aggregate course according to subsection num and produce a surface free of loose material .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements including the acceptance quality characteristic category .
calcium chloride flakes will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
surface course aggregate imported will be evaluated for gradation fractured faces liquid limit and plasticity index under subsection num .
other aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num a aggregate gradation .
the upper and lower specification limits are equal to the calculated mean of all test results plus or minus the allowable deviations shown in table num except as follows num if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve exceeds the maximum gradation value shown in table num the upper specification is equal to the maximum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the maximum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
num if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve is less than the minimum gradation value shown in table num the upper specification is equal to the minimum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the minimum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
b fractured faces .
when aggregate is produced from a gravel source use the specification limit shown in subsection numanum .
c liquid limit index .
the specification limit is shown in subsection numcnum .
d plasticity liquid limit .
the specification limit is shown in subsection numcnum .
construction of aggregate stabilization courses will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
reconditioning of the aggregate course for inplace aggregate will be evaluated under section num .
preparation of the surface on which the treated imported aggregate course is placed will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring surface course aggregate stabilization by the square yard square meter measure the length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
measure width horizontally to include the top of subgrade width and allowable widening .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement adjusted according to subsection num for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source imported aggregate only imported aggregate source quality numa measured and tested for conformance num num la abrasion coarse aashto t num num per type not less than num per source of materialnum source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided sources soundness using sodium sulfate course fine aashto t num imported aggregate num process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day per stockpile min crusher belt no num hours fractured faces astm dnum liquid limit aashto r num t num method a crusher belt or after processing plasticity index aashto r num t num t num proportioning proportioning num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density aashto t num method dnum num per mixture or change in material processed material before incorporating in work yes before using in work report proportion of aggregate calcium chloride water section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production inplace aggregate num measured and tested for conformance num moisture density proportioning aashto t num method dnum num per num feet num meters or a minimum of num samples processed material before incorporating in work yes before using in work when incorporating existing aggregate imported aggregate num statistical num gradation aashto t num t num num per num tons num metric tons processed aggregate before stabilizing yes num hours when using imported aggregate no .
num num mm i no .
num num μm i no .
num num μm ii other specified sieves ii liquid limit ii aashto r num t num method a fractured faces ii astm dnum plasticity index ii aashto r num t num t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued surface course aggregate stabilization measured and tested for conformance num density moisture content aashto t num or other approved procedures num per num tons num metric tons or num ydnum num mnum inplace after compaction no end of shift finished product surface course aggregate stabilization measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance grade subsection num determined by the co finished surface course no as requested num minimum of num points per proctor .
num furnish at least five reports but not less than one report per rock type for each source .
reports must be dated within num year of intended use .
obtain samples representative of aggregates being furnished .
include rock type and sample location on test reports .
section num num section num .
dust palliative description num this work consists of furnishing and applying one or more applications of dust palliative on a prepared surface .
the application method is designated according to subsection num .
material num conform to the following subsections calcium chloride magnesium chloride and lignosulfonate num water numc construction requirements num general .
furnish equipment for spreading and processing dust palliative .
make the equipment available for inspection and approval before use .
do not apply dust palliative when raining rain is anticipated within num hours of application or when the ground is frozen .
apply when the ambient air temperature is num f num c or above .
protect structures and trees from splatter or marring .
use multiple applications at a reduced rate if necessary to prevent runoff .
prevent discharge of dust palliative into waters of the united states as defined by the clean water act .
num surface preparation and application .
a method num .
single application .
blade and shape the roadbed .
leave num to num inches num to num millimeters of loose material on the surface .
water the loose material so it is visibly moist .
thoroughly mix the moist loose material .
apply water calcium chloride magnesium chloride or lignosulfonate liquid at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter as approved by the co .
apply calcium chloride flakes at the rate of num to num pounds per square yard num to num kilograms per square meter as approved by the co .
process the dust palliative uniformly throughout the loose material .
moisten the mixture as necessary and compact by operating rollers over the full width of each layer until visual displacement ceases .
b method num .
two applications of calcium chloride or magnesium chloride liquid .
num first application .
scarify blade and shape the roadbed .
leave num inches num millimeters of loose material on the surface .
water the loose material so it is visibly moist .
thoroughly mix the moist loose material .
section num num apply calcium chloride or magnesium chloride liquid solutions with a distributor at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter as approved by the co. use a tractor rotary tiller or other approved mixing device immediately behind the distributor to incorporate the water solution into the full width of loose material .
shape the surface to line and grade and compact according to subsection numa .
allow at least one week of curing time between the first and second applications .
num second application .
apply calcium chloride or magnesium chloride liquid to the finished surface at a maximum rate of num gallons per square yard num liters per square meter as approved by the co. num opening to traffic .
keep traffic off the treated surface until the dust palliative has penetrated and cured to prevent excessive pickup under traffic .
num acceptance .
dust palliative material calcium chloride liquid calcium chloride flake magnesium chloride liquid and lignosulfonate liquid will be evaluated under subsection num .
provide a commercial certification that includes the date identification number truck or trailer net mass and brand name with each shipment .
for liquid dust palliatives provide the net volume and specific gravity at num f num c percent solids by mass and ph .
for solid dust palliatives provide the concentration of the product .
application of dust palliative will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
aggregatetopsoil course description num this work consists of furnishing and placing an aggregate topsoil and seed mixture on a prepared shoulder or other surface .
material num conform to the following subsections aggregate for aggregatetopsoil course num seed num topsoil num water numc construction requirements num preparing surface .
complete the adjoining pavement before placing an aggregatetopsoil course on the shoulder .
scarify the area where the mixture is to be placed to a depth of num inches num millimeters .
reduce clods and sod to a maximum size of num inches num millimeters .
num mixing placing and compacting .
furnish a mixture of num percent aggregate and num percent topsoil by volume with sufficient water for compaction .
mix the components into a uniform mixture .
spread the mixture on the prepared surface in a uniform layer .
shape the mixture to the line grade and crosssection .
remove clods and stones greater than num inches num millimeters in diameter .
before compaction dry seed the mixture surface at a rate of num pounds per acre num kilograms per hectare according to section num .
uniformly compact the mixture to ensure it does not exhibit heaving pumping rutting or shearing .
after compaction dry seed the surface again at a rate of num pounds per acre num kilograms per hectare .
num acceptance .
aggregate for aggregatetopsoil will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
seed and topsoil will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of aggregatetopsoil course will be evaluated under subsection num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring aggregatetopsoil course by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the hauling vehicle .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
stockpiled aggregates description num this work consists of furnishing and placing material in a stockpile for future use by the government .
aggregate grading is designated according to the applicable tables of section num .
material num conform to the following section aggregate num construction requirements num general .
conform to the gradation and quality requirements specified in the section identified for the material .
after a representative quantity of aggregate is produced submit proposed target values for the appropriate sieve sizes along with a representative sample size as specified in the section identified for the material .
set target values within the gradation ranges shown in the applicable table for the required grading .
num stockpile site .
the government will acquire the permits and rights to stockpile aggregate from sources identified in the contract if the material is stockpiled for future use .
prepare a plan of operation .
do not perform work within a governmentprovided source until a plan of operation for the development of the source is accepted .
obtain co approval before preparing sites .
prepare sites as necessary to accommodate the quantity of material to be stockpiled in a manner that prevents contamination of the stockpiles .
prepare new sites as follows a clear and grub according to section num b grade shape and compact the site to a uniform crosssection that drains and c place compact and maintain a minimum numinch nummillimeter layer of crushed aggregate over the stockpile site and access roads for stabilization .
obtain co approval before stockpiling aggregates .
section num num num stockpile .
build aggregate stockpiles in layers not to exceed num inches num millimeters in thickness .
make the side slopes of each layer no flatter than numvnumh .
spread aggregates with trucks or other approved pneumatictire equipment .
complete each layer before depositing aggregates on the next layer .
do not allow aggregates from the layer being built to run down over lower layers .
do not drop aggregates from a bucket or spout in one location to form a coneshaped pile .
do not push aggregates into piles .
make the stockpiles neat and regular in shape .
use plank runways or other suitable methods to avoid tracking dirt or other foreign matter onto the stockpiled material when operating trucks on stockpiles .
space stockpiles far enough apart or install partitions to prevent the mixing of aggregate gradations .
protect stockpiles for future use with an approved cover .
num acceptance .
see the table for sampling testing and the acceptance requirements including the category for quality characteristics specified in the section identified for the material .
the point of sampling and testing for aggregate stockpiled for future use is in the stockpile .
subbase base surface course chip seal aggregate gradations and surface course plasticity index will be evaluated under subsection num .
other aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
preparation of stockpile sites and construction of stockpiles will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
clearing and grubbing will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement adjusted according to subsection num for the pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num num division num asphalt pavements and surface treatments section num num section num .
asphalt concrete pavement by gyratory mix design method description num this work consists of constructing one or more courses of asphalt concrete pavement using hot or warm mix asphalt hma or wma .
asphalt concrete pavement nominal maximum size aggregate size is designated according to tables num and num .
equivalent single axle loads esal or number of gyrations at design ndesign is designated according to tables num .
pavement roughness type is designated according to subsection num .
when no roughness type is designated use type iv .
asphalt binder is designated according to aashto m num .
antistrip additive type is designated according to subsection num .
when no type is designated use type num lime .
material num conform to the following subsections antistrip additive num asphalt binder num asphalt concrete aggregate num mineral filler num construction requirements num composition of mix jmf .
provide asphalt concrete mixes of aggregate asphalt binder recycled asphalt pavement rap and additives that meet the applicable material requirements and the appropriate design parameters in table num and are capable of being placed and compacted as specified .
volumetric mix properties will be determined at ndesign according to aashto t num and aashto r num .
apply asphalt concrete mix design requirements for hma to the development of the wma mix design .
provide modifications to the process required for wma technology .
submit modifications to the asphalt concrete mix design process according to appendix x.num of aashto r num special mix design considerations and practices for warm mix asphalt wma for approval by the co. a rap .
limit the quantity of rap by mass in the jmf to num percent .
b baghouse fines .
if used document how baghouse fines are reintroduced and measured .
submit target values for the percent of baghouse fines reintroduced to the jmf if they are a separate stockpile .
section num num table num gyratory asphalt concrete mix design requirements aashto r num design esal million gyratory compaction level theoretical maximum specific gravity gmm aashto t num minimum voidsinthe mineral aggregate vma num voids filled with asphalt vfa dusttobinder ratio num minimum tensile strength ratio aashto t num nominal maximum size aggregate num ninitial ndesign nmax num inch num mm ¾ inch num mm ½ inch num mm ⅜ inch num mm num sieve num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num when mineral filler or hydrated lime is used include in the calculation for compliance with the vma .
num the nominal maximum size aggregate is one size greater than the first sieve to retain more than num percent of the combined aggregate .
num dust to binder ratio is the effective asphalt content divided by the total percent of material passing the no .
num numµm sieve .
dust includes lime bag house fines and other mineral matter .
section num num c submission .
submit written jmfs and associated material with fhwa form num worksheet for superpave asphalt concrete mix design for verification at least num days before the control strip .
include a signed statement prepared by the testing laboratory that certifies the proposed jmf meets requirements and can be compacted in the field during production .
for each proposed jmf submit the following num aggregate and mineral filler .
a target values num target value for percent passing each specified sieve size for the aggregate blend and num designate target values within the gradation band specified for the nominal maximum size aggregate grading shown in table num b source and percentage of each stockpile to be used c average gradation of each stockpile d representative samples from each stockpile .
use split samples of material taken at the same time samples are taken for testing by the contractors laboratory .
num num pounds num kilograms of aggregates proportioned by each stockpile according to the jmf and num num pounds num kilograms of mineral filler if proposed for the jmf and e results of aggregate quality tests performed within num year of use .
for aggregate quality tests see subsection num .
num asphalt binder .
a target asphalt binder content b five numgallon numliter samples of the asphalt binder c test results from the manufacturer according to aashto m num for the asphalt binder including a temperatureviscosity curve and d mixing temperature range and minimum compaction temperature for the asphalt binder .
num antistrip additives .
if part of the jmf a num pint num liter of liquid antistrip additive or num pounds num kilograms of cement or lime antistrip additive b name of product c manufacturer and d manufacturers msds and product data sheets .
num rap .
if part of the jmf a source and percentage of rap b gradation of the rap section num num c effective specific gravities of each stockpile d percent asphalt binder in rap by total mass according to aashto t num and e numpound numkilogram representative sample of each rap stockpile .
num wma technology and additive information .
a numgallon numliter wma additive sample with method for incorporating it in the asphalt concrete mix design process b wma manufacturers usage recommendations including additive target rates c documentation of past wma technology field applications including project type project owner tonnage placed asphalt concrete mix design mixture volumetrics and performance d laboratory mixing and compacting temperature e asphalt binder performance grade test data over the range of wma additive percentages proposed for use if applicable f compatibility of wma additive with asphalt binder and antistrip additive and g temperature range for field asphalt concrete mix production delivery laydown and compaction .
d verification .
the verification process starts when required documentation and material are received .
when the jmf is verified begin asphalt concrete mix production for the control strip .
num aggregate gradations .
the contractors aggregate gradation is verified if the cos gradation on a combined asphalt concrete mix using the contractors aggregate and rap stockpile percentage recommendations is within the contractors target value gradation plus or minus the following tolerance for each sieve sieve size tolerance num inch num mm num ¾ inch num mm num ½ inch num mm num ⅜ inch num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num no .
num num µm num no .
num num µm num num rap asphalt binder content and gradation .
the contractors rap asphalt binder content results are verified if the cos result for each stockpile is within num percent by total mass using aashto t num .
submit the rap dry gradation burned gradation asphalt content and specific gravity information as shown on the rap data sheet of fhwa form num .
num bulk specific gravity of aggregate gsb .
the contractors coarse and fine gsb is verified if the cos results are within num for aashto t num and num for aashto t num .
section num num num voids in the mineral aggregate vma .
the contractors vma result is verified if the cos result is above the minimum specification limit in table num .
num voids filled with asphalt vfa .
the contractors vfa result is verified if the cos result is within the specification limit in table num .
num air voids va .
the contractors va result is verified if the cos result at the same design asphalt binder content is between num and num percent .
num tensile strength ratio tsr .
the contractors tsr result is verified if the cos result is above the minimum specification limit in table num. e changes and resubmissions .
if a jmf is rejected or the source of material is changed submit a new jmf for verification .
up to num days may be required to evaluate a change after receipt of required documentation and material .
approved changes in target values will not be applied retroactively for payment .
the co will deduct jmf evaluation costs resulting from the following num contractorrequested changes to the approved jmf num contractor requests for more than one jmf evaluation and num additional testing necessary due to the failure of a submitted jmf .
num mixing plant .
use mixing plants conforming to aashto m num. a drum dryermixer plants .
num bins .
provide a separate bin in the cold aggregate feeder for each individual aggregate stockpile in the asphalt concrete mix .
use bins of sufficient size to keep the plant in continuous operation and of proper design to prevent overflow of material from one bin to another .
num stockpiling procedures .
separate aggregate into at least three stockpiles with different gradations .
b batch plants .
num hot aggregate bin .
provide a bin with three or more separate compartments for storage of the screened aggregate fractions to be combined for the asphalt concrete mix .
make the partitions between the compartments tight and of sufficient height to prevent spillage of aggregate from one compartment into another .
num load cells .
calibrated load cells may be used in batch plants instead of scales .
num rap .
modify batch plants so rap is introduced into the asphalt concrete mix after bypassing the dryer .
design the cold feed bin conveyor system and special bin adjacent to the weigh hopper if used to avoid segregation and sticking of the recycled asphalt pavement material .
heat aggregate to a temperature that will transfer sufficient heat to the recycled asphalt pavement material to produce an asphalt concrete mix of uniform temperature within the range specified in the approved jmf .
section num num c wma plant modifications .
num modify the mixing plant as required by the manufacturer to introduce the wma technology .
interlock the wma additive delivery system with the automated proportioning system num comply with manufacturers recommendations for incorporating additives and wma technologies into the asphalt concrete mix .
comply with manufacturers recommendations regarding delivery and storage of additives and num modify the plant burner and drum flights to operate at lower production temperatures .
num equipment .
a pavers .
furnish pavers that are num selfcontained powerpropelled units with adjustable vibratory screeds with fullwidth screw augers num heated for the full width of the screed num capable of spreading and finishing courses of asphalt concrete mix in widths at least num inches num millimeters more than the width of one lane num equipped with a receiving hopper having sufficient capacity to ensure a uniform spreading operation num equipped with automatic feed controls which are properly adjusted to maintain a uniform depth of material ahead of the screed num operable at forward speeds consistent with satisfactory asphalt concrete mix lay down num capable of producing a smoothfinished surface without segregating tearing shoving or gouging num equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals that operate the screed to maintain grade and transverse slope and num equipped with a screed mounted safety edge device capable of a maintaining contact with the road shoulder surface b allowing automatic transition to cross roads driveways and obstructions and c constraining and reducing the volume of the asphalt concrete material head to increase the density of the extruded profile .
do not use conventional single plate strike off .
b material transfer vehicle mtv .
when required furnish an mtv with the following num a loading system with the ability to receive mixtures from the hauling equipment num a minimum storage capacity of num tons num metric tons with a remixing system in the mtv storage bin num a discharge conveyor to deliver the mixture to the paver hopper and section num num num a mass not exceeding the maximum legal loadings on structures .
pickup machines hopper inserts and material transfer devices are not considered mtvs .
num surface preparation .
clean the existing surface of loose material dirt or other deleterious material by approved methods .
apply an asphalt tack coat to contact surfaces of pavements curbs gutters manholes and other structures according to section num .
num weather limitations .
place asphalt concrete mix on a dry unfrozen surface when the air temperature in the shade is above num f num c and rising .
for hma conform to table num .
table num asphalt concrete mix placement temperature compacted lift thickness num inches num mm num num inches num num mm num inches num mm road surface temperature f c minimum laydown temperaturenum f c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num do not heat the asphalt concrete mix above the temperature specified in the approved asphalt concrete mix design .
num do not pave .
num asphalt preparation .
uniformly heat the asphalt binder to provide a continuous supply of heated asphalt binder from storage to the mixer .
do not heat asphalt binder above num f num c. if a liquid heat stable antistrip additive is used meter it into the asphalt binder transfer lines at a bulk terminal or mixing plant .
inject the additive for at least num percent of the transfer or mixing time to obtain uniformity .
num aggregate preparation .
when lime is used as an antistrip adjust the aggregate moisture to at least num percent by mass of aggregate .
mix the lime uniformly with the aggregate before introducing the aggregate into the dryer or dryer drum .
use calibrated weighing or metering devices to measure the quantity of lime added to the aggregate .
for batch plants heat dry and deliver aggregate for pugmill mixing at a temperature sufficient to produce an asphalt concrete mix temperature within the approved range .
adjust flames used for drying and heating to prevent damage to and contamination of the aggregate .
additional plant adjustments may be required to provide dry aggregate at the reduced mixing temperatures of wma .
section num num control plant operations so the moisture content of the asphalt concrete mix behind the paver is num percent or less according to aashto t num .
before starting asphalt concrete mix production obtain approval of synchronized metering and weighing devices used to introduce a constant rate of lime and water .
add lime to the aggregate by one of the following methods a method a .
add lime to the combined cold feed aggregate using an enclosed inline cold feed mechanical pugmill mixer .
use a twinshaft continuous mixing pugmill with adjustable mixing paddles .
adjust the retention time of the mixture in the pugmill so no unmixed lime is visible after the lime and aggregate exit the pugmill .
b method b .
add lime to the produced aggregates during stockpiling using a pugmill .
distribute the lime per the stockpile ratios stated in the asphalt concrete mix design .
a minimum moisture content of num percent by dry weight for coarse aggregate and num percent by dry weight for fine aggregate is required at the time the aggregates and lime are mixed .
marinate treated aggregate in stockpiles from num hours to num days before using in asphalt concrete mix .
do not use aggregate marinated longer than num days .
c method c. add lime to the combined cold feed aggregate by introducing the lime between aggregate layers as the aggregate flows from the cold feed bins .
mix the lime and aggregate on the conveyor belt by placing at least of six paddles over the conveyor belt .
make the paddles protrude into the aggregate flow and direct the aggregate to fold over itself causing the material to migrate from one side of the conveyor belt to the other .
space the paddles to provide complete mixing .
provide a water spray over the conveyor belt as necessary to control dust and to maintain minimum moisture content .
num mixing .
measure the aggregate and asphalt into the mixer according to the jmf .
mix until particles are completely and uniformly coated with asphalt according to aashto m num .
maintain the discharge temperature according to the jmf .
num hauling .
use vehicles with tight clean and smooth metal beds for hauling asphalt concrete mixes .
coat the beds with an approved material to prevent the asphalt concrete mix from adhering to the beds .
do not use petroleum derivatives or other coating material that contaminates or alters the characteristics of the mix .
drain the bed before loading .
equip each truck with a canvas cover or other suitable material of sufficient size to protect the asphalt concrete mix from the weather .
when necessary to maintain temperature use insulated truck beds and securely fastened covers .
provide access ports or holes for checking temperature of asphalt concrete mix in the truck .
num production startup procedures .
a preparatory phase meeting .
conduct a prepaving preparatory phase meeting at least num days before the start of paving operations according to subsection numa .
in addition be prepared to discuss the following num calibration certification for the gyratory compactor and section num num num asphalt and aggregate correction factors according to aashto t num and aashto t num on fhwa form num worksheet for ignition furnace binder correction factor aashto t num .
if rap is included as part of the jmf provide the asphalt and aggregate correction factors according to aashto t num and the flh addendum to aashto t num on fhwa form num worksheet for ignition furnace binder correction factor and aggregate gradation correction factor for mixes including rap .
b control strip .
provide num days notice before beginning production of an asphalt concrete mix .
on the first day of production produce sufficient asphalt concrete mix to construct a numfoot nummeter long control strip onelane wide and at the designated lift thickness .
construct the control strip on the project at an approved location .
construct the control strip using asphalt concrete mix production laydown and compaction procedures intended for the entire mix .
cease production after construction of the control strip until the asphalt concrete mix and the control strip are evaluated for acceptance .
num mixture .
take and test at least three control strip asphalt concrete mix samples and evaluate according to subsection num .
the asphalt concrete mix is acceptable if all test results are within specification limits for asphalt content and vma and the calculated pay factor for asphalt content vma and gradation is num or greater .
num compaction .
compact according to subsection num .
take nuclear gauge density readings behind each roller pass to determine the roller pattern necessary to achieve required density .
take nuclear gauge density readings and cut and test core samples according to table num .
density is acceptable if the core density pay factor is num or greater .
furnish the co with documented nuclear gauge readings correlated to core specific gravities .
repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
see subsection num for the disposition of material in unacceptable control strips .
accepted control strips may remain in place and will be accepted and measured as a part of the completed pavement .
tests used for the control strip will not be included in the evaluation for payment according to subsection num .
when a control strip is verified and accepted full production may begin .
use these startup procedures when producing material from a different plant or when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num .
num placing and finishing .
do not use mixes produced from different plants unless the mixes are produced according to the same jmf use material from the same sources and are approved .
construct control strips according to subsection num for each plant from which production is intended .
place hma at a temperature conforming to table num .
place wma at temperatures conforming to subsection num .
measure temperature of the asphalt concrete mix in the hauling vehicle just before dumping into the spreader or measure it in the windrow immediately before pickup .
place the asphalt concrete mix with a paver conforming to subsection num .
control horizontal alignment using a reference line .
automatically control the grade and slope from reference lines a ski and slope control device or dual skis .
use skis having a minimum length of num feet num meters .
section num num in areas where mechanical spreading and finishing is impractical place and finish the asphalt concrete mix with alternate equipment to produce a uniform surface closely matching the surface obtained when using a mechanical paver .
offset the longitudinal joint of one layer at least num inches num millimeters from the joint in the layer immediately below .
make the longitudinal joint in the top layer along the striped centerline of twolane roadways or at the lane lines of roadways with more than two lanes .
num compacting .
furnish at least three rollers with at least one being a pneumatictire roller .
furnish one roller each for breakdown intermediate and finish rolling .
size the rollers to achieve the required results .
operate rollers according to the recommendation of the manufacturer .
do not use diesel fuel as a release agent with rollers used to compact asphalt concrete mix .
monitor the compaction process with nuclear density gauges calibrated to the control strip core density test results and compact according to subsection numc .
take nuclear gauge density readings and cut and test core samples according to table num .
compact the asphalt concrete mix with alternate equipment to obtain the required compaction along forms curbs headers walls and other places inaccessible to rollers .
num joints trimming edges and cleanup .
complete pavement construction of adjacent traffic lanes to the same elevation within num hours .
if elevation differences exceeding num inches num millimeters between adjacent lanes are left overnight sign with uneven lanes warning signs and provide a numvnumh fillet .
make transverse joints vertical to the depth of the new pavement at connections to existing pavements and previously placed lifts .
form transverse joints by cutting back the previous run to expose the fulldepth course .
apply an asphalt tack coat to the edge of both transverse and longitudinal joints according to section num .
place the asphalt concrete mix as continuously as possible .
do not pass rollers over an unprotected edge of freshly laid asphalt concrete mix .
dispose of material trimmed from the edges and other discarded asphalt concrete mix according to subsection numanum .
num pavement roughness .
measure the profile of the pavement surface according to the designated pavement roughness type .
in addition construct pavement surfaces to meet the requirements of subsection nume .
a profile measurement .
the co will use profile measurements to determine the mean roughness index mri values for the traveled way using the current version of profile viewer and analysis proval software .
the co will also determine areas of localized roughness .
the mri and areas of localized roughness will be used to determine payment for the designated pavement roughness type and pavement areas requiring surface corrections .
section num num conform to the following num equipment .
provide an astm enum class num inertial profiling system conforming to aashto m num and certified according to aashto r num .
provide copies of the system certifications at least num days before profiling begins .
display a current decal on the equipment indicating the expiration date of the certifications .
the co may perform verification testing equipment validation or both as follows a verification testing .
verification testing will consist of the co profiling a section of pavement and comparing the results against the contractors results for the same section of pavement .
comparison runs will be made within num days of each other .
the contractors results will be considered verified if the cos international ride index iri for each wheel path differs from the contractors iri for the same wheel path by no more than num percent of their mean .
do not use equipment that fails verification .
b equipment validation .
equipment validation will consist of determining a cross correlation value on at least one section of pavement having a minimum length of num feet num meters .
the contractors profiler and the cos profiler will be cross correlated on the same day .
coordinate and schedule the equipment validation date at least num days before the validation date .
the co will determine the location of the cross correlation segments .
the contractors equipment will be considered validated if the cross correlation value is greater than or equal to num .
do not use equipment that fails validation .
num personnel .
provide the following a a profile system operator certified according to aashto r num .
submit copies of the operators certifications at least num days before profiling begins .
b flaggers pilot car operations or other temporary traffic control according to section num as required .
num measuring .
the co will identify the beginning and ending points of the profile measurements .
measure the pavement profile in both wheel paths using a sensor path spacing of num num inches num num millimeters and centered in the traveled way of the lane .
operate the inertial profiler according to aashto r num and the manufacturers recommendations .
do not apply filters when collecting profile data .
filtering will be applied during profile analysis in proval .
collect profile data elevation and distance at a maximum interval of num inches num millimeters .
provide a leadin distance of at least num feet num meters after reaching the testing speed .
use the profilers automatic startstop activation when collecting data .
the co will identify excluded areas .
cattle guards bridges not being overlaid and turning lanes passing lanes side roads and ramps less than num feet num meters in length will be excluded from profile measurement the calculation of mri and the determination of localized roughness .
use event markers to mark the beginning and ending location of areas to be excluded from profile measurement .
measure excluded areas with a straightedge according to subsection nume .
coordinate profiling operations with the co .
export each profile elevation distance data header and marker information in pavement profile format ppf to a cd or dvd and submit after profiling .
do not submit noncontinuous data files .
section num num use the following naming convention for electronic file submissions a for type i and type ii pavement roughness project name or abbreviation _ beginning station_to_ending station _ initial or final beaver_cr_rd_num_to_num_initial.ppf .
b for type iii pavement roughness project name or abbreviation _ beginning station_to_ending station beaver_cr_rd_num_to_num.ppf .
num evaluation .
the co will review and analyze profile measurements .
the mri will be calculated from profile measurements using proval .
using proval a high pass filter length of num feet num meters and a low pass filter of num inches num millimeters will be applied to the profiles .
individual mri values are determined by averaging the iri value from each wheel path .
fixed interval mri values are reported as an average of the individual mri values over the fixed interval length .
an overall mri value will be determined by averaging the individual mri values excluding segments less than num feet num meters for type i and type ii pavement roughness or num feet num meters for type iii pavement roughness .
areas of localized roughness will be identified by using provals continuous mri function with a segment length of num feet num meters .
this will yield an average mri value and a length for each area of localized roughness which exceeds the localized roughness threshold value of every possible numfoot nummeter segment .
areas for which the continuous report exceeds the threshold mri value for the specified roughness type will be considered a defective area requiring correction .
when corrections are not allowed a reduction in payment will be applied according to subsection numf .
no deduction will be made for areas of localized roughness identified within num feet num meters of the beginning or end of a profile section or within num feet num meters of excluded areas .
measure these areas with a straightedge according to subsection nume .
correct areas of localized roughness according to subsection numg .
b type i pavement roughness .
measure the profile of the initial pavement surface before construction activities disturb the existing pavement surface .
the initial pavement surface is defined as the existing pavement surface before construction actives begin .
the localized roughness threshold computed to the nearest whole number for type i pavement roughness is equal to the following localized roughness threshold initial overall mri numsnum where initial overall mri mri obtained before construction activities begin .
snum sample standard deviation of the num foot num meters fixed interval mri values .
do not proceed with work that will disturb the initial pavement surface until the cos analysis is complete .
section num num measure the profile of the final pavement surface before placing a surface treatment and within num days of completing roadway paving .
the original overall surface mri will be used in conjunction with the final overall mri to determine an overall percent improvement for the entire traveled way .
the overall percent improvement in mri will be determined to one decimal place for the traveled way according to the following formula improvement initial overall mri final overall mri initial overall mri num table num will be used to determine the final pay factor pfrough for the traveled way to two decimal places .
when the percent improvement is less than num percent and the final overall mri value is less than or equal to num inches per mile num meters per kilometer type iiia from table num will be used to determine the final pfrough .
correct areas of localized roughness according to subsection numg .
if a pavement has an overall negative percent improvement place a minimum numinch nummillimeter overlay over the entire paved surface .
table num type i pavement roughness pay factors type ia type ib percent improvement percent improvement pay factor pfrough greater than num greater than num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num negative improvement negative improvement correct overlay section num num c type ii pavement roughness .
measure the profile of the initial pavement surface before construction activities disturb the pavement surface .
the initial pavement surface is defined as the original existing pavement surface before construction actives begin .
the localized roughness threshold computed to the nearest whole number for type ii pavement roughness is equal to the following localized roughness threshold initial overall mri numsnum where initial overall mri mri obtained before construction activities begin .
snum sample standard deviation of the numfoot nummeter fixed interval mri values .
do not proceed with work that will disturb the initial pavement surface until the cos analysis is complete .
measure the profile of the final pavement surface before placing a surface treatment and within num days of completing roadway paving .
the original overall surface mri will be used in conjunction with the final overall mri to determine an overall percent improvement for the entire traveled way .
the overall percent improvement in mri will be determined to one decimal place for the traveled way according to the following formula improvement initial overall mri final overall mri initial overall mri num table num will be used to determine the final pfrough for the traveled way to two decimal places .
when the percent improvement is less than num percent and the final overall mri value is less than or equal to num inches per mile num meters per kilometer type iiia from table num will be used to determine the final pfrough .
correct areas of localized roughness according to subsection numg .
if a pavement has less than a num percent improvement place a minimum numinch nummillimeter overlay over the entire paved surface .
section num num table num type ii pavement roughness pay factors type iia type iib percent improvement percent improvement pay factor pfrough greater than num greater than num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num num num num num pf num less than num less than num correct overlay d type iii pavement roughness .
measure the profile of the final pavement surface before placing a surface treatment and within num days of completing roadway paving .
pay factors from table num will be used in conjunction with the long continuous histogram printout from provals smoothness assurance analysis function and by utilizing a long continuous numfoot nummeter segment length for analysis .
the final pfrough is equal to the sum of the products of the individual pay factors indicated in table num multiplied by the ratio of individual lane miles lane kilometersto the overall project lane miles lane kilometersand by provals corresponding histogram percentages divided by num .
the final pfrough will be determined to three decimal places .
if the final overall mri for the entire traveled way is greater than the values shown in table num correct the traveled way according to subsection numg .
section num num table num type iii pavement roughness pay factors mean roughness index mri type iiia inmi mkm mean roughness index mri type iiib inmi mkm pay factor pfrough localized roughness threshold num inmi num mkm localized roughness threshold num inmi num mkm if mri of entire roadway is greater than num inmi num mkm if mri of entire roadway is greater than num inmi num mkm reject greater than num num greater than num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num num less than num num num e type iv straightedge measurement .
use a num foot num meters metal straightedge to measure at right angles and parallel to the centerline .
defective areas are deviations between the surface and the bottom of the straightedge in excess of ¼ inches num millimeters measured between two contacts of the straightedge or deviations in excess of ¼ inches num millimeters measured at the end of the straightedge .
correct defective areas according to subsection numg .
f localized roughness and straightedge measurement pay reduction .
each area of localized roughness exceeding the threshold mri specified for the designated pavement roughness type will receive a reduction in payment according to table num .
each defective area as determined by a numfoot nummeter metal straightedge will receive a reduction in payment according to table num .
section num num table num localized roughness and straightedge measurement pay reductions type i type ii iv localized roughness limit mri type iii deduction per occurrence deduction per occurrence localized roughness limit mri inmi mkm deduction per occurrence num num computed mri value per subsection numb for type i numc for type ii numd for type iii num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num g defective area correction .
obtain approval before starting corrective work .
allow num days for review and approval of correction method proposal .
correct defective areas by one of the following methods num milling .
replace the defective area by milling at least onehalf the pavement depth and repaving with the approved asphalt concrete mix .
mill the defective area according to section num .
num saw cutting .
replace the defective area by saw cutting and removing the defective area and repaving with the approved asphalt concrete mix .
saw cut and remove the defective area according to section num .
num grinding .
use a diamond blade machine to grind off the defective surface area .
provide the manufacturer and model of the equipment to be used .
identify the beginning and ending station of each grind location the grinding depth and lateral extent of grinding .
optimize the endpoints of the areas where a grinder is to be applied using provals smoothness assurance function in conjunction with the grinding simulation function .
submit the type of seal to be placed after grinding is completed for approval .
place seals according to section num or num .
limit the grinding depth to num percent of the design pavement thickness .
if grinding in excess of this depth provide a minimum numinch nummillimeter overlay .
num other .
submit a proposal for approval for other correction methods not listed above .
section num num after corrections are made remeasure the pavement profile according to subsection numa .
data from the remeasurement will be analyzed to determine the mri or percent improvement areas of localized roughness and the final pfrough .
if correction and remeasurement of the surface is required the maximum allowable pay factor under subsection num is num .
if corrections are not allowed no adjustment will be made to the final pfrough or localized roughness pay deductions .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mineral filler antistrip additives and wma additives will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
asphalt content vma and core density will be evaluated under subsection num .
pavement roughness will be evaluated under subsection num .
asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
evaluations will consider the following a asphalt content .
the upper and lower specification limits are the approved jmf target value plus or minus num percent b vma .
the lower specification limit is the value shown in table num .
after the jmf has been verified according to subsections num and num use the contractors combined coarse and fine bulk specific gravity of aggregate gsb values to calculate vma on field produced asphalt concrete mix samples c density core .
the lower specification limit is num percent of the maximum specific gravity density determined according to aashto t num and aashto t num .
the percent compaction will be determined using the average maximum specific gravity aashto t num from all samples tested each day d pavement roughness .
the evaluation for payment will be made after defective areas are addressed .
see subsection numg and e asphalt binder .
the pay factor is determined from table num .
construction of the hma or wma pavement course will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the asphalt concrete pavement contract price will be adjusted according to subsections num num and table num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num payment for asphalt concrete pavement will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the material pay factor .
the material pay factor is calculated as follows pfmaterial num pfvolumetric num pfpg num where pfmaterial material pay factor .
pfvolumetric pay factor for asphalt concrete pavement .
pfvolumetric is the lowest single pay factor determined for asphalt binder content vma and core density .
pfpg pay factor for asphalt binder .
the pfpg formula is as follows pfpg pfnum pfnum pfnum .pfn n where pf for each sample the lowest pay factor determined from any test in table num .
if the lowest pay factor for a sample is in reject the samples pay factor is zero .
n number of samples tested .
if either the pay factor for the asphalt binder pfpg or the pay factor for asphalt concrete pavement pfvolumetric is below num the lot for asphalt concrete pavement is in reject .
when the contract specifies a pavement roughness type i type ii or type iii a separate pay adjustment will be made for pavement roughness calculated as follows type i type ii or type iii pay adjustment rfpfrough numl lrpr where pfrough pay factor from tables num num or num .
l total project length in lane miles lane kilometers .
lrpr localized roughness pay reduction from table num .
rf roughness factor num u.s .
customary num metric .
section num num table num asphalt binder pay factor table tests on original specifications num pay factor num num num num num reject dynamic shear rheometer kpa num num num num num num num num num num num tests after rolling thin film oven rtfo dynamic shear rheometer kpa num num num num num num num num num num num tests on pressure aging vessel pav dynamic shear rheometer kpa num num num num num num num num num num num bending beam rheometer s mpa num num num num num num num num num num num bending beam rheometer mvalue num num num num num num num num num num num num see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source asphalt concrete aggregate num measured and tested for conformance num num aggregate quality subsection num num per type and source of material source of material yes before production not required when using government provided source asphalt binder num quality aashto m num asphalt supplier or mixing plant asphalt concrete aggregate num process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day per stockpile crusher belt during production no num hours not required when using a precrushed commercial source section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks mix design asphalt concrete mixture measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per submitted mix design stockpiles yes num days before producing rap asphalt binder content aashto t num bulk specific gravity of aggregate coarse and fine aashto t num t num vma aashto r num vfa air voids tensile strength ratio aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production startup control strip asphalt concrete pavement statistical num gradation aashto t num num minimum behind the paver before compaction yes num hours no .
num num mm i no .
num num µm i no .
num num µm i other specified sieves ii asphalt contentnum i aashto t num vma i aashto r num densitynum i aashto t num num minimum inplace after compaction num hours deliver cores to co after determining specific gravity and compaction section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num mix temperature first load and as determined by co thereafter hauling vehicle before dumping or windrow before pickup no immediately upon completion of test maximum specific gravitynum aashto t num num minimum behind the paver before compaction yes num hours process control num density astm dnum num minimum at core location before coring no num hours see subsection num production asphalt concrete pavement statistical num asphalt contentnum i aashto t num num per num tons num metric tons behind the paver before compaction yes num hours vma i aashto r num densitynum i aashto t num inplace after compacting num hours deliver cores to co after testing is completed section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num placement temperature first load and as determined by co thereafter hauling vehicle before dumping or windrow before pickup no immediately upon completion of measurement maximum specific gravitynum aashto t num minimum num per day behind the paver before compaction yes num hours asphalt binder num measured and tested for conformance num quality see table num aashto m num num per num tons num metric tons of mix in line between tank and mixing plant yes num numquart numliter samples test by government section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued asphalt concrete pavement process control num gradation at plant aashto t num t num contractor determined cold feed or hot bins as applicable no num hours gradation at paver aashto t num num per num tons num metric tons of mix behind the paver before compaction moisture content of aggregates aashto t num contractor determined stockpile density astm dnum num per num feet num meters inplace after compacting air voids aashto t num t num num per num tons num metric tons of mix behind the paver before compaction no num hours vfa aashto r num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num type i roughness before construction initial mri aashto r num r num see subsection num left and right wheel paths no within num days of notice to proceed original surface before construction type i roughness after construction final mri within num days after completing paving type ii roughness before construction initial mri within num days of notice to proceed original surface before construction type ii roughness after construction final mri within num days after completing paving type iii roughness final mri process control num surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection nume contractor determined see subsection nume num hours section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements num use aashto t num method a .
calculate the asphalt binder content by weighing the sample before and after the burn using a calibrated external balance .
num cut two numinch nummillimeter diameter side by side cores .
remove them with a core retriever and fill and compact the core holes with asphalt concrete mixture .
label the cores and protect them from damage due to handling and temperature .
submit one core for verification testing .
dry the other core to constant mass at num f num c or vacuum dry it according to astm dnum before performing the core density and measuring the thickness .
use num pounds per cubic foot num kilograms per cubic meter to convert specific gravity to density .
num after production paving has begun use the average maximum specific gravity value aashto t num for each day to adjust the percent compaction for the cores that represent that days paving .
num do not use the supplemental procedure for mixtures containing porous aggregate dry back method of aashto t num .
section num num section num .
asphalt concrete pavement by hveem or marshall mix design method description num this work consists of constructing one or more courses of asphalt concrete pavement using hot or warm mix asphalt hma or wma .
hma and wma asphalt concrete pavement class is designated according to table num .
pavement roughness type is designated according to subsection num .
if no roughness type is designated use type iv .
asphalt binder is designated according to aashto m num .
antistrip additive type is designated according to subsection num .
when no type is designated use type num lime .
material num conform to the following subsections antistrip additive num asphalt binder num asphalt concrete aggregate num mineral filler num construction requirements num composition of mix jmf .
provide asphalt concrete mixes of aggregate asphalt binder recycled asphalt pavement rap and additives that meet the applicable aggregate gradation in table num and design parameters a c and d or b c and d in table num for the class of mix listed in the bid schedule .
apply asphalt concrete mix design requirements for hma to the development of the wma mix design .
provide modifications to the process required for wma technology .
submit modifications to the asphalt concrete mix design process according to appendix x.num of aashto r num special mix design considerations and practices for warm mix asphalt wma for approval by the co .
section num num table num asphalt concrete mix requirements design parameters class of mix a b c a hveem aashto t num and aashto t num percent air voidsnum num num num num num num stabilometer minimum num num num voids in mineral aggregate minimum see table num b marshall aashto t num percent air voids num num num num num num num compaction number of blows each end of test specimen num num num stability pounds kn min .
num num num num num num flow num inches num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num voids in mineral aggregate minimum see table num c moisture susceptibility aashto t num num tensile strength ratio min .
num num num d dust to binder rationum num num num num num num num the percent of air voids is based on aashto t num aashto t num and aashto t num .
maximum specific gravity density is based on aashto t num .
num use numinch nummillimeter diameter specimens .
aashto t num requires a freezethaw cycle .
num dust to binder ratio is the percent of material including lime baghouse fines and other mineral matter added to the mixture .
calculate the ratio using the effective asphalt content calculated by mass of mix .
section num num table num voids in mineral aggregate vma hveem or marshall mix design sieve size num voids in mineral aggregate minimum num hveem marshall no .
num num mm num num ⅜ inch num mm num num ½ inch num mm num num ¾ inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num num the largest sieve size listed in the applicable specification upon which material is permitted to be retained .
num vma to be determined according to aashto r num .
num when mineral filler or hydrated lime is used include in the calculation for compliance with the vma .
a rap .
see subsection numa .
b baghouse fines .
see subsection numb .
c submission .
submit written jmfs and associated material with fhwa form num worksheet for a hveem mix design aashto t num or fhwa form num worksheet for a marshall mix design aashto t num for verification at least num days before the control strip .
include a signed statement prepared by the testing laboratory that certifies the proposed jmf meets the requirements and can be compacted in the field during production .
for each proposed jmf submit the following num aggregate and mineral filler .
a target values num target value for percent passing each sieve size for the aggregate blend and num designate target values within the gradation band specified for the nominal maximum size aggregate grading shown in table num. b source and percentage of each stockpile to be used .
c average gradation of each stockpile .
d representative samples from each stockpile .
use split samples of material taken at the same time samples are taken for testing by the contractors laboratory .
num num pounds num kilograms of aggregates proportioned by each stockpile according to the jmf and num num pounds num kilograms of mineral filler if proposed for the jmf .
section num num e results of aggregate quality tests performed within num year of use .
for aggregate quality tests see subsection num .
num asphalt binder .
see subsection numcnum .
num antistrip additives .
see subsection numcnum .
num rap .
see subsection numcnum .
num wma technology and additive information .
see subsection numcnum .
d verification .
the verification process starts when required documentation and material have been received .
when the jmf is verified begin asphalt concrete mix production for the control strip .
num aggregate gradations .
see subsection numdnum .
num rap asphalt binder content and gradation .
see subsection numdnum .
num bulk specific gravity of aggregate gsb .
see subsection numdnum .
num hveem stabilometer value .
the contractors hveem stabilometer value is verified if the cos result is above the minimum specification limit in table num .
num marshall stability and flow value .
the contractors marshall stability and flow values are verified if the cos results meet the requirements in table num .
num air voids va. see subsection numdnum .
num tensile strength ratio tsr .
see subsection numdnum .
e changes and resubmissions .
see subsection nume .
num mixing plant .
see subsection num .
num equipment .
see subsection num .
num surface preparation .
see subsection num .
num weather limitations .
see subsection num .
num asphalt preparation .
see subsection num .
num aggregate preparation .
see subsection num .
num mixing .
see subsection num .
num hauling .
see subsection num .
num production startup procedures .
a preparatory phase meeting .
conduct a prepaving preparatory phase meeting at least num days before the start of paving operations according to subsection numa .
in addition be prepared to discuss the following num calibration certification for the hveem or marshall compactor and section num num num asphalt and aggregate correction factors according to aashto t num and aashto t num on fhwa form num worksheet for ignition furnace binder correction factor aashto t num .
if rap is included as part of the jmf provide the asphalt and aggregate correction factors according to aashto t num and the flh addendum to aashto t num on fhwa form num worksheet for ignition furnace binder correction factor and aggregate gradation correction factor for mixes including rap .
b control strip .
provide num days notice before beginning production of an asphalt concrete mix .
on the first day of production produce sufficient asphalt concrete mix to construct a numfoot nummeter long control strip onelane wide and at the designated lift thickness .
construct the control strip on the project at an approved location .
construct the control strip using asphalt concrete mix production laydown and compaction procedures intended for the entire mix .
cease production after construction of the control strip until the asphalt concrete mix and the control strip are evaluated for acceptance .
num mixture .
take and test at least three control strip asphalt concrete mix samples and evaluate according to subsection num .
the asphalt concrete mix is acceptable if all test results are within specification limits for gradation and asphalt content and the calculated pay factor for gradation and asphalt content is num or greater .
num compaction .
take nuclear density gauge readings behind each roller pass to determine the roller pattern necessary to achieve required density .
take nuclear gauge density readings and cut core samples at least five locations within the control strip .
test cores according to subsection num .
density is acceptable if all tests are above the specification limit or the calculated pay factor is num or greater .
furnish the co with documented nuclear gauge readings and correlations of the readings to the core specific gravities at completion of control strip .
repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
see subsection num for the disposition of material in unacceptable control strips .
accepted control strips may remain in place and will be accepted and measured as a part of the completed pavement .
tests used for the control strip will not be included in the evaluation for payment according to subsection num .
when a control strip is verified and accepted full production may begin .
use these startup procedures when producing material from a different plant or when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num .
num placing and finishing .
see subsection num .
num compacting .
see subsection num .
num joints trimming edges and cleanup .
see subsection num .
num pavement roughness .
see subsection num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num mineral filler antistrip additives and wma additives will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
asphalt content core density and aggregate gradation will be evaluated under subsection num .
pavement roughness will be evaluated under subsection num .
asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
evaluations will consider the following a asphalt content .
the upper and lower specification limits are the approved jmf target value plus or minus num percent b density core .
the lower specification limit is num percent of the maximum specific gravity density determined according to aashto t num and aashto t num .
the percent compaction will be determined using the maximum specific gravity aashto t num from at least one production sample per day c aggregate gradation .
the upper and lower specification limits are the approved jmf target values plus or minus the allowable deviations shown in table num d pavement roughness .
the evaluation for payment will be made after defective areas are addressed .
see subsection numg and e asphalt binder .
the pay factor is determined from table num .
construction of the hma or wma pavement course will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except for the asphalt concrete pavement contract price will be adjusted according to subsections num num and table num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for asphalt concrete pavement will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the material pay factor .
the material pay factor is calculated as follows pfmaterial num pfvolumetric num pfpg num where pfmaterial material pay factor .
pfvolumetric pay factor for asphalt concrete pavement .
pfvolumetric is the lowest single pay factor determined for asphalt content density or aggregate gradation .
pfpg pay factor for asphalt binder .
the pfpg formula is as follows pfpg pfnum pfnum pfnum .pfn n section num num where pf for each sample the lowest pay factor determined from any test in table num .
if the lowest pay factor for a sample is in reject the samples pay factor is zero .
n number of samples tested .
if either the pay factor for the asphalt binder pfpg or the pay factor for asphalt concrete pavement pfvolumetric is below num the lot for asphalt concrete pavement is in reject .
when the contract specifies a pavement roughness type i type ii or type iii a separate pay adjustment will be made for pavement roughness calculated as follows type i type ii or type iii pay adjustment rfpfrough numl lrpr where pfrough pay factor from tables num num or num .
l total project length in lane miles lane kilometers of traveled way as specified in the contract .
lrpr localized roughness pay reduction from table num .
rf roughness factor num u.s .
customary num metric .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test method specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source asphalt concrete aggregate num measured and tested for conformance num num aggregate quality subsection num num per type source of material source of material yes before producing not required when using government provided source asphalt binder num measured and tested for conformance num quality aashto m num asphalt supplier or mixing plant asphalt concrete aggregate num process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day per stockpile crusher belt during production no num hours not required when using a precrushed commercial source section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks mix design asphalt concrete mixture measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per submitted mix design stockpiles yes num days before paving rap asphalt binder content aashto t num rap asphalt gradation aashto t num dry gradation no binder removed bulk specific gravity of aggregate coarse fine aashto t num t num vma aashto r num vfa air voids aashto t num hveem svalue aashto t num t num required only for hveem mix marshall stability flow aashto t num required only for marshall mix tensile strength ratio aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production startup control strip asphalt concrete pavement statistical num gradation aashto t num num minimum behind the paver before compaction yes num hours ½ in num mm i no .
num num mm i no .
num num μm i no .
num numμm i other specified sieves ii asphalt content num i aashto t num density num i aashto t num num minimum inplace after compacting num hours deliver cores to co after determining specific gravity and compaction section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production startup control strip asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num maximum specific gravitynum aashto t num num minimum behind the paver before compaction yes num hours mix temperature first load as determined by the co thereafter hauling vehicle before dumping or windrow before pickup no upon completion of test process control num density astm dnum num minimum at core location before coring no num hours see subsection num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production asphalt concrete pavement statistical num gradation aashto t num num per num tons num metric tons behind the paver before compaction yes num hours ½ in num mm i no .
num num mm i no .
num num μm i no .
num numμm i other specified sieves ii asphalt content num i aashto t num density num i aashto t num inplace after compacting num hours section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num maximum specific gravity num aashto t num minimum num per day behind the paver before compaction yes num hours placement temperature first load and as determined by co thereafter hauling vehicle before dumping or windrow before pickup no upon completion of measurement asphalt binder num measured and tested for conformance num quality see table num aashto m num num per num tons num metric tons of mix in line between tank mixing plan yes num numquart numliter samples tested by government asphalt concrete pavement process control num gradation at plant aashto t num t num contractor determined cold feed or hot bins as applicable no num hours moisture content of aggregates aashto t num contractor determined stockpile density astm dnum num per num feet num meters inplace after compacting section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num type i pavement roughness before construction initial mri aashto r num r num see subsection num left and right wheel paths no within num days of notice to proceed original surface before construction type i pavement roughness after construction final mri within num days after completing paving type ii pavement roughness before construction initial mri within num days of notice to proceed original surface before construction type ii pavement roughness after construction final mri within num days after completing paving section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product continued asphalt concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num type iii pavement roughness final mri aashto r num r num see subsection num left and right wheel paths no within num days after completing paving process control num surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection nume contractor determined see subsection nume num hours num use aashto t num method a .
calculate the asphalt binder content by weighing the sample before and after the burn using a calibrated external balance .
num cut two numinch nummillimeter diameter side by side cores .
remove them with a core retriever and fill and compact the core holes with asphalt concrete mixture .
label the cores and protect them from damage due to handling and temperature .
submit one core for verification testing .
dry the other core to constant mass at num f num c or vacuum dry it according to astm dnum before performing the core density and measuring the thickness .
use num pounds per cubic foot num kilograms per cubic meter to convert specific gravity to density .
num after production paving has begun use the average maximum specific gravity value aashto t num for each day to adjust the percent compaction for the cores that represent that days paving .
num do not use the supplemental procedure for mixtures containing porous aggregate dry back method of aashto t num .
section num num section num .
asphalt concrete description num this work consists of constructing asphalt concrete pavement using a hot or warm mix asphalt hma or wma .
asphalt concrete type is designated as type i or type ii according to subsection num .
construction requirements num composition of mix jmf .
conform to current state department of transportation material specifications for asphalt concrete .
a type i .
submit a state department of transportation jmf approved within the past num months for approval at least num days before production .
for each proposed jmf submit a production certification conforming to state department of transportation specifications and conforming to design parameter a b or c for the type of mix submitted and conforming to design parameter d in table num .
table num asphalt concrete mix requirements design parameters specification a volumetric hot asphalt concrete pavement aashto m num aashto r num and aashto t num gyratory compaction level num num num volumetric properties at num to num million esals aashto m num see table num b hveem aashto t num and aashto t num stabilometer minimum num percent air voids num num num c marshall aashto t num stability pounds kilonewtons minimum num num flow num inches num millimeters num num percent air voids num num num compaction number of blows each end of test specimen num d moisture susceptibility aashto t num tensile strength ratio minimum num num the percent of air voids are based on aashto t num aashto t num and aashto t num. b type ii .
provide a mix composed of crushed stone or gravel and asphalt binder mixed in an approved plant .
use an aggregate gradation and asphalt binder of a quality conforming to those normally used locally by either federal or state agencies for the type of work being constructed .
submit the strength quality and gradation specifications for the asphalt concrete mix .
include copies of laboratory test reports that demonstrate aggregate asphalt binder additive and mix properties meet federal state or local government agency specifications .
section num num for both type i and type ii submit the maximum specific gravity density of the mix as determined by aashto t num .
num production startup procedures .
see subsection numb .
num mixing plant .
see subsection num .
num surface preparation .
see subsection num .
num weather limitations .
see subsection num .
num hauling .
see subsection num .
num placing and finishing .
do not use mixes produced from different plants unless the mixes are produced according to the same jmf use material from the same sources and are approved .
place hma at a temperature conforming to table num .
place wma at temperatures conforming to subsection num .
measure temperature of the asphalt concrete mix in the hauling vehicle just before dumping into the spreader or measure it in the windrow immediately before pickup .
a asphalt concrete for roadway construction .
place the mix with a paver conforming to subsection num .
control horizontal alignment using a reference line .
automatically control the grade and slope from reference lines a ski and slope control device or dual skis .
use skis having a minimum length of num feet num meters .
in areas where mechanical spreading and finishing is impractical place and finish the asphalt concrete mix according to subsection numb .
offset the longitudinal joint according to subsection num. b asphalt concrete for nonroadway uses .
spread and finish each course by hand raking screeding or by other approved methods .
num compacting .
thoroughly and uniformly compact the asphalt surface by rolling .
in places inaccessible to rollers use alternate equipment approved by the co. do not cause cracking shoving or undue displacement .
monitor the compaction process with nuclear density gauges calibrate according to the astm dnum calibration section within num months before use .
check the standard and reference on each day of use according to the astm dnum standardization and reference check sections .
compact to at least num percent of the maximum specific gravity density determined in subsection num .
continue compaction until surface marks are eliminated and cracks are sealed .
num joints trimming edges and cleanup .
see subsection num .
num pavement straightedge measurement .
measure the pavement surface using a numfoot nummeter metal straightedge at right angles and parallel to the centerline .
defective areas are deviations between the surface and the bottom of the straightedge in excess of ¼ inches num millimeters measured between two contacts of the straightedge or deviations in excess of ¼ inches num millimeters measured at the end of the straightedge .
section num num correct defective areas according to subsection numgnum through num .
obtain approval for the method of correction .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
asphalt concrete mix properties will be evaluated under subsection num .
asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of asphalt concrete work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
pavement straightedge measurement will be evaluated under subsection num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production asphalt concrete type i numa measured and tested for conformance num density num aashto t num num per num tons num metric tons inplace after compacting yes num hours deliver cores to co after testing is completed surface tolerance straightedge measurement subsection num continuously after compaction finished pavement surface no placement temperature first load and as determined by co thereafter hauling vehicle before dumping or windrow before pickup upon completion of measurement process control num gradation at the plant aashto t num t num contractor determined cold feed or hot bins as applicable num hours moisture content of aggregates aashto t num stockpile density astm dnum num per num feet num meters inplace after compacting asphalt concrete type ii numb measured and tested for conformance num num per num tons num metric tons inplace after compacting num dry cores to constant mass at numf num c or vacuum dry astm dnum before testing .
for asphalt concrete type i cut two numinch nummillimeter diameter side by side cores .
remove them with a core retriever and fill and compact the core holes with asphalt concrete mixture .
label the cores and protect them from damage due to handling and temperature .
submit one core for verification testing .
dry the other core to constant mass at num f num c or vacuum dry it according to astm dnum before performing the core density and measuring the thickness .
use num pounds per cubic foot num kilograms per cubic meter to convert specific gravity to density .
num section num .
reserved section num num section num .
opengraded asphalt friction course description num this work consists of constructing an opengraded asphalt friction course ogfc .
grading is designated according to table num .
asphalt binder is designated according to aashto m num .
antistrip additive type is designated according to subsection num .
where no type is designated use type num lime .
material num conform to the following subsections antistrip additive num asphalt binder num mineral filler num opengraded asphalt friction course aggregate num construction requirements num composition of mix jmf .
provide ogfc mixes of aggregate and asphalt binder designed according to astm dnum or other approved methods that meet the applicable requirements in table num .
fabricate gyratory compacted specimens num inches num millimeter in diameter and num inches num millimeters nominal height .
the cantabro abrasion test is not required .
provide an application temperature range .
table num ogfc mix requirements design parameter requirement air voids astm dnum or dnum num minimum draindown astm dnum num maximum by mixture mass moisture susceptibility aashto t num except as modified by astm dnum num minimum a submission .
submit a written jmf mix design reports applicable charts and design data for verification at least num days before production .
include a signed statement prepared by the testing laboratory that certifies the proposed jmf meets requirements .
for the proposed jmf submit the following section num num num aggregate and mineral filler .
a target values num target value for percent passing each specified sieve size for the aggregate blend and num set target values within the gradation ranges shown in table num for the required grading .
b source and percentage of each stockpile to be used c average gradation of each stockpile d representative samples from each stockpile .
use split samples of material taken at the same time samples are taken for testing by the contractors laboratory .
num num pounds num kilograms of aggregates proportioned by each stockpile according to the jmf and num num pounds num kilograms of mineral filler if proposed for the jmf .
e results of aggregate quality tests performed within num year of use .
for aggregate quality tests see subsection num .
num asphalt binder .
see subsection numcnum .
num antistrip additives .
see subsection numcnum .
b verification .
the verification process starts when required documentation and material are received .
do not begin ogfc production until the jmf is verified .
num aggregate gradations .
the contractors aggregate gradation is verified if the cos gradation on a combined ogfc mix using the contractors aggregate stockpile percentage recommendations is within the contractors target value gradation plus or minus the following tolerance for each sieve sieve size tolerance no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num num moisture susceptibility .
the contractors retained tensile strength result determined by aashto t num except as modified by astm dnum is verified if the cos result is num percent minimum .
c changes and resubmissions .
if a jmf is rejected or the source of material is changed submit a new jmf for verification .
up to num days may be required to evaluate a change after receipt of required documentation and material .
approved changes in target values will not be applied retroactively for payment .
the co will deduct jmf evaluation costs resulting from the following num contractorrequested changes to the approved jmf and num additional testing necessary due to the failure of a submitted jmf .
section num num num mixing plant .
see subsection num .
num pavers .
see subsection numa .
num surface preparation .
see subsection num .
num weather limitations .
place the ogfc mix on a dry asphalt surface when the air temperature in the shade is above num f num c and the road surface temperature is above num f num c. stop placement if either temperature falls below these minimums .
num preparing and mixing material .
prepare mix and control material according to subsections num through num except do not heat the aggregate introduced into the mixer above the optimum mixing temperature established in the jmf .
num hauling placing and finishing .
haul place and finish the mix according to subsections num and num .
place the mix within the approved temperature range .
minimize asphalt binder drainage by discharging the mix into the paver within num½ hours of loading the truck .
when surge bins are used begin this num½hour limit at the time the mix is deposited into the surge bin .
num compacting .
roll the ogfc mix before the mix temperature drops below num f num c or the temperature recommended by the asphalt binder manufacturer .
use a steelwheeled roller for compacting the mix .
do not shove distort or strip the mix beneath the roller .
roll the mix parallel to the centerline commencing at the outside edge and progressing towards the center .
on superelevated curves begin the rolling on the low side and progress to the high side .
limit rolling to that necessary to consolidate the ogfc and bond it to the underlying surface .
num joints and cleanup .
use butt joints for longitudinal and transverse joints .
protect the completed ogfc from traffic until it has sufficiently hardened to resist abrasion pickup and raveling .
dispose of material trimmed from the edges and other discarded asphalt concrete mix according to subsection numanum .
num straightedge measurement .
see subsection num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
aggregate quality properties will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mineral filler and antistrip additive will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
asphalt content and aggregate gradation will be evaluated under subsection num .
evaluations will consider the following a asphalt content .
the upper and lower specification limits are the approved jmf target value plus or minus num percent .
b aggregate gradation .
the upper and lower specification limits are the approved jmf target values plus or minus the allowable deviations shown in table num .
section num num construction of opengraded asphalt friction course will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the ogfc contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for ogfc will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the material pay factor .
the material pay factor is the lowest single pay factor determined for asphalt content or any individual sieve of the aggregate gradation .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source ogfc aggregate num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num per type and source of material source of material yes before production not required when using government provided source asphalt binder num quality aashto m num asphalt supplier or mixing plant mix design ogfc asphalt concrete mixture measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per submitted mix design stockpiles yes num days before producing air voids astm dnum or dnum draindown astm dnum tensile strength ratio aashto t num complete aashto t num except as modified by astm dnum section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production ogfc statistical num asphalt content i aashto t num num per num tons num metric ton point of discharge of the mixing unit yes num hours gradation at paver aashto t num no .
num num µm i no .
num num µm i other specified sieves ii measured and tested for conformance num placement and compaction temperature first load and as determined by co thereafter hauling vehicle before dumping or windrow before pickup and pavement surface during rolling no upon completion of measurement asphalt binder num quality subsection num num per num tons num metric tons of mix in line between tank mixing plant yes num numquart numliter samples test by government section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued ogfc process control num gradation at plant aashto t num t num contractor determined cold feed or hot bins as applicable no num hours moisture content of aggregates aashto t num stockpile finished product ogfc measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection num continuously after compaction finished pavement surface no num hours section num num section num .
fog seal description num this work consists of applying an emulsified asphalt fog seal .
emulsified asphalt is designated according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
material num conform to the following subsections blotter num emulsified asphalt num water numc construction requirements num equipment .
furnish an asphalt distributor with the following a heater for uniformly heating the asphalt b full circulation spray bar adjustable to numfoot nummeter width c positive controls including tachometer pressure gauge volume measuring device or calibrated tank to uniformly deposit asphalt over the full width within num gallons per square yard num liters per square meter of the required rate and d thermometer for measuring asphalt temperature in the tank .
num surface preparation .
a clean the existing surface of loose material dirt and other deleterious material before placing the fog seal .
remove or protect raised pavement markers pavement markings reflectorized tape and other material that interferes with the work .
protect service entrances such as manholes valve boxes and drop inlets .
protect concrete work rock walls and other objects adjacent to the work .
b dry the surface before placing the fog seal .
num weather limitations .
apply fog seals only when the following apply a ambient air temperature is above num f num c b surface temperature is above num f num c c weather is not foggy or rainy d rain or temperatures below num f num c are not anticipated for at least num hours after application section num num e sustained winds are less than or equal to num miles num kilometers per hour and f application is completed at least num hours before sunset .
num asphalt application .
dilute the emulsion one part water to one part emulsified asphalt .
apply the emulsion according to subsection num at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter as approved by the co. at locations where the fog seal can not be applied with an asphalt distributor spray bar apply the fog seal uniformly using a hand spray attachment or by another approved method .
allow the fog seal to cure undisturbed for at least num hours or until the emulsified asphalt breaks and is substantially tack free .
cover unabsorbed asphalt with blotter to protect traffic or minimize rain damage .
remove excess blotter after the asphalt is absorbed .
dispose of material according to subsection numa and d. num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
emulsified asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each load of emulsified asphalt .
blotter will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of fog seals will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure fog seal including water added for dilution .
show a breakdown of total emulsion and water added on the load invoices supplied to the co for payment .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production emulsified asphalt num process control num placement temperature minimum num per distributor truck distributor truck no before incorporating into work section num num section num .
chip seal description num this work consists of applying a single or double course chip seal .
chip seal types are designated according to tables num and num .
asphalt binder is designated according to aashto m num and emulsified asphalt is designated according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
material num conform to the following section and subsections asphalt binder num blotter num chip seal aggregate num emulsified asphalt num fog seal num construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a superintendent and foreman with experience in placing chip seals .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting chip seal work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least five chip seal projects of similar complexity .
num composition .
submit the following for approval at least num days before placement a aggregate samples .
num pounds num kilograms from the material produced for the project the gradation range represented and the proposed target value for each sieve size b asphalt sample .
numgallon numliter sample with a production certification conforming to subsection numa c spread rates .
the proposed spread rate for the asphalt and aggregate and d density .
the density of the aggregate according to aashto t num shoveling procedure .
num equipment .
a asphalt distributor .
see subsection num .
maintain twoway radio communication with the aggregate spreader .
b sweeper .
furnish two sweepers conforming to subsection numc .
section num num c pneumatictire rollers .
num three rollers each with a minimum compacting width of num feet num meters or two rollers each with a minimum compacting width of num feet num meters and num gross mass adjustable within the range of num to num pounds per inch num to num kilograms per millimeter of compaction width .
d aggregate spreader .
controls to uniformly deposit aggregate over the full asphalt width .
num surface preparation .
see subsection numa .
prepare the surface as follows a newly asphalt patched areas .
fog seal according to section num. b existing asphalt surfaces including recycled asphalt pavements .
dry the surface .
c aggregate base course surfaces .
num when using an emulsified asphalt make the surface damp or num when using an asphalt binder dry the surface .
num weather limitations .
apply chip seals only when the following apply a ambient air temperature is above num f num c b surface temperature in the shade is above num f num c c surface temperature in the sun is below num f num c d weather is not foggy or rainy e rain or temperatures below num f num c are not anticipated for at least num hours after application f sustained winds are less than or equal to num miles num kilometers per hour and g application is completed at least num hours before sunset .
num production startup procedures .
conduct a prechip seal preparatory phase meeting according to subsection numa .
on the first day of each chip seal layer placement construct up to three num to numfoot num to nummeter control strips that are onelane wide according to subsections num and num .
coordinate the control strip locations with the co. start the first control strip at the proposed application rates .
vary the asphalt material or surface aggregate application rate for each control strip .
construct the control strip using the material laydown procedures and compaction procedures intended for the entire project .
repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
cease production until the material and the control strip are evaluated and accepted .
the co will indicate which strip will serve as the approved project control strip .
section num num acceptable control strips may remain in place and will be accepted as a part of the completed project .
correct unacceptable control strips .
use these startup procedures when changing construction procedures when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num or the beginning of a new construction season .
num asphalt application .
calibrate asphalt distributors before the start of project and when directed by the co. calibrate the spray bar height check nozzle angle and verify longitudinal and transverse application rates according to astm dnum .
spread building paper on the pavement surface at the beginning and end of each asphalt application so distributor flow is started and stopped on the paper .
apply asphalt uniformly at the optimum application rate determined from the control strip .
do not apply more asphalt than can immediately be covered with aggregate .
correct skipped areas or deficiencies .
at the end of each days production provide the co with documentation of calibrations and application rates .
remove and dispose of material spills and associated debris at the end of each shift according to subsection numa and d. num aggregate application .
when emulsified asphalt is used verify the aggregate stockpile moisture daily and use moist surfaced aggregate .
when asphalt binder is used dry the aggregate .
precoat the aggregate uniformly with num to num percent of residual asphalt by mass of aggregate .
maintain the flow qualities of the precoated aggregate to allow uniform spreading with the aggregate spreader .
calibrate aggregate spreaders before the start of project and as directed by the co. calibrate the longitudinal and transverse spread rates .
apply aggregate uniformly at the optimum application rate determined from the approved control strip .
apply the aggregate immediately after the asphalt material is applied .
operate the aggregate spreader so asphalt is covered with the aggregate before wheels pass over it .
for partwidth construction leave an uncovered numinch nummillimeter wide asphalt strip to permit an overlap of asphalt material .
cover excess asphalt with blotter to protect traffic .
correct excesses and deficiencies by adding or removing aggregate to achieve a uniform texture before the asphalt cures .
operate rollers at a maximum speed of num miles num kilometers per hour .
do not allow the aggregate to be displaced by pickup or sticking of material to the tire surface .
roll the surface to uniformly and thoroughly bond the aggregate over the full width .
complete rolling within num hour after asphalt is applied to the surface .
perform three passes with the rollers .
do not allow traffic to travel over aggregate until rolling is completed .
section num num at the end of each days production provide the co with documentation for calibrations and application rates .
use a pilot car according to section num to limit traffic speeds to num miles num kilometers per hour during the first num minutes after rolling and to num miles num kilometers per hour for the next num hours .
sweep the surface when the air temperature is below num f num c. do not displace embedded material .
complete vacuum sweeping by the morning after construction .
dispose of material according to subsection numa and d. num placing and finishing .
apply the asphalt and aggregate according to subsections num and num and table num .
the application rates in these tables are for estimating purposes only .
determine the exact rates based on approved control strips .
table num approximate quantities of material for single course chip seal type nominal maximum size of aggregate aggregate gradationnum estimated quantity of aggregate num poundsydnum kilogramsmnum estimated quantity of asphalt binder gallonsydnum litersmnum estimated quantity of emulsified asphalt gallonsydnum litersmnum numa ¾ inch num mm a num num num num num num num num num num num num numb ½ inch num mm b num num num num num num num num num num num num numc ⅜ inch num mm c num num num num num num num num num num num num numd no .
num num mm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num see table num for aggregate gradations .
num aggregate masses are for aggregates having a bulk specific gravity of num as determined by aashto t num and aashto t num .
make proportionate corrections when the aggregate furnished has a bulk specific gravity above num or below num .
num double course chip seal .
apply each asphalt and aggregate layer according to subsections num and num and table num .
table num application rates are for estimating purposes only .
determine the exact rates based on approved control strips .
when using emulsified asphalt wait at least num hours between applications .
when using asphalt binder no wait is required between applications .
lightly vacuum sweep the first layer to remove loose material .
section num num table num approximate quantities of material for double course chip seal type thickness nominal maximum size of aggregate aggregate gradationnum estimated quantity of aggregate num poundsydnum kilogramsmnum estimated quantity of asphalt binder gallonsydnum litersmnum estimated quantity of emulsified asphalt gallonsydnum litersmnum numa ⅞ inch num mm numst application ¾ inch num mm a num num num num num num num num num num num num numnd application ⅜ inch num mm c num num num num num num num num num num num num numb ¾ inch num mm numst application ½ inch num mm b num num num num num num num num num num num num numnd application ⅜ inch num mm c num num num num num num num num num num num num numc ½ inch num mm numst application ⅜ inch num mm c num num num num num num num num num num num num numnd application no .
num num mm d num num num num num num num num num num num num num see table num for aggregate gradations .
num aggregate masses are for aggregates having a bulk specific gravity of num as determined by aashto t num and aashto t num .
make proportionate corrections when the aggregate furnished has a bulk specific gravity above num or below num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
emulsified asphalt and asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each load of emulsified asphalt or asphalt binder .
chip seal aggregate gradation will be evaluated under subsection num .
the upper and lower specification limits are equal to the calculated mean of all test results plus or minus the allowable deviations shown in table num except as follows a if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve exceeds the maximum gradation value shown in table num the upper specification is equal to the maximum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the maximum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
section num num b if the calculated mean value for a tested sieve is less than the minimum gradation value shown in table num the upper specification is equal to the minimum gradation value plus the allowable deviation and the lower specification is equal to the minimum gradation value minus the allowable deviation .
construction of asphalt chip seals will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the chip seal contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for the chip seal will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the material pay factor .
the material pay factor is the lowest single pay factor determined for each specified sieve of the aggregate gradation for each aggregate gradation furnished .
when two gradations are furnished for a double chip seal the material pay factor is weighted for the quantity of each aggregate gradation spread as a percent of the total .
the material pay factor is calculated as follows pfmaterial pfnumstsrnumstsrnumst srnumnd pfnumndsrnumndsrnumst srnumnd where pfmaterial material pay factor .
pfnumst pay factor for first aggregate gradation .
pfnumst is the lowest single pay factor determined for each specified sieve .
pfnumnd pay factor for second aggregate gradation .
pfnumnd is the lowest single pay factor determined for each specified sieve .
srnumst spread rate for the first aggregate per square yard square meter .
srnumnd spread rate for the second aggregate per square yard square meter .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsectionnum characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source chip seal aggregate num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num per material type source of material yes before producing process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day per stockpile crusher belt during production no num hours not required when using a precrushed commercial source blotter subsection num asphalt binder num or emulsified asphalt num measured and tested for conformance num quality section num num per material type point of shipment or delivery yes num before incorporating into work section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection num characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production chip seal aggregate num statisticalnum num gradation see table num for applicable sieves i aashto t num t num see note num production belt or spreader dischargenum yes num hours process control num moisture on surface of aggregates visual inspection num contractor determine stockpile or spreader discharge no before incorporating into work asphalt binder num or emulsified asphalt num measured and tested for conformance num quality section num num per tanker truck including trailer tanker or distributor yes num tested by government process control num placement temperature minimum num per distributor truck distributor truck no before incorporating into work num applies to each aggregate grade furnished .
num applies to each asphalt material furnished .
num for plan quantities less than num square yards num square meters material will be accepted according to subsection num .
for plan quantities greater than num square yards num square meters material will be accepted according to subsection num.for plan quantities between num and num square yards num and num square meters the sampling frequency will be determined by dividing the plan quantity by eight .
if plan quantity exceeds num square yards num square meters the sampling frequency will be one every num square yards num square meters .
num select one point of sampling that must remain throughout project or lot .
num two numquart numliter samples for asphalt binder .
one numgallon numliter sample for emulsified asphalt .
num section num .
reserved section num num section num .
micro surfacing description num this work consists of applying a polymermodified micro surfacing mix on an existing pavement surface .
material num conform to the following subsections micro surfacing aggregate numb mineral filler num polymermodified emulsified asphalt for microsurfacing numb water numc construction requirements num qualifications .
see subsection num .
num composition of mix jmf .
submit a written jmf for micro surfacing which conforms to issa anum recommended performance guideline for micro surfacing for approval at least num days before production .
include the following a aggregate gradation values .
percent passing for each sieve size for the aggregate blend b emulsified asphalt content .
residual asphalt content as a percent by mass of dry aggregate c polymermodifier .
type and quantity of polymermodifier solids based on the residual asphalt content d aggregate samples .
numpound numkilogram sample of each aggregate e polymermodified emulsified asphalt sample .
numgallon numliter sample with a production certification conforming to subsection numa and f mineral filler samples .
numpound num kilogram sample of each proposed mineral filler .
num equipment .
a mixing equipment .
conform to issa anum .
b spreading equipment .
conform to issa anum with the exception that augers within the spreader box are not required .
section num num c sweeper .
num selfpropelled num vertical broom pressure control and num vacuum capability .
d pneumatictire rollers .
num selfpropelled num numton nummetric ton gross mass with a tire pressure of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals and num waterspray system .
e auxiliary equipment .
furnish hand squeegees shovels and other equipment necessary to perform the work .
provide power brooms air compressors water flushing equipment and hand brooms to clean the pavement surface .
other equipment of proven performance may be used in addition to or instead of this equipment when approved by the co. num surface preparation .
see subsection numa .
num weather limitations .
apply only when the following apply a ambient air temperature is above num f num c b surface temperature in the shade is above num f num c c weather is not foggy rainy or overcast d rain or temperatures below num f num c are not anticipated for at least num hours after application .
num calibration .
calibrate mixing equipment according to issa anum .
num production startup procedures .
conduct a presurfacing preparatory phase meeting according to subsection numa .
on the first day of placement construct one numfoot nummeter long control strip one lane wide .
coordinate location of the control strip with the co. construct the control strip using material laydown and rolling procedures intended for the entire project .
cease production after construction of the control strip until the material and the control strip are evaluated and accepted by the co. repeat the control strip process until an acceptable control strip is produced .
acceptable control strips may remain in place and will be accepted as a part of the completed surface treatment .
correct unacceptable control strips .
section num num use these startup procedures when changing construction procedures when resuming production after a termination of production due to unsatisfactory quality according to subsection num or the beginning of a new construction season .
num application .
fog the surface with water in front of the spreader .
blend the additives with the aggregate .
prewet the aggregate in the pugmill before mixing with the polymermodified emulsified asphalt .
mix the surfacing material a maximum of num minutes .
ensure the mix is of uniform consistency as it leaves the mixer and conforms to the approved jmf .
adjust mineral filler and polymermodified emulsified asphalt content during construction when approved by the co to adjust for variations in field conditions .
clean the spreader box before the start of each work shift .
carry sufficient mix in the spreader to completely cover the surface .
spread the mix with a spreader box .
in areas not accessible to the spreader use hand squeegees to work the mix .
remove streaks and transverse ripples as defined by issa anum from the finished surface .
provide straight lines along curbs and shoulders and do not allow runoff onto these areas .
provide straight and neat starting and ending joints by masking surfaces at the start end and other locations as directed by the co. for transverse joints use a butt joint .
use building paper placed over previously placed micro surfacing or other suitable method to avoid double placement of micro surfacing .
remove ridges or bumps in the finished surface .
for longitudinal joints place joints on lane lines .
use half passes and oddwidth passes only in turnouts and parking areas .
do not use half passes for the last pass in paved areas .
overlap longitudinal joints no more than num inches num millimeters .
limit the elevation difference at joints to less than ¼ inch num millimeters .
begin rolling after the mixture has cured to the point where it will not pick up on the roller tires .
roll parking areas and turnouts with at least two fullcoverage passes with the roller .
rolling the mainline roadway is not required .
allow treated areas to cure completely before opening to traffic .
cure is complete when clear water can be pressed out of the placed mix with a piece of paper without discoloring the paper .
remove and dispose of material spills and associated debris at the end of each shift according to subsection numa and d. two weeks to one month after completion of micro surfacing application sweep the entire treated surface .
dispose of swept material according to subsection numa .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
polymermodified emulsified asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each load of polymermodified emulsified asphalt .
section num num micro surfacing aggregate will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mineral filler will be evaluated under subsections num an num .
construction of the micro surfacing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num for each days production .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source micro surfacing aggregate for surface mixturenum measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num per material type source of material yes before producing process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day per stockpile crusher belt during production no num hours not required when using a precrushed commercial source polymer modified emulsified asphaltnum measured and tested for conformance num quality subsection num num per material type point of shipment or delivery yes num numquart numliter samples before incorporating into work section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production micro surfacing aggregate for surface mixture num measured and tested for conformance num gradation see table num for applicable sieves aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum stockpile yes num hours polymer modified emulsified asphalt num measured and tested for conformance num quality subsection numb num per day point of shipment or delivery yes num numquart numliter samples tested by government process control num placement temperature minimum num per distributor truck distributor truck no before incorporating into work num applies to each aggregate grade furnished .
num applies to each asphalt material furnished .
section num num section num .
slurry seal description num this work consists of applying an emulsified asphalt slurry seal mix on a pavement surface .
material num conform to the following subsections emulsified asphalt num mineral filler num slurry seal aggregate numa water numc construction requirements num qualifications .
see subsection num .
num composition of mix jmf .
submit a written jmf for asphalt slurry seal which conforms to issa anum recommended performance guideline for emulsified asphalt slurry seal for approval at least num days before production .
include the following a aggregate gradation values .
percent passing for each sieve size for the aggregate blend b emulsified asphalt content .
residual asphalt content as a percent by mass of dry aggregate c aggregate samples .
numpound numkilogram sample of each aggregate d emulsified asphalt sample .
numgallon numliter sample with a production certification conforming to subsection numa and e mineral filler samples .
numpound numkilogram sample of each proposed mineral filler .
num equipment .
a mixing equipment .
conform to the requirements of issa anum .
b mechanicaltype single squeegee spreader box .
num attaches to the mixer num flexible squeegee in contact with the pavement surface to prevent loss of material num adjustable to ensure a uniform spread over varying grades and crowns num adjustable in width with a flexible strikeoff and num augers for uniform flow to edges .
c sweeper .
see subsection numc .
section num num d pneumatictire rollers .
see subsection numd .
e auxiliary equipment .
see subsection nume .
other equipment of proven performance may be used in addition to or instead of this equipment when approved by the co. num surface preparation .
see subsection numa .
num weather limitations .
see subsection num .
num calibration .
calibrate each mixing unit according to issa anum in the presence of the co. num production startup procedures .
see subsection num .
num application .
mix the material according to issa anum .
fog the surface with water in front of the spreader .
blend the additives with the aggregate .
prewet the aggregate in the pugmill before mixing with the emulsified asphalt .
mix the surfacing material a maximum of num minutes .
ensure the mix is of uniform consistency as it leaves the mixer and conforms to the approved jmf .
adjust mineral filler and emulsified asphalt content during construction when approved by the co to adjust for variations in field conditions .
clean the spreader box before the start of each work shift .
carry sufficient mix in the spreader to completely cover the surface .
spread the mix with a mechanicaltype single squeegee spreader box .
in areas not accessible to the spreader box use hand squeegees to work the mix .
remove streaks and transverse ripples as defined by issa anum from the finished surface .
provide straight lines along curbs and shoulders and do not allow runoff on these areas .
provide straight and neat starting and ending joints by masking surfaces at the start end and other locations as directed by the co. for transverse joints use a butt joint .
use building paper placed over previously placed slurry seal or other suitable method to avoid double placement of slurry seal .
remove ridges or bumps in the finished surface .
for longitudinal joints place joints on lane lines .
use half passes and oddwidth passes only in turnouts and parking areas .
do not use half passes for the last pass in paved areas .
overlap longitudinal joints no more than num inches num millimeters .
limit the elevation difference at joints to less than ¼ inch num millimeters .
begin rolling after the mixture has cured to the point where it will not pick up on the roller tires .
roll parking areas and turnouts with at least two fullcoverage passes with the roller .
allow treated areas to cure completely before opening to traffic .
cure is complete when clear water can be pressed out of the mix with a piece of paper without discoloring the paper .
section num num remove and dispose of material spills and associated debris at the end of each shift according to subsection numa and d. two weeks to one month after completion of slurry seal application .
sweep and pick up the loose material from the entire treated surface .
dispose of swept material according to subsection numa .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
emulsified asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each load of emulsified asphalt .
slurry seal aggregate will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mineral filler will be evaluated under subsections num an num .
construction of the slurry seal will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num for each days production .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate for surface mixture num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num per material type source of material yes before producing process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day per stockpile crusher belt during production no num hours not required when using a precrushed commercial source emulsified asphalt num measured and tested for conformance num quality subsection num num per material type point of shipment or delivery yes num numquart numliter samples before incorporating into work section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production aggregate for surface mixture num measured and tested for conformance num gradation .
see table num for applicable sieves aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum stockpile yes num hours emulsified asphalt num quality subsection num num per day point of shipment or delivery yes num numquart numliter samples tested by government process control num placement temperature minimum num per distributor truck distributor truck no before incorporating into work num applies to each aggregate grade furnished .
num applies to each asphalt material furnished .
section num num section num .
asphalt prime coat description num this work consists of applying a emulsified asphalt prime coat .
prime coat asphalt grade is designated according to aashto m num or aashto m num for emulsified asphalts or subsection numc for penetrating emulsified asphalt .
asphalt application is designated in subsection num .
if no application method is designated use method num .
material num conform to the following subsections blotter num crushed aggregate num emulsified asphalt num penetrating emulsified asphalt for prime coat numc water numc construction requirements num equipment .
use equipment conforming to subsection num .
num surface preparation .
prepare the surface to be primed according to subsection num .
when required use sweeping or other approved method to remove loose dust and fine material and lightly spray the surface with water .
num weather limitations .
apply prime coat only when the following apply a surface is dry or slightly damp b ambient air temperature is above num f num c and rising c surface temperature in the shade is above num f num c and rising and d weather is not foggy or rainy .
num asphalt application .
apply emulsified asphalt according to subsection num. a method num topical .
apply undiluted emulsified asphalt formulated as a penetrating prime coat at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter .
exact application rate will be approved by the co. b method num inverted prime .
apply undiluted emulsified asphalt at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter .
immediately apply crushed aggregate at a uniform rate of num to num pounds per square yard num to num kilograms per square meter using an aggregate spreader .
exact application rate will be approved by the co .
section num num leave a numinch nummillimeter wide uncovered strip of asphalt to permit an overlap of asphalt material during partwidth construction .
do not allow the wheels of the aggregate spreader to come in contact with the asphalt .
immediately seat the aggregate using a roller .
operate rollers at a maximum speed of num miles num kilometers per hour .
c method num processed .
scarify the surface to a depth of num to num inches num to num millimeters before applying the asphalt as a prime coat .
apply emulsified asphalt at an undiluted rate of num gallons per square yard per inch num liters per square meter per num millimeters of scarification depth .
immediately process respread and compact the material .
when required dilute a slowsetting emulsified asphalt by adding water .
other methods of incorporating asphalt into the aggregate may be used when approved by the co. num curing .
cure surfaces primed with emulsified asphalt for at least num hours before covering with the next course .
num maintenance .
maintain the primed surface by keeping it free of corrugations potholing and loose material until the next course is placed .
remove dirt or other deleterious material and repair damaged areas .
spread additional blotter to cover unabsorbed asphalt .
remove excess blotter after the asphalt is absorbed .
num acceptance .
emulsified asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
crushed aggregate and blotter will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of the prime coat will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring prime coat by the square yard square meter measure the length along the centerline of the roadway .
include treated widen areas when measuring the width .
when measuring prime coat by the cubic yard cubic meter volume measure in the hauling vehicle .
do not measure water added for dilution .
indicate a breakdown of total emulsion and water added on the load invoices supplied to the co. payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
asphalt tack coat description num this work consists of applying an emulsified asphalt tack coat .
tack coat emulsified asphalt grade is designated according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
material num conform to the following subsection emulsified asphalt num construction requirements num equipment .
use equipment conforming to subsection num .
num surface preparation .
clean the existing surface of loose material dirt or other deleterious material by approved methods .
when the surface is concrete remove excess joint and crack filler .
num weather limitations .
apply asphalt tack only when the following apply a surface is dry and unfrozen b ambient air temperature is above num f num c and rising and c weather is not foggy or rainy .
num asphalt application .
when using slowsetting emulsified asphalt dilute by adding an equal quantity of water to the emulsified asphalt .
apply the asphalt tack coat according to subsection num at a rate of num to num gallons per square yard num to num liters per square meter .
apply the asphalt tack coat uniformly and completely by fogging with a hand spray attachment or by another approved method when application with a distributor spray bar is not practical .
squeegee the excess asphalt from the surface .
allow the tacked surfaces to completely cure before placing the covering course .
place the covering course within num hours of placing the asphalt tack coat .
num acceptance .
emulsified asphalt will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of the tack coat will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure tack coat including water added for dilution .
indicate a breakdown of total emulsion and water added on the load invoices supplied to the co for payment .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
asphalt pavement milling description num this work consists of removing asphalt pavement by a cold milling process .
construction requirements num equipment .
a milling machine .
num selfpropelled num sufficient power traction and stability to accurately maintain depth of cut num capable of removing the pavement thickness to provide profile and cross slope num automatic system to control grade elevations by referencing from the existing pavement by means of a ski matching shoe or from an independent grade control num automatic system to maintain cross slope num system to effectively limit dust and other particulate matter from escaping removal operations num loading system or adequate support equipment to completely recover milled material at removal rate and num cutting width equal to at least onethird of the lane width .
b sweeper .
see subsection numc .
num milling .
use a longitudinal reference to accurately guide the machine .
references may include a curb edge of pavement or string attached to the pavement surface .
mill in a longitudinal direction .
mill the transverse slope to within ¼ inch in num feet num millimeters in num meters of the required slope .
transition from one transverse slope to another at a uniform rate .
uniformly mill the entire roadway lane width so the crosssection of the new surface forms a straight line .
transition between different depths of cut at a uniform rate of ½ inch num millimeters of depth per num feet num meters .
at the beginning and end of the milling work construct a smooth transition to the original surface at this rate .
do not leave an exposed vertical edge perpendicular to the direction of travel .
when the pavement remains open to traffic limit differences in elevation between adjacent lanes according to subsection num .
mill the surface to conform to subsection num .
use a sweeper immediately behind the milling operations to remove and completely recover loose material .
minimize the escape of dust into the air by misting .
dispose of recovered milled material according to subsection numanum .
section num num before opening to traffic patch defects in milled surface according to the co. num acceptance .
asphalt pavement milling will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
milled surfaces will be evaluated under subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring asphalt pavement milling by square yard square meter measure the length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
asphalt pavement crack sealing and filling description num this work consists of routing cleaning sealing and filling cracks in asphalt pavement surfaces .
material num conform to the following section and subsection asphalt concrete num joint sealants and crack fillers hot applied numa construction requirements num equipment .
furnish equipment with the following capabilities a router .
a power rotary impact router or vertical spindle router capable of creating a reservoir to the required depth and width without damaging adjacent pavement .
b air lance .
a hot compressed air lance capable of providing clean oilfree compressed air at a volume of num cubic feet num cubic meters per minute a pressure of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals and a temperature of num f num c. c application wand .
a wand attached to a heated hose attached to a heated material chamber that maintains material temperature within manufacturers tolerances .
supply proper wand tips for desired application .
d heating kettle .
an indirectheating double boiler capable of constant and effective agitation .
fill the space between the inner and outer shells with oil or other heat transfer medium .
provide an accurate and calibrated thermometer with a range from num to num f in num f graduations num to num c in num c graduations located so the material temperature can be safely checked .
e squeegee or screed .
a handheld squeegee or screed of appropriate configuration for filling cracks flush with the surface underfilling cracks to recess below the surface or overfilling cracks to an overband shape .
f compressor .
a compressor capable of producing oil and waterfree air at a minimum rate of num cubic feet num cubic meters per minute with a minimum continuous line pressure of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals .
num routing .
rout clean and seal cracks in a continuous operation .
do not allow traffic to close or damage routed cracks .
rout ⅛ to ½inch num to nummillimeter wide cracks to produce vertical intact walls and a flat bottom with a reservoir centered over the crack .
make the reservoir two to three times the width of the crack .
rout cracks to a depth of ½ to ¾ inches num to num millimeters .
section num num num cleaning .
prevent debris from entering waterways travel lanes open to public traffic or areas designated not to be disturbed .
remove dirt dust and other deleterious material from the crack walls and cavity using a stream of air or other approved methods .
blow or brush dry material off the pavement surface .
num sealing and filling .
dry the crack surfaces with the hot air lance before sealing or filling .
do not seal or fill cracks when the pavement surface temperature is below num f num c and weather conditions are rainy or foggy .
a sealing routed cracks or cracks averaging ¼ to num inch num to num millimeters wide .
submit a copy of and adhere to the manufacturers recommendations for heating and applying the hot applied crack material .
heat the material to pouring temperature in a heating kettle and continuously agitate the material .
discard sealant when num heated above the safe heating temperature recommended by the manufacturer num held at pouring temperature for more than num hours num reheated more than once or num not consistent or uniform in appearance .
warm and dry the crack surfaces using a hotcompressed air lance if the pavement temperature is lower than num f num c or moisture is present .
keep the lance moving to prevent burning the pavement surface .
place and finish the material within num minutes after heating the pavement surface with the lance .
use an application wand to place material in each crack from the bottom up .
insulate the wand to maintain pouring temperature while placing material .
return the wand to the heating kettle immediately after sealing each crack .
use a squeegee or screed to strike off the material .
b filling cracks averaging more than num inch num millimeters wide .
fill each crack with an asphalt mix according to section num .
use a squeegee screed or other suitable equipment to force the mix into the crack .
fill each crack flush with the pavement surface and compact the asphalt mixture .
do not allow traffic on sealed or filled cracks until the sealant or filler has cured or is treated with debonding material recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the co. num resealing cracks .
reseal cracks exhibiting adhesion failure damage incomplete filling foreign objects in the sealant or otherwise rejected by the co. num acceptance .
material for asphalt pavement crack sealing or filling will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
asphalt pavement crack sealing and filling will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
paving geotextiles description num this work consists of installing paving geotextile and asphalt binder between pavement layers to form a waterproofing and stressrelieving membrane within the pavement structure .
material num conform to the following subsections asphalt binder num blotter num paving geotextile numb construction requirements num submittals .
submit the following for approval at least num days before installing the paving geotextile a a production certification for the geotextile according to subsection numa .
include the name of the manufacturer product name and style number b a num by numinch num by nummillimeter sample from beyond the first outer wrap of the roll .
label the sample with the lot and batch number date of sampling project number item number manufacturer and product name c the manufacturers recommended asphalt binder application rate based on field conditions and geotextile asphalt retention properties and d a plan of operations for installing the geotextile .
num general .
identify store and handle geotextile according to astm dnum and the manufacturers recommendations .
limit exposure to ultraviolet radiation to less than num days .
num surface preparation .
seal cracks according to section num .
clean the existing surface of loose material dirt or other deleterious material by approved methods .
num weather limitations .
apply asphalt binder and paving geotextile only when the following apply a surface is dry and unfrozen and b surface temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
num asphalt binder application .
apply asphalt binder to the pavement surface according to subsection num at num to num f num to num c. spray the asphalt binder num inches num millimeters wider than the paving geotextile .
do not apply the asphalt binder further than the temporary traffic control zone for this work .
section num num use the same asphalt binder grade as required in the approved jobmix formula .
num paving geotextile placement .
before the asphalt binder cools and loses tackiness place the paving geotextile smoothly and with minimal wrinkling onto the binder .
use equipment especially designed to hold the roll and lay down the paving geotextile .
provide uniform tension and broom the geotextile smooth during placement .
slit lay flat and tack wrinkles or folds higher than num inch num millimeters .
cut to remove folds that result in three or more layers of geotextile .
broom and roll the paving geotextile to maximize fabric contact with the pavement surface .
overlap the geotextile num inches num millimeters at longitudinal joints to ensure full closure .
do not overlap transverse joints .
butt adjacent geotextile ends together at transverse joints .
apply additional asphalt binder to paving geotextile overlaps to ensure proper bonding of the double fabric layer .
if asphalt binder bleeds through the fabric treat the affected areas with blotter .
broom the excess blotter from the geotextile surface before placing the overlay .
do not turn equipment on the geotextile .
repair damaged fabric before placing overlay .
limit the laydown temperature of the asphalt concrete overlay to a maximum of num f num c. num acceptance .
asphalt binder will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
material for paving geotextiles will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each shipment of geotextile .
installation of the paving geotextile will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
blotter will be evaluated under section num .
sealing cracks will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure blotter under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num section num .
reserved section num .
reserved section num num section num .
asphalt concrete pavement patching description num this work consists of repairing distressed areas of asphalt concrete pavement by removing and patching the pavement and underlying material as required .
separation and stabilization geotextile is designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections asphalt concrete num asphalt tack coat num crushed aggregate num separation and stabilization geotextile and geotextile filter numa stabilization geogrid num construction requirements num asphalt pavement base and subgrade full depth patch type num fdpnum .
a patch areas .
extend the repair area num inches num millimeters beyond the distressed area .
if patch limits are within num inches num millimeters of the pavement edge extend the patch limit to the pavement edge .
make the minimum transverse dimension of the patch half of the travel lane width and the minimum longitudinal dimension of the patch num inches num millimeters .
b pavement removal .
mill completely through the pavement or saw cut and remove the pavement .
when saw cutting cut through the existing pavement and around the perimeter of the patch area .
make saw cuts perpendicular to the roadway surface and at right angles to each other .
remove the pavement base and subgrade to the depth shown in the plans .
c patching .
when required place geogrid or geotextile according to section num .
place and compact crushed aggregate base according to subsections num and num .
asphalt millings may be used for crushed aggregate base material .
apply a tack coat to the edges of the patch area according to section num .
place and compact asphalt concrete pavement to ensure the patched surface matches the same grade as the adjacent surface .
num asphalt pavement full depth patch type num fdpnum .
a patch areas .
extend the repair area num inches num millimeters beyond the distressed area .
if patch limits are within num inches num millimeters of the pavement edge extend the patch limit to the pavement edge .
make the minimum length and width of the patch num inches num millimeters .
b pavement removal .
see subsection numb except remove the pavement to expose subbase or subgrade as shown in the plans .
section num num c patching .
apply a tack coat to the edges of the patch area according to section num .
place and compact asphalt concrete pavement so the patched surface matches the same grade as the adjacent surface .
num asphalt pavement partial depth patch type num. a patch areas .
patch areas will be designated by the co. b pavement removal .
clean the patch area by sweeping or other acceptable methods .
c patching .
apply a tack coat to asphalt concrete surfaces within the patch area according to section num .
place the asphalt material either by hand with a blade or other approved method .
compact the asphalt concrete pavement patch to match the grade of the adjacent surface .
num disposing of waste .
dispose of debris and unsuitable and excess material according to subsection numa and d. num acceptance .
construction of asphalt concrete pavement patching will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
separation and stabilization geotextiles and geogrid will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
asphalt concrete will be evaluated under section num .
crushed aggregate will be evaluated under section num .
asphalt tack coat will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable do not measure asphalt tack coat .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract unit price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num num division num rigid pavements section num num section num .
minor concrete pavement description num this work consists of constructing minor concrete pavement on a prepared surface .
material num conform to the following section minor concrete num construction requirements num composition concrete mix design .
see subsection num except conform to table num .
table num composition of concrete maximum water cementitious material ratio slump maximum aashto t num air content minimum coarse aggregate size number aashto m num numday compressive strength minimum aashto t num num num inches num millimeters fixed form num num num num psi num mpa num meet the processing requirements of aashto m num table num standard sizes of processed aggregate .
num equipment .
conform to the following a forms .
furnish straight steel forms .
for curved edges with radii less than num feet num meters furnish flexible or curved forms .
provide forms conforming to the following num height equal to the pavement thickness at the edge num numfoot nummeter minimum length num stabilizing devices to secure form to the prepared surface and to withstand paving operations and pressure of concrete with no visible movement or settlement num joint locks to join form lengths tightly together and num clean and free of hardened concrete dirt distortion and rust .
section num num b paving and finishing .
num fixed form construction .
furnish equipment conforming to either of the following a mechanical selfpropelled finishing machines capable of consolidating and finishing the concrete with minimal hand finishing .
coordinate the number of driving wheels power of the motor and the machines mass to prevent slippage .
do not use machines that displace the fixed forms or b manual finishing machines or roller screeds capable of consolidating and finishing the concrete .
num vibrators .
furnish internal immersed tube or multiple spud type vibrators for paving more than num inches num millimeters thick .
surface pan type vibrators are acceptable for fullwidth concrete consolidation of slabs num inches num millimeters or less in thickness .
operate the vibrators at frequencies within num to num vibrations per minute .
attach vibrators to the spreader or finishing machine or mount on a separate carriage that precedes the finishing machine .
for construction of irregular areas use handheld vibrators operated at a frequency recommended by the manufacturer .
c concrete saws .
furnish concrete saws that are capable of sawing new concrete for crack control to the required depth and alignment .
equip saws with blade guards and devices to control alignment and depth .
d joint sealing .
furnish sealing equipment according to the sealant manufacturers recommendations .
num production startup procedures .
conduct a preminor concrete pavement preparatory phase meeting according to subsection numa .
num surface preparation and setting forms .
prepare the roadbed surface according to section num .
maintain the surface to avoid the development of loose and uncompacted material .
set and align forms to the plan dimensions and elevations .
securely brace forms so they will not bulge or warp during concrete placement .
apply form release agent or form oil to the inside form faces .
align forms to the dimensions and elevations in the plans and assure there is no bulging or warping .
check and correct roadbed surface deformations and rutting exceeding ½ inch num millimeters and uniformly dampen the surface before placing concrete .
num placing concrete .
at least num days before the start of concrete placement operations arrange a prepaving conference .
coordinate attendance with the co and applicable subcontractors .
submit and be prepared to discuss the following a proposed pour sequence and placement schedule b approved concrete mix design c contractor quality control plan d equipment batching mixing placing and curing requirements section num num e subsections num and num f jointing plan joint forming or sawing operations rain protection plan hot and cold weather paving plan and opening to traffic requirements and g traffic control plan .
conform to subsections num through num and num for weather limitations handling storing batching and mixing material and delivering concrete .
deposit concrete between the forms to a uniform height .
consolidate concrete to remove voids and air pockets .
do not move concrete horizontally with vibrators .
strike off and place concrete with a formriding paving machine or manual fixed form paving equipment .
in irregular areas where a paving machine is impractical place concrete using templates screeds or other methods approved by the co .
carry a slight excess of concrete in front of the leading edge of the template or screed .
after strikeoff and before bleed water appears on the surface float to the required grade and crosssection .
finish the concrete pavement to minus ¼ inch num millimeters or plus ⅜ inch num millimeters of the thickness required .
when concrete is placed adjoining a previouslyconstructed lane of pavement do not operate mechanical equipment on the existing lane until the lane has attained a minimum flexural strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals according to aashto t num and aashto t num or a compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals according to aashto t num and aashto t num .
when required place reinforcing steel according to section num .
if placing rebar before placing concrete position the rebar on acceptable supports .
if placing rebar after placing concrete mechanically insert the rebar to the required depth .
reinforcing bars and steel supports are to be epoxycoated .
keep epoxycoated reinforcing steel free of damage and distortion .
steel wire fabric and mats are not required to be epoxycoated .
when rain is threatening during paving operations stop paving operations and protect the concrete pavement from rain with plastic sheeting or other methods approved by the co .
remove replace or repair pavement damaged by rain or hail as directed by the co at no cost to the government .
num joints .
construct joints at locations and dimensions indicated in the plans .
if jointing locations are not indicated in the plans submit a jointing plan according to subsection num .
indicate locations of contraction construction and isolation joints .
do not vary longitudinal joints more than ½ inch num millimeters and transverse joints more than ¼ inch num millimeters from true alignment .
when curbs or medians are constructed integral with the pavement construct transverse joints continuous through the curb or median .
clean joints of deleterious material including concrete slurry and protect the joints until sealed .
a longitudinal joints .
construct longitudinal construction joints by using steel fixed forms and a keyway along the joint .
section num num where required place deformed steel tie bars perpendicular to the longitudinal joints with mechanical equipment or rigidly secured chairs without damaging or disrupting the concrete .
along longitudinal construction joints tie bars may be bent at right angles against the form of the first lane constructed and straightened into final position before placing concrete in the adjacent lane .
repair or replace broken or damaged tie bars .
threaded hook bolts may be used instead of tie bars .
fasten hook bolts to the form of the longitudinal construction joint .
construct joints as follows num formed joints .
form joints with an approved nonmetallic or removable device while the concrete is plastic but set sufficiently to maintain the formed joint .
when adjacent lanes are constructed separately form the sealant reservoir in the lane placed last .
num sawed joints .
after placing concrete saw joints approximately ⅛ inch num millimeters wide as soon as equipment can be supported and before uncontrolled cracking occurs .
do not ravel the joints while sawing .
saw longitudinal joints immediately after sawing transverse joints .
protect the sawed concrete faces from drying during the curing period .
saw sealant reservoirs no sooner than num hours after placing the concrete .
if necessary continue sawing day and night regardless of weather conditions .
do not saw a joint if a crack occurs at or near the joint location before sawing .
discontinue sawing when a crack develops ahead of the saw .
remove and replace newlyplaced concrete pavement where uncontrolled cracking occurs .
dowel and tie replacement pavement to adjacent pavement as specified .
b transverse contraction joints .
when required construct contraction joints according to subsection numanum or anum .
where required place dowel bars through and centered on traverse joints and in the middle of the slab depth .
align and hold dowels parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab by a metal assembly that remains in the pavement and is rigidly secured to the base or subgrade using stakes or nails .
limit deviations from parallel to ¼ inch num millimeters in the length of the dowel bar .
assure proper alignment of joint and dowel bar assemblies .
coat each dowel bar with an approved bond breaker .
limit bond breaker coating thickness to num mils num micrometers .
concrete edges adjacent to the joint may be rounded or beveled to a radius no greater than ¼ inch num millimeters or as approved .
resaw or grind joints having an insufficient opening .
where a joint is larger than required furnish a larger size joint seal as approved .
c transverse construction joints .
construct transverse construction joints only at locations specified at the end of each work shift or when concrete placement is interrupted for more than num minutes .
if necessary remove and dispose of the excess concrete to the last preceding joint .
when required install dowel bars in transverse construction joints according to subsection numb .
section num num use a metal or wooden bulkhead to form the joint shaped to the pavement crosssection and designed to permit the installation of dowel bars .
d isolation joints .
form isolation joints around manholes utility boxes foundations other fixed objects or as indicated in the plans .
place a ½inch nummillimeter preformed joint filler continuously around or along each structure that extends into or through the pavement before concrete is placed .
after the concrete hardens recess the joint filler about ¾ inch num millimeters to allow a reservoir for sealant .
when required place steel wire fabric at the location and orientation specified .
use metal or plastic chairs or other methods approved by the co to support the steel wire fabric .
num surface finishing .
protect the surface from rain damage .
after floating check the surface of the fresh concrete with a numfoot nummeter straightedge .
remove high areas indicated by the straightedge .
lap each successive check with the straightedge num feet num meters over the previous check path .
before the concrete has initially set work the pavement edges on each side of isolation joints formed joints transverse and longitudinal construction joints and emergency construction joints to produce a ¼ inch num millimeters or less continuous radius and a smooth dense mortar finish .
do not use mortar buildup to round edges .
as soon as excess moisture has disappeared and while the concrete is still plastic enough to make a granular surface possible texture the surface to produce a skid resistant surface .
use the method specified and conform to the following a transverse tine finish .
drag two layers of moistened burlap along the pavement in the direction of paving without tearing or marring the surface .
following the burlap drag use a tining comb to form grooves in the pavement surface .
space tines randomly ½ to ¾ inches num to num millimeters apart .
produce grooves that are num to num inches num to num millimeters wide and ⅛ to num num to num millimeters inches deep .
tine perpendicular to the centerline without tearing the concrete surface or loosening surface aggregate .
b broom finish .
broom the surface with a steel or stiffbristled fiber broom to produce corrugations between num and ⅛ inch num to num millimeters deep .
broom perpendicular to the centerline from edge to edge with adjacent strokes slightly overlapped .
use the same type and manufacture of broom for all paved surfaces to provide a consistent appearance .
c exposed aggregate finish .
broom the surface .
use stiff brushes approved by the co .
exercise care to prevent marring of the surface and cracking or chipping of slab edges or joints .
if approved by the co apply a light spray of retardant to the unfinished surface to facilitate this work .
broom transversely across the pavement .
pull the loosened semistiff mortar off the pavement .
remove the mortar from adjacent pavement .
broom parallel to the centerline .
continue this operation until a sufficient quantity of coarse aggregate is exposed .
other methods of aggregate exposure will be permitted if satisfactory results are demonstrated .
after curing wash the surface with water and brush to remove laitance and cement from the exposed coarse aggregate .
section num num num curing .
immediately after finishing and when marring will not occur cure the surface and exposed sides of concrete for at least num hours .
do not leave the concrete exposed for more than num minutes during the curing period .
cure using one of the following methods a water method .
cure according to subsection numb .
cover the entire surface of the pavement and edges of the slab with water saturated mats .
extend the mats at least twice the thickness of the pavement beyond the edges of the slab .
place the mats in complete contact with the surface .
use weights or other approved methods to maintain contact or b liquid membrane curing compound method .
cure according to subsection numc .
remove forms when the concrete has hardened sufficiently to resist damage but no earlier than num hours after placing concrete .
protect the sides of the exposed slabs with a curing method equal to that provided for the surface .
prevent erosion of the base course beneath the exposed pavement edges until shoulders are constructed .
num sealing joints .
saw cut and seal joints before the pavement is opened to construction or public traffic .
where sealant reservoirs are required clean each sealant reservoir of foreign material including membrane curing compound and concrete slurry .
blow dry joints with moisture free compressed air .
do not apply sealing material unless the joint faces are clean and surface dry and the joint is free of incompressibles .
use preformed joint seals silicone sealant or hotpoured sealant for isolation joints .
use silicone or hotpoured sealants for longitudinal and transverse contraction joints .
a silicone or hotpoured sealants .
install backer rod with a steel wheel to the depth required .
do not stretch or twist the backer rod during installation .
limit the length of backer rod installed to that which can be sealed during the same workday .
place joint sealing material when the air temperature is over num f num c or as specified by the manufacturer .
remove excess or spilled material and clean the pavement surface .
do not use sand or similar material to cover the seal .
for sealants that are not selfleveling tool the surface of the sealant to the dimensions required in the plans .
b preformed joint seals .
furnish the seal in one piece in the size specified for the joint opening .
install seals with a lubricant adhesive covering both sides of the joint .
compress the seal to between num and num percent of its nominal width or as specified by the manufacturer .
install the top of the seal about ¼ inch num millimeters below the pavement surface .
remove and replace seals that are damaged twisted improperly positioned or stretched more than num percent .
num pavement straightedge measurement .
measure the pavement surface after the concrete has cured .
use a numfoot nummeter metal straightedge to measure at right angles and parallel to the centerline .
defective areas are deviations between the surface and the bottom of the straightedge in excess of ¼ inches num millimeters measured between two contacts of the straightedge or deviations in excess of ¼ inches num millimeters measured at the end of the straightedge .
correct defective areas by diamond grinding slab removal or other methods approved by the co .
section num num num opening to traffic .
do not allow traffic on new concrete pavement earlier than num days after concrete placement unless concrete tests indicate one of the following conditions is obtained a flexural strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals according to aashto t num or b compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals according to aashto t num .
do not allow traffic on the pavement when joint sealant is tacky and traffic debris would imbed into the sealant .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for minor concrete pavement will be evaluated under section num .
the concrete mixtures slump air content density temperature and compressive strength will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of concrete pavement will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
pavement straight edge will be evaluated under subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring concrete pavement by the square yard square meter measure the length horizontally along the centerline of the roadway .
measure the width including allowable curve widening .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate num num measured and tested for conformance num num quality aashto m num m num m num num per material type source of material yes num days before paving mix design concrete composition num measured and tested for conformance num num all subsection num num per mix design source of material yes num days before paving section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production concrete measured and tested for conformance num density aashto t num num per load num point of discharge num no upon completing tests air content aashto t num or t num slump aashto t num temperature field measured compressive strength num aashto t num t num num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num set per day see note num deliver verification cylinders to the co or designated location in time for num day break aggregate coarse fine process control num gradation aashto t num t num num per day min bin discharge conveyor belt or stockpile no before batching moisture aashto t num concrete surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection num subsection num concrete surface after floating while concrete is still workable section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished roadway concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection num successively after concrete has hardened finished pavement surface no num hours pavement thickness aashto t num when directed by the co num a single compressive strength test result is the average result from two num by num inch num by num millimeter or three num by num inch num by num millimeter cylinders cast from the same load and tested at num days .
num this frequency may be reduced by the co if produced material proves to be consistent .
num sample according to aashto r num except composite samples are not required .
num make at least four num by num inch num by num millimeter or six num by num inch num by num millimeter compressive strength test cylinders and carefully transport the cylinders to the project curing facility .
two or three cylinders will be used for numday compressive strength tests .
the remaining cylinders will be used by the co for verification testing or other designated purposes .
section num num section num .
concrete pavement restoration description num this work consists of concrete pavement restoration .
concrete pavement restoration includes full depth patching partialdepth patching pavement jacking subsealing surface grinding crack and joint repair and cleaning .
material num conform to the following section and subsections epoxy resin adhesive num latex modifier num minor concrete pavement num nonshrink grout numb polymer concrete and mortar num reinforcing steel num num composition of mix concrete mix design .
design the concrete mix according to subsection num .
num equipment .
furnish equipment conforming to the following a waterblaster .
furnish a highpressure water jet machine with at least num pounds per square inch num megapascals pressure and is capable of removing residual sealant oil or other foreign material in joints .
b air compressors .
furnish air compressors with a minimum nozzle pressure of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals and capable of dislodging loose debris and drying joints and cracks .
c grout plant .
furnish a grout plant which consists of a positive displacement cement injection pump and a highspeed colloidal mill .
operate colloidal mill at speeds necessary to make a homogeneous mixture .
furnish an injection pump having a pressure capability of num pounds per square inch num kilopascals when pumping a grout slurry mixed to a numsecond flow cone time and that continuously pumps at a minimum rate of num gallons num liters per minute .
the system may be modified by adding a recirculating hose and valve at the discharge end of the pump .
produce grout through a meter or scale capable of measuring the total days consumption .
furnish hoses and fittings to provide a positive seal during grout injection .
section num num d drills .
furnish drills that meet the following num drills for pavement jacking .
furnish rock drills capable of drilling straight minimum num½inch nummillimeter diameter holes through the concrete slab steel reinforcement and base material .
furnish rock drills weighing less than num pounds num kilograms that are capable of drilling with a downward pressure of less than num pounds num kilograms .
furnish an auger to open clogged holes and existing pavement jacking holes .
num drills for dowels and tie bars .
furnish drills capable of drilling specified hole diameters for dowel bars or reinforcing steel tie bars .
drills for dowel bars must be capable of drilling holes that meet the vertical and horizontal tolerance of ¼ inch num millimeters along the centerline of the dowel with respect to a horizontal line that is perpendicular to the plane established by the joint .
e surface diamond grinder .
furnish power driven selfpropelled grinding equipment specifically designed to smooth and texture concrete pavement with diamond blades .
furnish equipment that num cuts or planes at least num inches num millimeters in width num does not encroach on traffic movement outside of the work area and num grinds the surface without spalling .
f hydroblaster .
provide hydroblasting equipment conforming to subsection num. g cold planing milling machine .
provide a milling machine with a micromilling head that does not exceed the bearing capacity of the concrete pavement and that conforms to subsection numa .
h slab stabilization testing .
furnish the following testing equipment num a numaxle truck with dual rear wheels .
load the rear axle to num kips num kilonewtons evenly distributed between the num wheel paths num static load measuring gauges consisting of num gauges on num gauge mounts num gauges per mount capable of detecting slab movement under load and num a modified benkelman beam or similar approved device .
num partialdepth patching less than num inches num millimeters in depth .
this work consists of patching spalls potholes corner breaks or other surface distresses in concrete pavement .
a patch material .
use a polymer concrete for patches less than or equal to num½ inches num millimeters deep .
use hydraulic cement concrete designed and approved according to subsection num for patches greater than num½ inches num millimeters deep .
b patch area preparation .
extend the limits of repair at least num inches num millimeters outside the deteriorated area .
saw vertically along the perimeter of the patch area parallel to the existing joint and to a minimum depth of num½ inches num millimeters .
near vertical edges from milling or grinding machines are acceptable .
repair saw overcuts and nicks to adjacent pavement outside the perimeter of the repair area with noncorrosive nonshrink grout .
section num num break out concrete within the patch area to a minimum depth of num½ inches num millimeters to expose sound concrete .
sandblast exposed concrete faces clean of loose particles oil dust traces of asphalt concrete and other contaminants before patching .
remove nonconcrete shoulders adjacent to the patch longitudinally to the depth of the patch and to a maximum width of num inches num millimeters to facilitate placing form work .
dispose of the concrete according to subsection num. c placing concrete .
remove sandblasting residue immediately before placing the epoxy resin adhesive .
apply an epoxy resin adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations .
delay concrete placement until the epoxy becomes tacky .
place and consolidate the concrete to eliminate voids at the interface of the patch and existing concrete .
place and consolidate hydraulic cement concrete according to subsection num .
place and consolidate polymer concrete according to climate conditions and methods recommended by the manufacturer .
d joints .
if a repair area abuts a working joint repair the joint similar to the existing joint to maintain a working joint .
form a new joint to the same width as the existing joint .
use compressible joint filler material as inserts to prevent intrusion of the repair material into the joint .
seal the joint according to subsection num. e finishing and coloring concrete .
finish patches according to subsection num to match the plane and texture of the contiguous pavement .
cure hydraulic cement concrete according to subsection num .
cure polymer concrete as recommended by the manufacturer .
when colored concrete is required begin concrete pavement restoration work after colored test panels submitted according to subsection num are approved .
restore and compact shoulders with material similar to the existing shoulder .
num full depth patching welded wire reinforced jointed plain doweled or plain concrete pavement .
this work consists of removing existing concrete pavement the full depth and replacing with new concrete .
begin pavement patch work after the concrete mix design has been approved according to subsection num. a concrete removal .
saw cut slabs full depth leaving vertical edges at the limits of the patch .
prevent adjacent concrete slabs from being damaged .
remove the concrete by lifting the slab in one or more pieces without disturbing the underlying surface .
clean out the area with hand tools .
dispose of the concrete according to subsection num .
when required excavate the underlying material to a maximum depth of num inches num millimeters and replace with aggregate base according to section num .
prevent adjacent concrete slabs from being undermined .
remove and replace adjacent slabs damaged by concrete removal .
repair spalls using partialdepth patching methods according to subsection num .
section num num repair saw overcuts of repair areas and nicks to adjacent pavement outside the perimeter of the repair area with nonshrink grout .
b joints .
construct joints according to subsection num and the following install dowels tie bars or both into existing concrete pavement slabs as shown in the plans .
drill dowel or tie bar holes into the face of the existing concrete at the required diameter length and spacing using a drill according to subsection numdnum .
clean and dry the holes before installing the dowels or tie bars .
use an epoxy resin to permanently anchor the dowel or tie bar into the existing concrete .
place the epoxy resin starting from the back of the hole and use a sufficient quantity to insure the epoxy material will be forced up and around the dowel or tie bar after insertion .
place a thin donutshaped grout retention disk around the dowel or tie bar and up against the face of the existing concrete to prevent epoxy resin material from flowing out of the hole .
seal joints according to subsection num. c welded wire reinforcement .
when required provide num by numinch num by nummillimeter wnum by wnum mnum by mnum steel welded wire reinforcement for crack control .
support welded wire fabric on chairs or bolsters .
d concrete placement .
compact base and subgrade material within the patch area according to subsection num .
construct side forms to overlap the ends of the existing slab .
securely fasten side forms so they do not move when concrete is placed .
to accommodate forms for the patch excavate the adjacent shoulders a maximum width of num inches num millimeters .
place concrete according to subsection num .
cast each patch in one continuous fulldepth operation .
after removal of the forms backfill compact and return the excavated shoulder area to its previous condition .
e finishing and coloring concrete .
finish patches according to subsection nume .
num resealing joints and crack repair .
this work consists of repairing or resealing joints and cracks in existing concrete pavement .
a preparation of joints and cracks .
limit the length of joints and cracks prepared to that which can be resealed within the same shift .
do not damage joints or previously repaired patches .
remove existing sealant with a waterblaster router concrete saw or other method approved by the co .
remove old sealant from the crack faces to expose new clean concrete .
when the crack widths vary and the crack faces are raveling and irregular cut a crack reservoir to a depth of ¾ inch num millimeters .
thoroughly clean the joint or crack of foreign material by sandblasting waterblasting or with a mechanical wire brush .
repeat the process until a new clean concrete face is exposed .
dry the joint with compressed air .
section num num use sawing if other methods do not properly clean the joint .
limit sawing to exposing clean new concrete faces in the joint with a maximum allowable cut of ⅛ inch num millimeters on each face of the joint .
b backer rod .
install the backer rod to the required depth after the joints and cracks are clean and dry .
do not stretch or twist the backer rod during installation .
limit the length of backer rod installed to that which can be sealed during the same shift .
c sealant application .
seal joints and cracks immediately after placing the backer rod .
apply sealant at air and surface temperatures recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
comply with installation recommendations provided by the sealant manufacturer .
if the joint or crack becomes contaminated or damp remove the backer rod clean and dry the joint or crack and reinstall a new backer rod before placing the sealant .
for a nonselfleveling joint sealant tool the sealant immediately after application to provide firm contact with the joint faces and to form the required recess below the slab surface .
num pavement jacking .
this work consists of raising and supporting the concrete pavement to the specified grade tolerances by drilling and injecting nonshrink hydraulic cement grout .
a drilling holes .
determine a pattern for grout injection holes and submit for approval .
drill vertical holes less than num inches num millimeters in diameter .
b jacking .
establish string lines from the pavement high points to monitor slab movement .
lower an expanding rubber packer or hose into the holes .
provide a positive seal and connected to the discharge hose on the grout plant .
do not allow the discharge end of the packer or hose to extend below the bottom of the concrete pavement .
allow pumping to raise the pavement to within ⅛ inch num millimeters of the string line grade when jacking continuouslyreinforced concrete pavement .
allow pumping to raise the pavement to within ¼ inch num millimeters of the transverse and longitudinal grades when jacking jointed pavement and bridge approach slabs .
continuous jacking pressures to num pounds per square inch num megapascals are permitted .
use pressures to num pounds per square inch num megapascals only for short periods of num seconds or less .
if the pavement is bonded to the subbase brief pressure rises of num seconds or less to num pounds per square inch num megapascals may be allowed .
stop pumping if grout extrudes through cracks joints or shoulders .
discontinue pumping if back pressure in the hose exceeds num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
c overjacking .
grind pavement raised above the specified tolerances to grade .
remove and replace the pavement according to subsection num if the overjacking is greater than num inch num millimeters .
d cracks .
radial cracks from the grout injection holes will be considered caused by improper injection technique .
remove and replace the slab or a portion of the slab with more than num feet num meters of new cracks according to subsection num .
for slabs with less than num feet num meters of new cracks seal cracks according to subsection num .
section num num e hole patching .
after completing the jacking and the hole plugs are removed fill drill holes flush with the pavement surface with a nonshrink grout or epoxy mortar .
num undersealing and slab stabilization .
this work consists of pumping a nonshrink grout mixture through holes drilled in the pavement into voids underneath the slabs to stabilize and underseal concrete pavement .
a preliminary testing .
perform testing at night or when there is no evidence of slab lockup due to thermal expansion .
testing may be allowed to continue if the slabs are not interlocked or under compression .
furnish testing equipment as provided in subsection numh .
test each designated slab using a static method as follows num position one set of gauges with one gauge referenced to the corner of each slab on both sides of the joint near the pavement edge num set the gauges to zero with no load on the slab on either side of the joint num move the test truck into position and stop with the center of the test axle num inches num millimeters behind the joint and the outside test wheel num inches num millimeters from the pavement edge .
read the back gauge num move the test truck across the joint to a similar position num inches num millimeters forward from the joint and stop .
read the forward gauge and num repeat for each joint to be tested .
underseal slabs with a deflection of more than num inch num millimeters .
b drilling holes .
drill holes using the required hole pattern .
an altered hole pattern may be approved based on field conditions .
drill vertical holes less than num inches num millimeters in diameter to provide a positive seal for the pumping nozzle .
for the first undersealing drill holes to a depth that penetrates into unbound base or subgrade .
avoid penetrating the subgrade by more than num inches num millimeters .
c cleaning holes .
after the holes are drilled and before pumping the underseal grout clean the hole with compressed air to remove debris and provide a passage for the grout .
d pumping underseal grout .
pump nonshrink grout in each hole .
seal the nozzle of the discharge hose in the hole to maintain the nonshrink grout pressure underneath the slab .
do not allow the nozzle end to extend below the bottom of the concrete .
monitor slab lift according to subsection num .
limit upward movement of the pavement to ⅛ inch num millimeters .
continue pumping into a hole until grout flows out other holes joints or cracks or until the slab begins to lift .
stop grouting if there is lift in the slab or the adjacent shoulder .
during stabilization operations limit continuous pumping pressures to num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
allow a short pressure surge of up to num pounds per square inch num megapascals when starting to pump grout into the hole to ensure grout penetrates the void structure .
do not plug other holes while grouting .
grind pavement raised more than the ⅛ inch num millimeters .
section num num e cracks .
if cracks develop complete the required repairs according to subsection num. f hole patching .
see subsection nume .
g stability testing .
test for stability num hours after designated slabs have been undersealed according to subsection num a .
complete a second underseal operation on slabs that continues to show excess movement .
submit the number depth and location of holes for the second undersealing for approval .
the co may accept or direct replacement of slabs that continues to show movement in excess of that specified after undersealing twice .
remove and replace designated slabs according to subsection num .
num surface diamond grinding .
this work consists of grinding existing concrete pavement to eliminate joint or crack faults and providing positive lateral drainage .
uniformly transition auxiliary or ramp lane grinding from the mainline edge to provide positive drainage and an acceptable riding surface .
provide a grinding unit conforming to the requirements of subsection nume .
produce a pavement surface that is true to grade smooth and consisting of a longitudinal corduroytype texture .
produce grooves between num and num inches num to num millimeters wide .
produce a surface area between the grooves between num and num inches num to num millimeters wide .
produce peak ridges approximately num inch num millimeters higher than the grooves .
adjust blade spacing to achieve the specified texture .
establish a positive and immediate means for removal of grinding residue .
remove and dispose of solid residue from the pavement surfaces before it is blown by traffic action or wind .
do not allow residue to flow into gutters or drainage facilities .
test the ground pavement surfaces for pavement roughness according to subsection num .
limit misalignment of surface planes on adjacent sides of the joints or cracks and between each grinding pass to less than num inch num millimeters .
produce a transverse slope of the pavement with no depressions or slope misalignment greater than ¼ inch in num feet num millimeters in num meters tested perpendicular to the centerline .
straightedge requirements do not apply across longitudinal joints or outside of ground areas .
num concrete cleaning .
this work consists of cleaning the existing concrete pavement surface with a high pressure washing device approved by the co .
remove dust dirt oil and other foreign material including the existing crack sealant material without causing damage to the surface or exposing coarse aggregate .
vacuum the concrete surface to remove and collect water and debris after the pavement cleaning .
dispose of the water and debris at a site approved by the co. num opening to traffic .
do not allow traffic on restored pavement until the concrete has a compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals when tested according to aashto t num or until the grout used for jacking or undersealing the pavement has attained num pounds per square inch num megapascals when tested with a num square inch num square millimeters probe according to aashto t num .
as an alternative method of determining the compressive strength of the restored pavement in situ compressive strength can be measured by developing a strengthmaturity relationship of the approved concrete mixture according to aashto t num .
submit the strength maturity relationship for approval at least num days before production .
provide a concrete maturity meter during the test placement and production that meets the following section num num a conforms to aashto t num b rugged waterproof and can withstand the construction environment c able to operate without an external power source for at least num days d able to collect and store temperature and maturity data for at least num days and e able to determine equivalent maturity hours according to the arrhenius function .
do not allow traffic on sealed joints when the sealant is tacky and traffic debris embeds into the sealant .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for concrete pavement restoration will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each shipment of hydraulic cement .
the concrete mixtures slump air content density temperature and compressive strength will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
grout will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction including batching placing finishing and curing of the concrete will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete pavement restoration work including partialdepth patching pavement jacking subsealing surface grinding crack and joint repair cleaning and breaking and seating will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring grout for pavement jacking and undersealing by the cubic foot cubic meter measure by metering .
measure aggregate base under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate num num measured and tested for conformance num num quality aashto m num m num m num num per material type source of material yes num days before paving mix design concrete composition num measured and tested for conformance num num all subsection num num per mix design source of material yes num days before paving production concrete measured and tested for conformance num density aashto t num num per load num point of discharge num no upon completing tests air content aashto t num or t num slump aashto t num temperature field measured section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued concrete measured and tested for conformance num compressive strength num aashto t num t num num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num set per day point of discharge num see note num deliver verification cylinders to the co or designated location with in num days aggregate coarse fine process control num gradation aashto t num t num minimum num per day bin discharge conveyor belt or stockpile no before batching moisture aashto t num concrete surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection num subsection num concrete surface after floating while concrete is still workable section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks finished product concrete pavement measured and tested for conformance num surface tolerance straightedge measurements subsection num successively after concrete has hardened finished pavement surface no num hours num a single compressive strength test result is the average result from two num by num inch num by num millimeter or three num by num inch num by num millimeter cylinders cast from the same load and tested at num days .
num this frequency may be reduced by the co if produced material proves to be consistent .
num sample according to aashto r num .
num make at least four num by num inch num by num millimeter or six num by num inch num by num millimetercompressive strength test cylinders and carefully transport the cylinders to the project curing facility .
two or three cylinders will be used for numday compressive strength tests .
the remaining cylinders will be used by the co for verification testing or other designated purposes .
num division num bridge construction section num num section num .
driven piles description num this work consists of furnishing and driving piles .
this work also includes furnishing and placing reinforcing steel and concrete in concretefilled steel shell and concretefilled pipe piles .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections concrete piles num grout num paint num pile shoes num prestressing steel num reinforcing steel num sheet piles num splices num steel hpiles num steel pipes num steel shells num structural concrete num treated timber piles num untreated timber piles num construction requirements num qualifications .
submit the following for approval at least num days before driven pile operations begin a professional engineer .
name of the engineer and a résumé describing at least num years experience in wave equation analyses to perform the wave equation analysis .
b pile specialty consultant .
when dynamic load testing is specified provide the name of the consultant and a résumé describing at least num years experience in num dynamic load testing and analysis num signal matching analysis and num wave equation analysis including the initial wave equation analysis .
c welders .
provide names and aws certifications .
num submittal .
at least num days before starting driven pile work submit the following according to subsection num a start date and proposed driven pile construction sequence section num num b wave equation analysis report .
include a wave equation analysis for the proposed pile driving system unless the use of the dynamic formula is specified to determine the nominal driven pile capacity c equipment and analysis .
furnish the following piledriving equipment information num general .
project and structure identification piledriving contractor or subcontractor and auxiliary methods of installation such as jetting or preboring and the type and use of the equipment num hammer .
manufacturer model type serial number rated energy _____ at _____ length of stroke ram weight and modifications num capblock hammer cushion .
material thickness area modulus of elasticity e and coefficient of restitution e num pile cap .
helmet weight bonnet mass anvil block mass and drivehead mass num pile cushion .
material thickness area modulus of elasticity e and coefficient of restitution e num pile .
pile type length in leads mass per linear foot meter wall thickness taper crosssectional area design pile capacity description of splice and tip treatment description numtest pile details .
location type estimated tip elevation minimum allowable embedment length capacity allowable compressive and tensile stresses num subsurface conditions .
soil description soil damping and quake parameters used in analysis anticipated driving difficulties if any and num bearing graph analysis results .
calculated maximum compressive and tensile stresses penetration resistance blow counts hammer stroke and energy transferred to the pile for a range of nominal soil resistance values .
d splices .
details for pile field splices .
e pile shoes .
details for pile shoes .
num pile driving equipment .
furnish equipment conforming to the following requirements a pile hammers .
num gravity hammers .
gravity hammers may only be used to drive timber piles .
furnish a hammer with a ram weighing between num and num pounds num and num kilograms and limit the drop height to num feet num meters .
select a ram mass greater than the combined mass of the drive head and pile .
provide hammer guides to ensure concentric impact on the drive head .
num openend diesel hammers .
equip openend single acting diesel hammers with a device such as rings on the ram to permit visual determination of hammer stroke .
submit a chart from the hammer manufacturer equating stroke and blows per minute for the hammer to be used .
a speed versus stroke calibration may be used if approved .
section num num num closedend diesel hammers .
submit a chart calibrated to actual hammer performance within num days of use equating bounce chamber pressure to either equivalent energy or stroke for the hammer to be used .
equip hammers with a dial gauge for measuring pressure in the bounce chamber .
make the gauge readable from ground level .
calibrate the dial gauge to allow for losses in the gauge hose .
verify the accuracy of the calibrated dial gauge during driving operations by ensuring that cylinder lift occurs when bounce chamber pressure is consistent with the maximum energy given in the hammer specifications .
do not use closedend diesel hammers that do not attain cylinder lift at the maximum energybounce chamber pressure relationship given in the hammer specification .
num air or steam hammers .
furnish plant and equipment for steam and air hammers with sufficient capacity to maintain the volume and pressure specified by the hammer manufacturer .
equip the hammer with accurate pressure gauges that are easily accessible .
use a hammer with the mass of the striking parts equal to or greater than one third the combined mass of the driving head and pile .
ensure the combined mass is at least num pounds num kilograms .
measure inlet pressures for doubleacting and differentialacting air or stream hammers with a needle gauge at the head of the hammer when driving test piles .
if required also measure inlet pressures when driving production piles .
a pressure versus speed calibration may be developed for specific driving conditions at the project as an alternative to periodic measurements with a needle gauge .
num nonimpact hammers .
use nonimpact hammers such as vibratory hammers when specified .
use nonimpact hammers for installing production piles only after the pile tip elevation or embedment length for safe support of the pile load is established by static or dynamic load testing .
control the installation of production piles when using vibratory hammers by power consumption rate of penetration specified tip elevation or other acceptable methods that ensure the required pile load capacity is obtained .
strike piles with an impact hammer of suitable energy to verify the required pile capacity is obtained on at least one of every ten piles .
num hydraulic hammers .
provide a power plant for hydraulic hammers with sufficient capacity to maintain the volume and pressure specified by the manufacturer at the hammer under working conditions .
equip the power plant and equipment with accurate pressure gauges that are easily accessible to the co. b approval of piledriving equipment .
furnish piledriving equipment that permits permanent piles to be driven with reasonable effort and to the required depths and resistances without damage .
approval of piledriving equipment will be based on a wave equation analysis unless the contract specifies the dynamic formula to determine the nominal driven pile capacity .
use only the approved equipment represented in the wave equation analysis during piledriving operations .
approval of the piledriving system is specific to the equipment submitted .
if the proposed equipment is modified or replaced reevaluate and resubmit the analysis and revised data for approval before using .
approval of a pile hammer does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for piles damaged due to driving stress .
num wave equation .
the required number of hammer blows indicated by the wave equation at the nominal pile capacity is between num and num blows per inch num millimeters .
section num num in addition do not allow the pile stresses resulting from the wave equation analysis to exceed the values at which pile damage is impending .
the point of impending damage is defined for steel concrete and timber piles as follows .
a steel piles .
limit the compressive driving stress to num percent of the yield strength of the pile material .
b concrete piles .
limit the tensile ts and compressive cs driving stresses to ts numfcnum epv for us customary ts numfcnum epv for metric cs numfc epv for us customary cs numfc epv for metric where fc the numday design compressive strength of the concrete in pounds per square inch megapascals epv the effective prestress value in pounds per square inch megapascals c timber piles .
limit the compressive driving stress to σdr φdafco where σdr limiting driving stress ksi or kilonewtons φda resistance factor drivability analysis fco base resistance of wood in compression parallel to the grain ksi or kilonewtons num minimum hammer energy .
the energy of the driving equipment submitted for approval as rated by the manufacturer will be determined by a wave equation analysis .
c driving appurtenances .
num hammer cushion .
equip impact piledriving equipment except gravity hammers with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer or pile and to ensure uniform driving behavior .
fabricate hammer cushions from durable manufactured material according to the hammer manufacturers recommendations .
do not use wood wire rope or asbestos hammer cushions .
place a striker plate as recommended by the hammer manufacturer on the hammer cushion to ensure uniform compression of the cushion material .
inspect the hammer cushion in the presence of the co when beginning pile driving at each structure or after each num hours of pile driving whichever is less .
replace the cushion when its thickness is reduced by more than num percent of its original thickness num pile drive head .
provide adequate drive heads for impact hammers .
provide appropriate drive heads mandrels or other devices for special piles according to the manufacturers recommendations .
align the drive head axially with the hammer and pile .
fit the drive head around the pile head so that transfer of torsional forces is prevented during driving and proper alignment of hammer and pile is maintained section num num num leads .
support piles in line and position with leads while driving .
construct pile driver leads to allow freedom of movement of the hammer while maintaining axial alignment of the hammer and the pile .
do not use swinging leads unless permitted in writing or specified in the contract .
when swinging leads are permitted fit swinging leads with a pile gate at the bottom of the leads and in the case of battered piles fit with a horizontal brace between the crane and the leads .
adequately embed leads in the ground or constrain the pile in a structural frame template to maintain proper alignment .
provide leads of sufficient length that do not require a follower but will permit proper alignment of battered piles num followers .
do not use followers unless approved .
when followers are permitted drive the first pile in each bent or substructure unit and every tenth pile thereafter full length without a follower to verify that adequate pile embedment is being attained to develop the required nominal capacity .
provide a follower of such material and dimensions that will permit the piles to be driven to the required penetration .
hold and maintain follower and pile in proper alignment during driving num jetting .
do not use jetting unless approved .
provide jetting equipment with sufficient capacity to deliver a consistent pressure equivalent to at least num pounds per square inch num kilopascals at two ¾inch nummillimeter jet nozzles .
jet so as not to affect the lateral stability of the final inplace pile .
remove jet pipes when the pile tip is at least num feet num meters above the prescribed tip elevation and drive the pile to the required nominal capacity with an impact hammer .
control treat if necessary and dispose of jet water in an approved manner num pile cushion .
for concrete piles use a new pile cushion to protect the head of each pile .
cut the pile cushion at least num inches num millimeters thick and to match the crosssection of the pile top .
replace the pile cushion if it is compressed more than onehalf its original thickness or it begins to burn .
for steel and timber piles protect each pile with an approved driving cap .
enclose timber piles with approved collars or bands to prevent splitting or brooming .
replace caps when damaged .
do not reuse cushions or caps and num pile shoes .
when specified provide shoes to protect the piletip from damage during driving .
fabricate shoes to snugly fit the pile tip .
for concrete piles attach the shoe to the pile using dowels or other approved methods .
for steel piles design and fit the shoe to the steel shape and weld the shoe to the pile so as not to stress the web or the flange .
for timber piles carefully shape the tip to secure an even uniform bearing for the pile shoe .
treat holes cuts or caps in treated timber piles with twobrush applications of creosotecoal tar solution according to awpa .
num pile lengths .
furnish piles with sufficient length to obtain the required resistance and to extend into the pile cap or footing as indicated in the plans .
in addition increase the length to provide fresh heading and to provide for the contractors method of operation .
when test piles are required furnish piles in the lengths determined by the test piles .
num test piles .
install test piles when specified in the contract .
place the piles designated as dynamic load test piles in a horizontal position and not in contact with other piles .
drill holes for mounting instruments near the head of the pile .
mount the instruments after the pile is in leads and take wave speed measurements .
provide at least a num by numinch num by nummillimeter rigid platform with a numinch nummillimeter safety rail that can be raised to the top of the pile .
section num num excavate the ground at the site of each test pile or production pile to the elevation of the bottom of the footing before the pile is driven .
furnish test piles longer than the estimated length of production piles .
drive test piles with the same equipment as the production piles .
drive test piles to the required nominal capacity at the estimated tip elevation .
allow test piles that do not attain the required nominal capacity at the estimated tip elevation to set up for num hours before redriving .
warm the hammer before redriving begins by applying at least num blows to another pile .
if the required nominal capacity is not attained on redriving drive a portion or the remaining test pile length and repeat the set up and redrive procedure as directed .
splice and continue driving until the required nominal pile capacity is obtained .
conform to the requirements for production piles when test piles are to be used in the completed structure .
remove test piles not incorporated in the completed structure to at least num inches num millimeters below finished grade .
num driven pile capacity .
drive piles to the specified penetration and to the depth necessary to obtain the required nominal pile capacity .
splice piles not obtaining the required nominal capacity at the ordered length and drive with an impact hammer until the required nominal pile capacity is achieved .
use the wave equation to determine nominal pile capacity of the inplace pile .
a wave equation .
adequate penetration will be considered to be obtained when the specified wave equation resistance criteria is achieved within num feet num meters of the designated tip elevation .
drive piles that do not achieve the specified resistance within these limits to a penetration determined by the co. b dynamic formula .
drive the piles to a penetration necessary to obtain the nominal pile capacity according to the fhwa gates formula num num e log numn r b num d ndr us customary num num e log numn r b num d ndr metric where rndr nominal pile resistance measured during pile driving in kips kilonewtons ed developed hammer energy .
this is the kinetic energy in the ram at impact for a given blow .
if ram velocity is not measured it may be assumed equal to the potential energy of the ram at the height of the stroke taken as the ram mass times the stroke footpounds or joules lognumnb logarithm to the base num of the quantity num multiplied by n nb number of hammer blows per inch num millimeters at final penetration section num num determine the inplace nominal capacity of jetted piles based on impact hammer blow counts dynamic formula after the jet pipes have been removed .
after the pile penetration length necessary to produce the required nominal pile capacity has been determined by impact hammer blow count install the remaining piles in each group or in each substructure unit to similar depths with similar methods .
confirm the required nominal pile capacity has been achieved by using the dynamic formula .
num preboring .
use auguring wet rotary drilling or other approved methods of preboring .
prebore the pile hole to natural ground in compacted embankments more than num feet num meters deep .
in natural ground preboring may extend to the surface of the rock or hardpan for piles endbearing on rock or hardpan .
seat the pile into the endbearing strata .
stop preboring at least num feet num meters above the estimated pile tip elevation and drive the pile with an impact hammer to a penetration which achieves the required nominal pile capacity for piles not endbearing on rock or hardpan .
prebore holes smaller than the diameter or diagonal of the pile crosssection while allowing penetration of the pile to the specified depth .
increase the hole diameter to the least dimension adequate for pile installation if the subsurface obstructions such as boulders or rock layers are encountered .
fill remaining void space around the pile with sand or other approved material after driving is complete .
do not use a punch or a spud instead of preboring .
do not impair the capacity of existing piles or the safety or condition of adjacent structures .
if preboring disturbs the capacity of previously installed piles or structures restore the required nominal capacity of piles and structures by approved methods .
num preparation and driving .
perform the work under section num .
make the heads of piles plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile .
coordinate pile driving to prevent damage to other parts of the completed work .
drive pile heads to within num inches num millimeters of plan location at cutoff elevation for bent caps supported by piles and to within num inches num millimeters of plan location from piles capped below final grade .
locate and drive piles at least num inches num millimeters from any edge of the cap .
drive piles so that the axial alignment is within ¼ inch per foot num millimeters per meter along the longitudinal axis of the required alignment .
the co may stop driving to check the pile alignment .
check alignment before the last num feet num meters are driven for piles that can not be internally inspected after installation .
do not pull laterally on piles or splice to correct misalignment .
do not splice a properly aligned section on a misaligned pile .
place individual piles in pile groups either starting from the center of the group and proceeding outward in both directions or starting at the outside row and proceeding progressively across the group .
correct piles driven improperly driven out of proper location misaligned or driven below the designated cutoff elevation in an approved manner .
replace piles damaged during handling or driving .
obtain approval for the proposed methods of correcting or repairing deficiencies .
section num num a timber piles .
do not use piles with checks wider than ½ inch num millimeters .
drive treated timber piles within num months after treatment .
handle and care for pressuretreated piles according to awpa standard m num standard for the care of preservativetreated wood products .
b steel piles .
furnish fulllength unspliced piles for lengths up to num feet num meters .
if splices are required in the first pile driven and it is anticipated that subsequent piles will also require splices place the splices in lower third of the pile .
splice lengths less than num feet num meters are not permitted and only num splices per pile are allowed .
load transport unload store and handle steel piles so the metal is kept clean and without damage .
do not use piles that exceed the camber and sweep permitted by allowable mill tolerance .
steel piles damaged during installation are unacceptable unless the minimum tip elevation is obtained and load tests show the bearing capacity is num percent of the required nominal .
perform tests on damaged piles at no cost to the government .
if driving points are required weld driving points to steel piles according to aashtoaws structural welding code steel dnum dnumm or aws bridge welding code dnum dnumm as applicable .
c precast and prestressed concrete piles .
support concrete piles during lifting or moving at the points shown in the plans .
provide support at the quarter points if not specified .
furnish slings or other equipment when raising or transporting concrete piles to avoid bending the pile or breaking edges .
reject concrete piles with reduced strength caused by external defects such as spalls cracks or internal defects such as cavities revealed with nondestructive testing .
d concretefilled pipe or steel shell piles .
furnish and handle the steel shells or pipes according to subsection numb .
cutting shoes for shells or pipes may be inside or outside the shell .
use high carbon structural steel with a machined ledge for shell bearing or cast steel with a ledge designed for attachment with a simple weld .
drive pile shells or pipes for a substructure unit before placing concrete in the shells or pipes when practical .
do not drive pile shells or pipes within num feet num meters of concretefilled pile shell or pipe until the concrete has cured for at least num days or num days if using highearlystrength concrete .
do not drive pile shell or pipe after it is filled with concrete .
remove and replace shells that are determined to be unacceptable for use due to breaks bends or kinks .
num splices .
align and connect pile sections so the axis of the spliced pile is straight .
a steel piles .
use welders certified for structural welding .
make surfaces to be welded smooth uniform and without loose scale slag grease or other material that prevents proper welding .
steel may be oxygen cut .
carbonarc gouging chipping or grinding may be used for joint preparation .
section num num weld according to aashtoaws structural welding code steel dnum dnumm or aws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
weld the entire pile crosssection using prequalified aws groove weld butt joints .
weld so there is no visual evidence of cracks lack of fusion undercutting excessive piping porosity or inadequate size .
do not use manufactured splices unless approved in writing or shown in the plans .
manufactured splices may be used in place of full penetration groove butt welds if the contractor can prove they can develop the full strength of the pile in compression tension and bending .
b concrete pile splices .
use dowels or other acceptable mechanical means to splice precast concrete or precast prestressed concrete piles .
submit drawings of proposed splices for approval .
if dowels are used cast the dowels into the tip end of the following pile with corresponding holes at the butt end of the driven pile .
serrate the holes to provide a mechanical bond .
separate the ends of the piles by at least ½ inch num millimeters .
clean surfaces and dowel holes .
grout the dowels in place and allow the grout to cure .
enclose the gap with forms and inject a bonding agent capable of withstanding the impact and driving forces and having the same compressive strength as the pile .
follow the manufacturers recommendations regarding the use and curing of grouting and bonding products .
attach manufactured splices to the concrete piles as recommended by the manufacturer .
ensure the splice develops strengths in compression tension and bending equal to or exceeding the strength of the pile being spliced .
c concrete pile extensions .
num precast concrete piles .
extend precast concrete piles by removing the concrete at the end of the pile and leaving num diameters of reinforcement steel exposed .
remove the concrete to produce a face perpendicular to the axis of the pile .
securely fasten reinforcement of the same size as that used in the pile to the projecting reinforcing steel .
form the extension to prevent leakage along the pile .
immediately before placing concrete wet the top of the pile thoroughly and cover with a thin coating of neat cement retempered mortar or other suitable bonding material .
place concrete of the same mix design and quality as that used in the pile .
keep forms in place for not less than num days after the concrete has been placed .
cure and finish according to section num .
num prestressed piles .
extend prestressed precast piles according to subsection numb .
include reinforcement bars in the pile head for splicing to the extension bars .
do not drive extended prestressed precast piles .
d timber piles .
do not splice timber piles .
num heaved piles .
check for pile heave during the driving operation .
take level readings immediately after each pile is driven and again after piles within a radius of num feet num meters are driven .
redrive piles that heave more than ½ inch num millimeters for endbearing piles or num½ inches num millimeters for friction piles .
redrive to the specified resistance or penetration .
num pile load tests .
pile load tests are not required unless specified .
a dynamic load test .
furnish equipment and perform dynamic load tests according to astm dnum under the supervision of the co. mount the instruments according to subsection num .
section num num drive the pile to the depth at which the dynamic test equipment indicates that the required nominal pile capacity is achieved .
if necessary to maintain stresses in the pile below the values in subsection numbnum reduce the driving energy transmitted to the pile by using additional cushions or reducing the energy output of the hammer .
realign the driving system if nonaxial driving is indicated .
at least num hours after the initial driving redrive each dynamic load test pile with instrumentation attached .
warm the hammer before redriving by applying at least num blows to another pile .
redrive the dynamic load test pile for a maximum penetration of num inches num millimeters a maximum of num blows or to practical driving refusal whichever occurs first .
practical driving refusal is defined as num blows per inch num blows per num millimeters for steel piles num blows per inch num blows per num millimeters for concrete piles and num blows per inch num blows per num millimeters for timber piles .
verify the assumptions used in the initial wave equation analysis submitted according to subsection numb using signal matching analysis .
analyze one blow from the original driving and one blow from the redriving for each pile tested .
perform additional wave equation analyses with adjustments based on the signal matching analysis results .
provide a graph showing blow count versus nominal capacity .
provide a blow count versus stroke graph for the nominal capacity of openended diesel hammers .
provide the driving stresses transferred energy and pile capacity as a function of depth for each dynamic load test .
based on the results of the dynamic load testing signal matching analyses and wave equation analyses the order list and production driving criteria may be approved and the required cutoff elevations provided or additional test piles and load testing may be specified .
this information will be provided within num days after receipt of the order list and required test data for the test piles driven .
b static load tests .
perform static load tests according to astm dnum using the quick load test method except as modified herein .
submit drawings of the proposed loading apparatus for approval according to the following num have a professional engineer prepare the drawings num furnish a loading system capable of applying num percent of the nominal pile capacity or num tons num kilonewtons whichever is less and num construct the apparatus to allow increments of load to be placed gradually without causing vibration to the test pile .
perform test at least num days after test pile was driven unless approved by the co. drive tension piles at the location of permanent piles when feasible if tension anchor piles are required .
do not use timber or tapered piles installed in permanent locations as tension piles .
take the test to plunging failure or the capacity of the loading system whichever occurs first .
the nominal bearing resistance is defined as num percent of the failure load .
the failure load is defined as follows for piles num inches num millimeters or less in diameter length of side for square piles or diagonal width the load that produces a settlement at failure of the pile head equal to .num num .num num d s sf u.s .
customary section num num .num num num d s sf metric for piles greater than num inches num millimeters in diameter length of side for square piles or diagonal width num d s sf where sf settlement at failure in inches millimeters d pile diameter or diagonal width in inches millimeters s elastic deformation of pile in inches millimeters determine top elevation of the test pile immediately after driving and again just before load testing to check for heave .
wait at least num days between the driving of anchor or load test piles and the commencement of the load test .
before testing redrive or jack to the original elevation piles that heaves more than ¼ inch num millimeters .
after completion of the load testing remove or cut off test or anchor piling not a part of the finished structure at least num inches num millimeters below either the bottom of footing or the finished ground elevation .
based on the results of the static load testing the order list and production driving criteria may be approved and the required cutoff elevations provided or additional load tests may be specified .
this information will be provided within num days after receipt of the order list and required test data for the test piles driven .
num pile cutoffs .
cut off the tops of permanent piles and pile casings at the required elevation .
cut off the piles clean and straight parallel to the bottom face of the structural member in which they are embedded .
dispose of cutoff lengths according to subsection numa .
treat the heads of treated timber piles which are not embedded in concrete by one of the following methods a reduce the moisture content of the wood to no more than num percent with no free moisture on the surface .
brush apply one application of creosotecoal tar solution as required in awpa standards .
build up a protective cap by applying alternate layers of loosely woven fabric and hot asphalt or tar similar to membrane waterproofing using three layers of asphalt or tar and two layers of fabric .
use fabric at least num inches num millimeters wider in each direction than the diameter of the pile .
turn the fabric down over the pile and secure the edges by binding with two turns of no .
num nummillimeter galvanized wire .
apply a final layer of asphalt or tar to cover the wire .
neatly trim the fabric below the wires .
b cover the sawed surface with three applications of a hot mixture of num percent creosote and num percent roofing pitch or thoroughly brush coat with three applications of hot creosote and cover with hot roofing pitch .
place a covering of galvanized sheet metal over the coating and bend down over the sides of each pile .
section num num num unsatisfactory piles .
correct unsatisfactory piles by an approved method .
methods of correcting unsatisfactory piles may include one or more of the following a use of the pile at a reduced capacity b install additional piles c repair damaged piles and d replace damaged piles .
num placing concrete in steel shell or pipe piles .
clean the inside of shells and pipes by removing loose material after driving .
keep the shell or pipe substantially water tight .
remove water before placing concrete or place the concrete using a tremie when water is present in the pile .
provide suitable equipment for inspecting the entire inside surface of the driven shell or pipe just before placing concrete .
a reinforcing steel .
make the spacing between adjacent cage elements at least five times the maximum size of aggregate in the concrete when reinforcing steel is required .
securely tie concrete spacers or other approved spacers at fifth points around the perimeter of the reinforcing steel cage .
install spacers at intervals not to exceed num feet num meters measured along the length of the cage .
place the reinforcement cage into the driven shell or pipe when the concrete reaches the planned bottom elevation of the reinforcement .
support the reinforcement so it remains within num inches num millimeters of the required vertical location .
support the cage from the top until the concrete reaches the top of the pile .
b concrete .
construct concrete according to section num .
place concrete in one continuous operation from the bottom to the top of the pile .
consolidate the top num feet num meters of the concrete pile using approved vibratory equipment before the initial concrete set .
num acceptance .
pile material will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish production certifications with each shipment of the following a concrete piles b sheet piles steel hpiles steel shells and steel pipes and c treated timber piles .
stamp each pile with an identification mark and date of inspection .
driving piles and related work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete for steel shells or pipe piles will be evaluated under section num .
reinforcing steel for steel shells or pipe piles will be evaluated under section num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring piles by the linear foot meter measure the length of pile from the cutoff elevation to the tip .
measure splices required to drive piles deeper than the estimated tip elevation .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
structural concrete description num this work consists of furnishing placing finishing and curing concrete in bridges culverts and other structures .
structural concrete class is designated in the plans according to table num .
material num conform to the following section and subsections coarse aggregate for concrete num color coating num concrete curing material and admixtures num elastomeric bearing pads numa epoxy resin adhesives num fine aggregate for concrete num hydraulic cement num nonshrink grout numb pozzolans num preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seal for bridges numg reinforcing fibers num sealants fillers and seals num water numa construction requirements num composition concrete mix design .
design and produce concrete mixtures that conform to tables num num and num as required for the class specified .
determine design strength values according to chapter num of aci num building code requirements for structural concrete and commentary .
section num num table num composition of concrete class of concrete minimum compressive strength numdays fc psi mpa maximum water cementitious material ratio coarse aggregate size number aashto m num num a num num num num num num aae num num num num num num c num num num num num cae num num num num num dae num num num num num num num p prestressed num see plans num pae num see plans num s seal num num num num num meet the processing requirements of aashto m num table num standard sizes of processed aggregate .
num the maximum watersoluble chloride ion cl content is num percent by mass of cement .
determine the watersoluble chloride ion content of concrete made with mix ingredients at an age between num and num days according to astm cnum .
submit test results with the concrete mix design for approval .
num the maximum watersoluble chloride ion cl content is num percent by mass of cement .
determine the watersoluble chloride ion content of concrete made with mix ingredients at an age between num and num days according to astm cnum .
submit test results with the concrete mix design for approval .
table num air content for air entrained concretenum nominal maximum aggregate size num minimum air content num maximum air content num num½ inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num ¾ inch num mm num num ½ inch num mm num num num the minimum air content values in the table may be reduced by up to num percent for concrete with fc greater than num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
num meet the requirements of aashto m num table num standard sizes of processed aggregate .
num for pae concrete reduce the asdelivered minimum air content by num percent and use a maximum air content of num percent .
section num num table num cementitious material requirements for concrete cementitious material maximum percent of total cementitious material by mass fly ash or other pozzolans aashto m num num slag aashto m num num silica fume aashto m num num total fly ash or other pozzolans slag and silica fume num num total fly ash or other pozzolans and silica fume num num num limit fly ash or other pozzolans to no more than num percent of the total mass of cementitious material and limit silica fume to no more than num percent of the total mass of cementitious material .
submit concrete mix designs on fhwa form num num structural concrete mix design submittal .
verify mixture design with trial mixes prepared according to aci num from proposed sources or with previous concrete production data for the mixture design submitted from proposed sources .
submit written concrete mix designs for approval at least num days before production .
include the following in each mix design submittal a project identification b name and address of contractor and concrete producer c mix design designation d class of concrete and intended use e material proportions f name and location of material sources for aggregate cement admixtures and water g type of cement and other cementitious material if used .
fly ash ground granulated blastfurnace slag or silica fume may partially replace cement in the mix .
follow the cement replacement limits in table num h cement content in pounds per cubic yard kilograms per cubic meter of concrete i the saturated surface dry batch mass of the coarse and fine aggregate in pounds per cubic yard kilograms per cubic meter of concrete j water content in pounds per cubic yard kilograms per cubic meter of concrete k watercementitious material ratio .
the watercementitious material ratio for modified concrete is the ratio of the mass of water to the combined masses of hydraulic cement and cement substitute section num num l dosage of admixtures .
provide a qualified person from the admixture manufacturer to help establish the proper dosage when requested by the co. do not mix chemical admixtures together in a mix unless they are compatible .
furnish supporting documentation of compatibility from the manufacturers .
num airentraining admixtures .
entrained air may be obtained with either airentraining hydraulic cement or airentraining admixture .
num set accelerating admixtures .
do not use chloride accelerators .
do not use set accelerating admixtures in prestressed concrete applications .
num hydration stabilizing admixtures .
hydration stabilizing admixtures may be used to extend the allowable delivery time for concrete .
base the dosage on the time needed to delay the initial set of the concrete for delivery and discharge on the job .
include the design discharge time limit in the dosage submittal .
the maximum allowable design discharge time is num½ hours m fine and coarse aggregate quality n sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregate o absorption of fine and coarse aggregate p bulk specific gravity dry and saturated surface dry of fine and coarse aggregate q dry rodded density of coarse aggregate in pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter .
r fineness modulus fm of fine aggregate s material certifications for cementitious material admixtures and aggregate t target values for concrete slump with and without highrange water reducers u target values for concrete air content .
include the proposed range of air content for concrete to be incorporated into the work .
describe the methods by which air content will be monitored and controlled v concrete density w specified design strength f c and required average strength f cr for the concrete mixture at num days as determined by the process described in chapter num of aci num .
this process and associated calculations are outlined on fhwa form num pages num and num .
pending numday strength results a mix design may be approved on the basis that numday compressive strength results meet or exceed num percent of the required average strength f cr at num days x compressive strengths test results at num and num days according to table num note num and y material samples if requested .
do not begin production until the mix design is approved by the co. furnish a new mix design for approval if there is a change in a source of material or when the fineness modulus of the fine aggregate changes by more than num .
section num num num handling and storing material .
handle and store material in a manner that prevents segregation contamination or other harmful effects .
do not use cement and fly ash containing evidence of moisture contamination .
store and handle aggregate in a manner that ensures uniform moisture content at the time of batching .
num measuring material .
batch the concrete according to the approved mix design and the following tolerances a cement num percent b water num percent c aggregate num percent d additive num percent num batching plant mixers and agitators .
use a batching plant mixer and agitator conforming to aashto m num .
num mixing .
mix the concrete in a centralmix plant or in truck mixers .
operate equipment within manufacturers recommended capacity .
produce concrete of uniform consistency .
a centralmix plant .
dispense liquid admixtures through a controlled flowmeter .
use dispensers with sufficient capacity to measure at one time the full quantity of admixture required for each batch .
if more than one admixture is used dispense each with separate equipment .
charge the coarse aggregate onethird of the water and all airentraining admixture into the mixer first then add remainder of the material .
mix for at least num seconds .
begin mixing time after all cement and aggregate are in the drum .
add the remaining water during the first quarter of the mixing time .
add num seconds to the mixing time if timing starts the instant the skip reaches its maximum raised position .
transfer time in multipledrum mixers is included in mixing time .
mixing time ends when the discharge chute opens .
remove the contents of an individual mixer before a succeeding batch is charged into the drum .
b truck mixer .
do not use mixers with blades worn num inch num millimeters or more below the original manufactured height .
do not use mixers and agitators with accumulated hard concrete or mortar in the mixing drum .
add admixtures to the mix water before or during mixing .
charge the batch into the drum so a portion of the mixing water enters before the cement .
mix each batch of concrete according to aashto m num .
num delivery .
produce and deliver concrete to permit a continuous placement with no concrete achieving initial set before the remaining concrete being placed adjacent to it .
deliver handle and place concrete so as to minimize rehandling of the concrete and prevent damage to the structure .
do not place concrete that has developed an initial set .
do not retemper concrete by adding water .
section num num if a hydration stabilizing admixture is approved for use in the concrete mix deliver and place the concrete within the approved design discharge time limit .
limit the slump loss to no more than num inches num millimeters during the stabilization period .
an approved and compatible hydration activator may be used at the discharge site to ensure proper placement and testing .
a truck mixeragitator .
use the agitating speed for rotation after mixing .
when a truck mixer or truck agitator is used to transport concrete that is completely mixed in a stationary central construction mixer mix during transportation at manufacturers recommended agitating speed .
do not exceed num total revolutions at mixing speed including both initial mixing and remixing .
if the concrete has not obtained an initial set water and admixtures in the approved mix design may be added one time at the project to obtain the required slump or air content .
limit the total of water in the mix so as not to exceed the maximum watercementitious material ratio of the approved mix design .
remix the concrete and added water or admixtures with num revolutions at mixing speed .
after the initial introduction of mixing water to cement or cement to aggregates complete the remixing within the time specified in table num .
after the beginning of the addition of the cement complete the discharge of the concrete within the time specified in table num .
table num concrete remixing and discharge time limits cement type num admixtures remixing time limit hour discharge time limit hour type i ia ii iia v or approved blended hydraulic cement none num num type i ia ii iia v or approved blended hydraulic cement aashto m num type b d or g num num type i ia ii iia v or approved blended hydraulic cement hydration stabilizer num approved design discharge time limit num maximum type iii none num num type iii aashto m num type b d or g num num num aashto m num or aashto m num as applicable .
b nonagitating equipment .
nonagitating equipment may be used to deliver concrete if the concrete discharge is completed within num minutes from the beginning of the addition of the cement to the mixing drum .
use equipment with smooth mortar tight metal containers capable of discharging the concrete at a controlled rate without segregation .
provide covers when needed for protection .
section num num num quality control of mix .
submit and follow a quality control plan according to sections num and num as applicable and the following a mixing .
designate a certified concrete technician at the mixing plant to be responsible for the mixing operations and quality control including num proper storage and handling of components of the mix num proper maintenance and cleanliness of plant trucks and other equipment num sampling and testing according to table num num adjusting the mix proportions to maintain the required watercementitious material ratio num computing batch masses for each days production num checking of the plants calibration and num completing batch tickets .
include the following a concrete supplier b ticket serial number c date and truck number d contractor e structure or location of placement f mixdesign and concrete class g component quantities and concrete total volume h moisture corrections for aggregate moisture i total water in mix at plant j time of batching and time at which discharge must be completed k maximum water that may be added to the mix at the project and l if a hydration stabilizing admixture is used the slump at the plant after adding the stabilizer .
provide equipment necessary for the above tests and controls .
furnish copies of work sheets for num num num and num above as they are completed .
b delivery and sampling .
designate at least one certified concrete technician at the project to be responsible for concrete delivery discharge and sampling including num verifying adjustments to the mix comply with the specifications before discharge num completing the batch ticket for each load by recording the apparent watercementitious material ratio and the time num sampling and testing according to table num and section num num num if hydration stabilizing admixture is used determining the slump before placement .
do not use concrete with a slump loss of more than num inches num millimeters as compared to the slump recorded at the batch plant .
num temperature and weather conditions .
maintain the temperature of the concrete mixture just before placement between num and num f num and num c except for bridge decks between num and num f num and num c. a cold weather .
cold weather is defined as a period when for more than num consecutive days the following conditions exist num average of the highest and the lowest temperatures occurring during the period from midnight to midnight is less than num f num c and num air temperature is not greater than num f num c for more than onehalf in a numhour period .
when cold weather is reasonably expected or has occurred within num days of anticipated concrete placement submit a detailed plan for the producing transporting placing protecting curing and temperature monitoring of concrete during cold weather .
aci num guide to cold weather concreting may be used for guidance in developing the plan .
include procedures for accommodating abrupt changes in weather conditions .
do not start placement until the plan is accepted .
allow at least num day for review and approval of the plan .
have material and equipment required for protection available at the project before commencing cold weather concreting .
remove snow ice and frost from the surfaces including reinforcement and subgrade against which the concrete is to be placed .
heat surfaces that come into contact with fresh concrete to at least num f num c and maintain the temperature of these surfaces at num f num c or above during concrete placement .
place heaters and direct ducts so as not to cause concrete drying or fire hazards .
vent exhaust flue gases from combustion heating units to the outside of enclosures .
heat the concrete components in a manner that is not detrimental to the mix .
do not heat cement or permit the cement to come into contact with aggregates that are hotter than num f num c. do not heat aggregates with a direct flame or on sheet metal over fire .
do not heat fine aggregate by direct steam .
do not add salts to prevent freezing .
protect concrete for at least num hours according to table num .
protect concrete exposed in the final construction for at least num days according to table num .
furnish and place continuously recording surface temperature measuring devices that are accurate within num f num c. at the end of the protection period allow the concrete to cool gradually over num hours at a rate not to exceed the maximum values shown in table num .
remove protection when the concrete surface temperature is within num f num c of the ambient air temperature .
section num num table num cold weather concrete surface temperatures minimum section size dimension numinches num mm num num inches num num mm num num inches num num mm num inches num mm minimum temperature of concrete during protection period num f num c num f num c num f num c num f num c maximum allowable temperature drop in a numhour period after end of protection num f num c num f num c num f num c num f num c b hot weather .
hot weather is defined as any time during the concrete placement when the ambient temperature at the work site is above num f num c. cool surfaces that come in contact with the mix to below num f num c by covering with wet burlap or cotton mats fog spraying with water covering with protective housing or by other approved methods .
during placement maintain concrete temperature by using any combination of the following num shade the material storage areas or production equipment num cool aggregate by sprinkling and num cool aggregate and water by refrigeration or replacing a portion or all of the mix water with flaked or crushed ice to the extent that the ice completely melts during mixing of the concrete .
c evaporation .
when placing concrete in bridge decks or other exposed slabs limit expected evaporation rate to less than num pound per square foot num kilograms per square meter per hour as determined by figure num .
when necessary take one or more of the following actions num construct windbreaks or enclosures to effectively reduce the wind velocity throughout the area of placement num use fog sprayers upwind of the placement operation to effectively increase the relative humidity and num reduce the temperature of the concrete according to subsection numb .
d rain .
protect the concrete from rain during and after placement .
num handling and placing concrete .
perform the work under section num except for work under section num .
construct reinforcing steel structural steel bearing devices joint material and miscellaneous items according to the appropriate sections .
section num num a general .
design and construct falsework and forms according to section num .
remove mortar debris and foreign material from the forms and reinforcing steel .
do not place concrete until the forms embedded material and the adequacy of the foundation material have been inspected .
thoroughly moisten the forms and subgrade immediately before concrete is placed against them .
use an approved form release agent to produce a minimum of staining air holes and hydration discoloration .
handle place and consolidate concrete by methods that do not cause segregation and will result in dense homogeneous concrete that is free of voids and rock pockets .
do not displace reinforcing steel or other material that is to be embedded in the concrete during concrete placement .
do not retemper concrete by adding water to the mix .
use temporary form spreader devices until concrete placement precludes their need .
figure num evaporation rate of surface moisture note example shown by dashed lines is for an air temperature of num f num c relative humidity of num percent concrete temperature of num f num c and a wind velocity of num miles num kilometers per hour .
this results in a rate of evaporation of num pounds per square foot num kilograms per square meter per hour .
to use this chart num .
enter with air temperature move up to relative humidity .
num .
move right to concrete temperature .
num .
move down to wind velocity .
num .
move left read approximate rate of evaporation .
section num num place concrete continuously without interruption between planned construction or expansion joints .
control the delivery rate placing sequence and construction methods to ensure fresh concrete is always placed and consolidated against previously placed preinitial set concrete .
do not allow time between the placement of successive batches to exceed num minutes .
do not damage previously placed concrete or break the bond between the concrete and reinforcing steel .
keep workers off fresh concrete .
do not support platforms for workers and equipment directly on reinforcing steel .
once the concrete is set do not disturb the forms or reinforcing bars that project from the concrete until it is of sufficient strength to resist damage .
b sequence of placement .
num substructures .
do not place loads on finished bents piers or abutments until concrete cylinder tests from the same concrete cured under the same conditions as the substructure element indicate that the concrete has at least num percent of its required numday compressive strength .
num vertical members .
for vertical members less than num feet num meters in height allow the concrete to set for at least num minutes before placing integral horizontal members .
for vertical members over num feet num meters in height allow the concrete to set for at least num hours .
do not transfer loads from horizontal members until the concrete has reached the specified strength and has been in place at least num days .
do not mount friction collars or falsework brackets on vertical members until the concrete has cured for at least num days or has reached specified strength .
num superstructures .
place concrete in the superstructure only after the substructure forms are stripped to allow inspection of the supporting concrete .
for concrete placed in tbeams or deck girders with depths greater than num inches num millimeters allow num days cure time for the stem concrete before placement of the top or deck slab .
for box girders place the bottom slab and stems in one or separate placements .
do not place the top slab until the stems have num days cure time .
num arches .
place concrete for arches in alternate lateral sections to minimize shrinkage stresses .
take into account deflections of the arch centering .
place other sections symmetrically with respect to the center of the bridge span .
where wide barrel arches require a longitudinal joint place concrete on each side of such joint independently of the centering to avoid relative settlements .
bond the sections together with suitable keys or dowels .
num box culverts .
place the box culvert base slab and allow num hours before the remainder of the culvert is constructed .
num precast elements .
place and consolidate concrete so that shrinkage cracks are not produced in the member .
c placing methods .
use equipment of sufficient capacity that is designed and operated to prevent mix segregation and mortar loss .
do not use equipment that causes vibrations that could damage the freshlyplaced concrete .
do not use equipment with aluminum parts that come in contact with the concrete .
remove set or dried mortar from inside surfaces of placing equipment .
section num num place concrete as near as possible to its final position .
consolidate concrete in horizontal layers greater than num inches num millimeters thick .
do not exceed the vibrator capacity to consolidate and merge the new layer with the previous layer .
do not place concrete at a rate that exceeds the design loading of the forms .
do not drop unconfined concrete more than num feet num meters .
concrete may be confined by using a tube fitted with a hopper head or other approved device that prevents mix segregation and mortar spattering .
this does not apply to castinplace piling or drilled shaft when concrete placement is completed before initial set occurs in the bottom of the piling .
operate concrete pumps so that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is delivered at the tube discharge .
d consolidation .
provide sufficient handheld internal concrete vibrators or mechanical vibrator gangs suitable for the conditions of concrete placement .
use vibrators conforming to table num .
provide rubbercoated vibrators when epoxycoated reinforcement is used .
provide a spare vibrator at the site in case of breakdown .
use external form vibrators only when the forms have been designed for external vibration and when internal vibration is not possible .
table num hand held vibratory requirements head diameter frequency vibrationsminute radius of action ¾ num½ inches num to num mm num num num num inches num num mm num¼ num½ inches num num mm num num num num inches num num mm num num½ inches num num mm num num num num inches num num mm consolidate concrete by mechanical vibration immediately after placement .
manipulate vibrators to thoroughly work the concrete around reinforcement embedded fixtures corners and angles in the forms .
do not cause segregation .
do not consolidate concrete placed underwater .
supplement vibration with spading as necessary to ensure smooth surfaces and dense concrete along form surfaces in corners and at locations impossible to reach with the vibrators .
vibrate the concrete at the point of deposit and at uniformly spaced points not farther apart than one and onehalf times the radius over which the vibration is visibly effective .
insert vibrators so that the affected vibrated areas overlap .
do not use vibrators to move concrete .
insert vibrators vertically and slowly withdraw from the concrete .
vibrate with sufficient duration and intensity to thoroughly consolidate the concrete but not to cause segregation .
do not vibrate at one point long enough to cause localized areas of grout to form .
do not vibrate reinforcement .
e underwater placement .
underwater placement of concrete is permitted only for concrete mixtures designed for underwater placement according to subsection num .
use tremies concrete pumps or other approved methods for placement .
section num num num tremies .
use watertight tremies with a sufficient to ensure that aggregateinduced blockages will not occur use multiple tremies as required .
make tremies capable of being rapidly lowered to retard or stop the flow of concrete .
seal the discharge end and fill the tremie tube with concrete at the start of concrete placement .
keep the tremie tube full of concrete to the bottom during placement .
if water enters the tube withdraw the tremie and reseal the discharge end .
maintain continuous concrete flow until the placement is completed .
num concrete pumps .
use pumps with a device at the end of the discharge tube to seal out water while the tube is first being filled with concrete .
when concrete flow is started keep the end of the discharge tube full of concrete and below the surface of the deposited concrete until placement has been completed .
place underwater concrete continuously from start to finish in a dense mass .
place each succeeding layer of concrete before the preceding layer has taken initial set using more than one tremie or pump if necessary .
keep the concrete surface as horizontal as practical .
do not disturb after placement .
maintain still water at the point of deposit .
dewater after test specimens cured under similar conditions indicate that the concrete has sufficient strength to resist the expected loads .
remove laitance or other unsatisfactory material from the exposed concrete .
f concrete railings and parapets .
use smooth tightfitting rigid forms .
neatly miter corners .
place concrete railings and parapets after the falsework for the supporting span is released .
remove forms without damaging the concrete .
finish corners to be true cleancut and without cracks spalls or other defects .
cast precast railing members in mortartight forms .
remove precast members from molds as soon as the concrete has sufficient strength to be selfsupporting .
protect edges and corners from chipping cracking and other damage .
cure according to subsection numb .
the curing period may be shortened when approved use moist heat type iii portland cement or water reducing agents .
num construction joints .
provide construction joints at locations shown in the plans .
obtain approval for additional construction joints .
extend reinforcing steel uninterrupted through construction joints .
embed lap splices or mechanical splices within the concrete .
do not use dowels .
at horizontal construction joints place gauge strips inside the forms along exposed faces to produce straight joint lines .
when the joint is between fresh and newly hardened concrete rough float the first placement to thoroughly consolidate the surface and leave the surface in a roughened condition .
clean the joint surface of laitance curing compound and other foreign material .
use an abrasive blast or other approved method to expose the aggregate on the joint surface .
retighten forms where the joint overlaps the first placement .
immediately before placing new concrete flush the joint surface with water and allow it to dry to a surface dry condition .
when the joint is between existing concrete and a new placement abrasive blast clean or use other approved methods to remove laitance and foreign material to expose clean aggregate and to roughen the joint surface .
before concrete placement apply approved bonding products to the joint surface according to the manufacturers recommendation .
section num num num expansion and contraction joints .
a open joints .
form open joints with a wooden strip metal plate or other approved material .
remove the joint forming material without chipping or breaking the corners of the concrete .
do not extend reinforcement across an open joint .
b filled joints .
cut premolded expansion joint filler to the shape and size of the surface being jointed .
secure the joint filler on one surface of the joint using galvanized nails or other acceptable means .
splice according to the manufacturers recommendations .
after form removal remove and neatly cut concrete or mortar that has sealed across the joint .
fill joint gaps ⅛ inch num millimeters or wider with approved filler .
place necessary dowels load transfer devices and other devices as shown in the plans or as directed .
c steel joints .
fabricate plates angles or other structural shapes accurately to conform to the concrete surface .
set joint opening to conform to the ambient temperature at the time of concrete placement .
securely fasten the joints to keep them in correct position .
maintain an unobstructed joint opening during concrete placement .
d compression joint seals .
use onepiece compression joint seals for transverse joints and the longest practical length for longitudinal joints .
clean and dry joints and remove spalls and irregularities .
apply a lubricant adhesive as a covering film to both sides of the seal immediately before installation .
compress the seal and place it in the joint as recommended by the manufacturer .
make sure the seal is in full contact with the joint walls throughout its length .
remove and discard seals that are twisted curled nicked or improperly formed .
remove and reinstall joint seals that elongate more than num percent of their original length when compressed .
remove excess lubricantadhesive before it dries .
e elastomeric expansion joint seal .
install the joint according to the manufacturers recommendations and according to the plans .
num finishing plastic concrete .
strike off concrete surfaces that are not placed against forms .
float finish the concrete surface .
remove laitance or thin grout .
carefully tool nonchamfered edges with an edger .
leave edges of joint filler exposed .
protect the surface from rain damage .
provide at least two nonsagging and nonvibrating work bridges capable of supporting the workers and equipment during placement finishing and curing operations .
place the work bridges at a reasonable height above the concrete surface to not impede worker performance and not touch the finished or fresh concrete surface .
a striking off and floating .
for bridge decks or top slabs of structures serving as finished pavements use an approved power driven finishing machine equipped with a screed that oscillates in a transverse direction .
use handfinishing methods for irregular areas when approved .
strike off surfaces .
do not support rails within the limits of the concrete placement without approval .
section num num set rails or headers on nonyielding supports so the finishing equipment operates without interruption over entire surface being finished .
extend rails beyond both ends of the scheduled concrete placement a sufficient distance to enable finishing machine to finish the concrete being placed .
set rails the entire length of continuous girder structures before placing deck concrete .
adjust rails headers and strikeoff equipment to the required profile and crosssection allowing for anticipated settlement camber and deflection of falsework .
before beginning delivery and placement of concrete operate the finishing machine over the entire area to be finished to check for excessive rail deflections deck thickness reinforcing steel cover and to verify proper operation of equipment .
make necessary corrections before concrete placement begins .
after placing the concrete operate finishing machine over the concrete as needed to obtain the required profile and crosssection .
keep a slight roll of excess concrete in front of the cutting edge of the screed at all times .
maintain this excess of concrete to the end of the pour or form and then remove and waste it .
adjust rails or headers as necessary to correct for unanticipated settlement or deflection .
remove rail supports embedded in the concrete to at least num inches num millimeters below the finished surface .
clean the voids of dust and debris using compressed air or other means .
apply approved bonding material in the voids .
fill the voids with fresh concrete of the same type and property as previously placed .
finish the surface with a float roller or other approved device as necessary to remove local irregularities .
remove excess water laitance or foreign material brought to the surface using a squeegee or straightedge drawn from the center of the slab towards either edge .
do not apply water to the surface of the concrete during finishing operations .
b straightedging .
check slab and sidewalk surfaces .
check the entire surface parallel to the centerline of the bridge with a numfoot nummeter metal straightedge .
overlap the straightedge at least half the length of the previous straightedge placement .
correct deviations in excess of ⅛ inch num millimeters from the testing edge of the straightedge .
for deck surfaces that are to receive an overlay correct deviations in excess of ¼ inch num millimeters .
c texturing .
finish after floating or at a time when finishing operations will not displace aggregate .
produce a skidresistant surface texture on driving surfaces by grooving .
use one of the following or a combination finishes for other surfaces as required .
num grooved finish .
use a float having a single row of fins or an approved machine designed specifically for sawing grooves in concrete pavements .
space fins ½ to ¾ inch num to num millimeters on centers .
make the grooves num to num inch num to num millimeters wide and ⅛ to num inch num to num millimeters deep .
groove perpendicular to the centerline without tearing the concrete surface or loosening surface aggregate .
if grooves are sawn cut the grooves approximately ¼ inch num millimeters wide at a spacing of ½ to num inch num to num millimeters .
on bridge decks discontinue grooving num inches num millimeters from curb face and provide a longitudinal troweled finish on the surface of gutters .
section num num num sidewalk finish .
strike off the surface using a strike board and then float the surface .
use an edging tool on edges and expansion joints .
broom the surface using a broom with stiff bristles broom perpendicular to the centerline from edge to edge with adjacent strokes slightly overlapped .
produce regular corrugations not over ⅛ inch num millimeters in depth without tearing the concrete .
correct porous spots irregularities depressions small pockets and rough spots while the concrete is plastic .
groove contraction joints at the required interval using an approved grooving tool .
num troweled and brushed finish .
use a steel trowel to produce a slick smooth surface free of bleed water .
brush the surface with a fine brush using parallel strokes .
num exposed aggregate finish .
strike off the surface using a strike board and then float the surface .
use an edging tool on transverse and longitudinal joints that are against forms or existing pavement .
do not edge transverse joints in a continuous lane pour or longitudinal joints in a continuous dual lane pour .
broom the surface as soon as the concrete hardens sufficiently to prevent particles of gravel from being dislodged .
use stiff brushes approved by the co .
exercise care to prevent marring of the surface and cracking or chipping of slab edges or joints .
apply a light spray of retardant to the unfinished surface to facilitate this work if approved .
broom transversely across the pavement .
pull the loosened semistiff mortar off the pavement .
remove the mortar from adjacent pavements .
then broom parallel to the pavement centerline .
continue this operation until a sufficient quantity of coarse aggregate is exposed .
other methods of aggregate exposure such as using a water spray attachment on a special exposed aggregate broom will be permitted if satisfactory results are demonstrated .
after curing according to subsection numb or c wash the surface with water and brush to remove laitance and cement from the exposed coarse aggregate .
d surface underneath bearings .
finish bearing surfaces to within ⅛ inch num millimeters of plan elevation .
when a masonry plate is to be set num directly on the concrete or on filler material less than ⅛ inch num millimeters thick finish the surface with a float to an elevation slightly above plan elevation .
grind the surface as necessary to provide a full and even bearing after the concrete has set .
num on filler material between ¼ and ½ inch num to num millimeters thick finish the surface with a steel trowel .
finish or grind the surface so that it does not vary from a straightedge in any direction by more than ¼ inch num millimeters .
num on filler material greater than ½ inch num millimeters thick or when an elastomeric bearing pad is to be used finish the surface to a plane surface free of ridges .
when required under a masonry plate or elastomeric bearing pad use nonshrink grout .
proprietary products may be used with approval .
e surface underneath waterproofing membrane deck seal .
finish to a smooth surface free of ridges and other projections .
section num num num curing concrete .
begin curing immediately after the free surface water has evaporated and the finishing is complete .
if the surface of the concrete begins to dry before the selected cure method can be implemented keep concrete surface moist using a fog spray without damaging the surface .
keep surfaces to be rubbed moist after forms are removed .
cure immediately following the first rub .
cure the top surfaces of bridge decks using the liquid membrane curing compound method combined with the water method .
apply liquid membrane curing compound immediately after finishing .
apply the water cure within num hours after finishing .
cure concrete uninterrupted for at least num days .
if pozzolans in excess of num percent by mass of the hydraulic cement is used in the mix cure uninterrupted for at least num days .
a forms inplace method .
for formed surfaces leave the forms inplace without loosening .
if forms are removed during the curing period to facilitate rubbing only strip forms from those areas able to be rubbed during the same shift .
during rubbing keep the surface of the exposed concrete moist .
after the rubbing is complete continue curing process using the water method for the remainder of the curing period .
b water method .
keep the concrete surface continuously wet by ponding spraying or covering with material that is kept continuously and thoroughly wet .
covering material may consist of cotton mats multiple layers of burlap or other approved material that does not discolor or otherwise damage the concrete .
cover the covering material with a waterproof sheet material that prevents moisture loss from the concrete .
use the widest sheets practical .
lap adjacent sheets at least num inches num millimeters and tightly seal seams with pressure sensitive tape mastic glue or other approved methods .
secure material so that wind does not displace it .
immediately repair sheets that are broken or damaged .
c liquid membrane curing compound method .
do not use the liquid membrane method on surfaces to receive a rubbed finish .
use on construction joint surfaces is permitted only if the compound is removed by sandblasting before placement of concrete against the joint .
only use type num whitepigmented liquid membrane on the top surfaces of bridge decks or on surfaces not exposed to view in the completed work .
use type numd clear curing compounds on other surfaces and on colored concrete .
mix membrane curing solutions containing pigments before use .
continue to agitate during application .
use equipment capable of producing a fine spray .
apply the curing compound at a minimum rate of num gallon per num square feet num liters per square meter in one or two uniform applications .
if the solution is applied in num applications follow the first application with the second application within num minutes and apply at right angles to the first application .
immediately apply a new coat over the damaged areas if the membrane is damaged by rain or other means during the curing period .
num finishing formed concrete surfaces .
remove and replace or repair as approved rock pockets or honeycombed concrete .
finish sound formed concrete surfaces as follows section num num a class num ordinary surface finish .
finish the following surfaces with a class num ordinary surface finish num under surfaces of slab spans box girders filled spandrel arch spans and the roadway deck slab between superstructure girders num inside vertical surface or tgirders of superstructures and num surfaces to be buried and culvert surfaces above finished ground that are not visible from the traveled way or a walkway .
begin finishing as soon as the forms are removed .
remove fins and irregular projections from surfaces that are exposed or will be waterproofed .
remove bulges and offsets with carborundum stones or discs .
remove localized poorlybonded rock pockets or honeycombed concrete and replace with sound concrete or packed mortar in an approved manner .
clean and point form tie cavities holes broken corners and edges and other defects .
saturate the area with water .
finish the area with mortar that is less than numhour old .
after the mortar is set rub it if required and continue curing .
match exposed surfaces to surrounding concrete .
carefully tool and remove free mortar and concrete from construction and expansion joints .
leave joint filler exposed for its full length with clean true edges .
rub or grind bearing surfaces on piers and abutments to the specified elevation and slope .
if the final finished surface is not true and uniform rub it according to subsection numb .
b class num rubbed finish .
finish the following surfaces with a class num rubbed finish num surfaces of bridge superstructures except those surfaces designated to receive a class num or other finish num surfaces of bridge piers piles columns and abutments and retaining walls above finished ground and to at least num inches num millimeters below finished ground num surfaces of open spandrel arch rings spandrel columns and abutment towers num surfaces of pedestrian undercrossings except floors and surfaces to be covered with earth num surfaces above finished ground of culvert headwalls and endwalls when visible from the traveled way or walkway num inside surfaces of culvert barrels higher than num inches num millimeter that are visible from the traveled way .
finish for a distance inside the barrel at least equal to the height of the culvert and num surfaces of railings .
complete a class num finish according to subsection numa .
saturate the concrete surface with water .
rub the surface with a medium coarse carborundum stone using a small quantity of mortar on its face .
use mortar composed of cement and fine sand mixed in the same proportions as the concrete being finished .
continue rubbing until form marks projections and irregularities are removed and a uniform surface is obtained .
leave the paste produced by this rubbing in place .
section num num after other work which could affect the surface is complete rub with a fine carborundum stone and water until the entire surface has a smooth texture and uniform color .
after the surface has dried rub it with burlap to remove loose powder .
leave the surface without unsound patches paste powder and objectionable marks .
c class num tooled finish .
do not use mortar blocks or wires to set reinforcing steel near the formed surface of areas to receive a tooled finish .
complete a class num finish according to subsection numa .
let the concrete set for at least num days or longer if necessary to prevent the aggregate particles from being picked out of the surface .
use air tools such as a bush hammer pick or crandall .
chip away the surface mortar and break the aggregate particles to expose a grouping of broken aggregate particles in a matrix of mortar .
produce a tooled finish on a small test area for approval before proceeding .
adjust the work procedures to produce a satisfactory finish and use those same procedures to finish the designated area .
d class num sandblasted finish .
complete a class num finish according to subsection numa .
let the concrete cure for at least num days .
protect adjacent surfaces that are not to be sandblasted .
sandblast a small test area for approval before proceeding .
use hard sharp sand to produce an even finegrained surface in which the mortar is cut away leaving the aggregate exposed .
do not remove mortar beyond onethird the diameter of the coarse aggregate .
e class num wire brushed or scrubbed finish .
complete a class num finish according to subsection numa .
begin as soon as the forms are removed .
scrub the surface with stiff wire or fiber brushes using a solution of muriatic acid .
mix the solution in the proportion of num part acid to num parts water .
scrub until the cement film or surface is completely removed and the aggregate particles are exposed .
leave an evenly pebbled texture having the appearance of fine granite to coarse conglomerate depending upon the size and grading of aggregate .
wash the entire surface with water containing a small quantity of ammonia .
f class num color finish .
build a sufficient number of num by numinch num by nummillimeter concrete color sample panels to obtain a color acceptable to the co .
protect the approved color sample panel .
color designated surfaces to match the color of the approved sample .
complete a class num finish according to subsection numa .
do not apply the color finish until concrete placement for the structure is complete .
remove dust foreign matter form oil grease and curing compound with a num percent solution of trisodium phosphate and then rinse the concrete surface with clean water .
use paper cloth or other means to protect surfaces not to be color finished .
apply the finish to a dry concrete surface when the surface temperature is num f num c or higher and the air temperature in the shade is anticipated to be num f num c or higher during the num hours following application .
apply the color finish according to the manufacturers recommendations .
spray brush or roll on the first coat of penetrating sealer and color base .
spray brush or roll on the finish coat after the first coat has thoroughly dried .
apply finish to provide a uniform permanent color without runs and sags to the surfaces .
clean concrete areas not intended to be covered by the finish using an approved method .
section num num num concrete anchorage devices .
use chemical grouted or castinplace concrete anchorage devices for attaching equipment or fixtures to concrete .
furnish the following for approval a concrete anchorage device sample b manufacturers installation instructions and c material data and certifications .
fabricate metal parts of the anchorage devices from stainless steel or from steel protected with a corrosion resistant metallic coating that does not react chemically with concrete .
supply anchorage devices complete with hardware .
for chemical or grouted anchors conduct a system approval test on one anchor on the project not to be incorporated in the work .
conduct a static load test according to astm enum .
demonstrate that the anchorage device can withstand a sustained direct tension test load not less than the values shown in table num for at least num hours with movement not to exceed num inch num millimeter .
also demonstrate that when loaded to failure the anchor device demonstrates a ductile failure of the anchor steel not a failure of the chemical grout or concrete .
table num sustained load test values anchorage device stud size tension test load ¾ inch mnum num lb num kn ⅝ inch mnum num lb num kn ½ inch mnum num lb num kn ⅜ inch mnum num lb num kn install concrete anchorage devices as recommended by the device manufacturer and so that the attached equipment or fixtures bear firmly against the concrete .
torque installed nuts to the values specified in table num unless otherwise specified in the manufacturers instructions .
set bearing anchor bolts according to the requirements of section num .
in the presence of the co proof load a random sample of at least num percent of the anchors to num percent of the yield stress of the steel .
if an anchor fails reset the failed anchor and proof load the reset anchor and num percent of remaining anchors .
the proof load may be applied by torqueing against a load indicator washer applying a direct tension load to the anchor or another method approved by the co. after proof loading release the load on the anchor and retighten the nuts to the torque specified in table num or according to the manufacturers instructions .
section num num table num torque for anchorage devices anchorage device stud diameter torque ¾ inch mnum num ftlb num nm ⅝ inch mnum num ftlb num nm ½ inch mnum num ftlb num nm ⅜ inch mnum num ftlb num nm num loads on new concrete structures .
do not allow traffic on concrete bridge decks until deck concrete has attained the design compressive strength and has been in place num days or longer .
construction loads less than num pounds num kilograms may be placed on the deck num days after the concrete is placed and the concrete in the entire span has attained a compressive strength of at least num percent of the specified design strength .
for precast concrete multibeam sections do not allow vehicles on any span until the grout has attained a strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals and tie rods have been tightened .
for posttensioned concrete structures do not allow vehicles over num pounds num kilograms on any span until the prestressing steel for that span is tensioned grouted and cured the grout has obtained a strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals and the tie rods are tightened .
vehicles weighing less than num pounds num kilograms may be permitted on a span provided the mass of the vehicle was included in the falsework design .
num concrete repair .
for concrete repairs remove existing or new defective concrete according to subsection numb and c. after removal of deteriorated or unsound concrete shotblast exposed structural steel reinforcing steel and concrete surfaces which will be in contact with repair material until free of rust and foreign material .
clean the sound concrete surface by flushing with clean water from a high pressure water jet or compressed air .
remove and replace deteriorated reinforcing steel .
before placing repair concrete thoroughly flushing with clean water under pressure or compressed air .
if compressed air is used provide a filter in airline to ensure that the air is oilfree .
if there is an interval of more than num hours between cleaning of the sound concrete surfaces that have been contaminated by substances detrimental to good bonding clean by abrasive shot blasting and pressurized water flushing or remove the concrete .
for vertical and overhead concrete repairs and those horizontal repairs to areas less than num inches num millimeters in depth use a nonshrink grout patching compound placed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for other repairs patches greater than num inches num millimeters in depth apply a bonding coat of a epoxy resin adhesive to the surfaces of the sound existing concrete immediately before placing new concrete against it .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for the epoxy resin adhesive .
repair areas using class aae concrete .
section num num num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements and the quality characteristic category .
material for concrete will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish production certifications with each shipment cementitious material .
the concrete mixtures slump air content density and temperature will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete compressive strength will be evaluated under subsection num .
the lower specification limit is the minimum required compressive strength at num days fc specified in the contract .
remove and replace concrete represented by cylinders having a compressive strength less than num percent of the minimum numday strength fc .
construction including batching placing finishing and curing concrete of concrete structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
falsework and forms will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring structural concrete by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the structure .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the structural concrete contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for structural concrete will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the compressive strength pay factor .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num num per material type source of material yes before producing mix design concrete composition all subsection num num per mix design if requested production produced aggregate fine coarse measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per day flowing aggregate stream bin belt discharge conveyor belt or stockpile yes before batching fineness modulus aashto t num moisture test aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued concrete numbnum measured and tested for conformance num density aashto t num num per load after at least num ydnum num mnum is dischargednum point of discharge no upon completing tests air content aashto t num or aashto t num no slump aashto t num no temperature astm cnum no concrete numbnum statistical num compressive strengthnum numday ii aashto t num t num num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per day and not less than num sets total discharge stream at point of placing yes num days deliver verification cylinders to the co or designated laboratory for scheduled testing num sample according to aashto r num except composite samples are not required .
num cast at least four compressive strength test cylinders for num by numinch num by nummillimeter specimens or six compressive strength cylinders for num by numinch num by nummillimeter and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
num a single compressive strength test result is the average result from two num by numinch num by nummillimeter or three num by numinch num by nummillimeter cylinders cast from the same load .
num if three successive samples are tested and compliance to the specifications is indicated screening tests may be reduced to an approved frequency .
resume initial testing frequency if a test shows a failing temperature air content slump or when directed .
num if the point of placement is different from the point of discharge correlate the discharge tests with the placement tests to document the changes .
section num num section num .
prestressed concrete description num this work consists of prestressing precast or castinplace concrete by furnishing placing and tensioning prestressing steel .
this work also includes installing precast prestressed members except piling .
material num conform to the following section and subsections anchorage devices num elastomeric bearing pads numa grout for posttensioned structures numc prestressing steel num reinforcing steel num structural concrete num construction requirements num qualifications .
submit the following for approval at least num days before prestressed concrete operations begin a professional engineer .
name of the engineer who is certified by pci for plant quality personnel level i or higher and is not directly employed by the precast concrete manufacturing plant b precast concrete manufacturing plant and quality control manager .
name and appropriate certifications c grouting supervisor .
name and a résumé describing experience on projects of similar complexity and american segmental bridge institute asbi grouting certification and d grouting personnel .
names and a résumé describing their experience on projects of similar complexity .
num method approval .
perform prestressing by either pretensioning or posttensioning methods .
if a method is proposed that is not in the contract submit detailed drawings of the method material and equipment proposed for approval at least num days before starting prestressing .
include the following a method and sequence of stressing b complete specifications details and test results for the prestressing steel and anchoring devices c anchoring stresses d arrangement of the prestressing steel in the members section num num e tendon elongation calculations for jacking procedures to be used f number spacing and method of draping pretensioned strands g other substantiating calculations for the prestressing method h type of tendon ducts for posttensioning i pressure grouting material and equipment for posttensioning j samples of wire or strand and k additions or rearrangement of reinforcing steel and changes in concrete dimensions .
for onsite casting submit drawings showing anticipated leveling or alterations to the site .
after completion of casting clear the site of equipment and rubbish and restore it to an acceptable condition .
num prestressing steel .
use prestressing steel that is bright and free of corrosion dirt grease wax scale rust oil or other foreign material that may prevent bond between the steel and the concrete .
do not use prestressing steel that has sustained physical damage or is pitted .
one splice per strand is permitted when single strand jacking is used .
when multistrand jacking is used splice all the strands or no more than num percent of the strands .
use strands having similar properties from the same source and having the same twist or lay .
locate splices outside the casting bed and between members .
do not weld or ground welding equipment on forms or other steel in the member after the prestressing steel is installed .
failure of one wire in a numwire prestressing strand is acceptable if num percent of the required tension load is attained before failure and if the failed strand does not constitute more than num percent of the total area of strands in an individual beam or girder .
extend bars using couplers which when assembled have a tensile strength not less than the tensile strength of the bars .
protect prestressing steel against physical damage rust or corrosion .
do not use damaged prestressing steel .
package prestressing steel to protect it from physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
place a corrosion inhibitor in the package .
use a corrosion inhibitor that has no deleterious effect on the steel concrete or bond strength of steel to concrete .
replace or restore damaged packaging .
mark the shipping package with a statement that the package contains highstrength prestressing steel and a warning to use care in handling .
identify the type kind and quantity of corrosion inhibitor used including the date when placed safety regulations and instructions for use .
assign a lot number and tag for identification purposes to wire strand anchorage assemblies or bars shipped to the site .
num concrete .
construct prestressed concrete according to section num .
construct reinforcing steel according to section num .
section num num make at least one set release strength test cylinders according to aashto t num in addition to those required to determine the numday compressive strength .
cure the release strength test cylinders with the concrete member they represent .
rough cast the top surface of members against which concrete will be cast .
finish surfaces to be covered with a waterproofing membrane deck seal to a smooth surface free of ridges and other projections .
cure the girder in a saturated atmosphere of at least num percent relative humidity .
cure time may be shortened by heating the outside of impervious forms with radiant heat convection heat conducted steam or hot air .
apply radiant heat by pipes circulating steam hot oil hot water or electric heating elements .
inspect casting beds to ensure uniform heat application .
use a suitable enclosure to contain the heat .
minimize moisture loss by covering exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting or liquid membrane curing compound according to subsection num .
sandblast curing compound from surfaces to which concrete will be bonded .
envelop the entire surface with saturated steam .
completely enclose the casting bed with a suitable type of housing tightly constructed to prevent the escape of steam and exclude outside air .
use steam at num percent relative humidity .
do not apply the steam directly to the concrete .
with hot air the co will approve the method to envelop and maintain the girder in a saturated atmosphere .
do not allow dry heat to touch the girder surface .
with heat curing methods a keep unformed girder surfaces in a saturated atmosphere throughout the curing time .
b embed a thermocouple linked with a thermometer accurate to num f num c num to num inches num to num millimeters from the top or bottom of the girder on its centerline and near its midpoint .
c monitor with a recording sensor accurate to num f num c arranged and calibrated to continuously record date and identify concrete temperature throughout the heating cycle .
d make the temperature record available to the co. e heat concrete to no more than num f num c during the first num hours after placing concrete and increase the temperature no more than num f num c per hour to a maximum of num f num c. f cool concrete after curing is complete no more than num f num c per hour until a temperature num f num c above the temperature of the air to which the concrete will be exposed has been reached .
g keep the temperature of the concrete above num f until the girder reaches release strength .
cure precast prestressed members to the release compressive strength .
this is when the average strength of two representative test cylinders is greater than the minimum required strength and the individual strength of any one cylinder is no more than num percent below the required strength .
num tensioning .
use hydraulic jacks to tension prestressing steel .
use a pressure gauge or load cell for measuring jacking force .
section num num calibrate measuring devices at least once every num months or if they appear to be giving erratic results .
calibrate the jack and gauge as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be at final jacking force .
keep a certified calibration chart with each gauge .
if a pressure gauge is used do not gauge loads less than ¼ nor more than ¾ of the total graduated capacity of the gauge unless calibration data clearly establishes consistent accuracy over a wider range .
use a pressure gauge with an accurate reading dial at least num inches num millimeters in diameter .
measure the force induced in the prestressing steel using calibrated jacking gauges load cells or a calibrated dynamometer .
take elongation measurements of the prestressing steel .
determine the required elongation from average loadelongation curves for the prestressing tendons used .
for pretensioned members if there is a discrepancy between the gauge pressure and elongation of more than num percent in tendons over num feet num meters in length or num percent in tendons of num feet num meters or less in length determine the source of error before proceeding .
do not allow discrepancies in posttensioned members to exceed num percent .
if the jacking system is equipped with an automatic release valve that closes when the required prestressing force is reached strand elongation measurements are only required for the first and last tendon tensioned and for at least num percent of the remaining tendons .
if a load cell is used do not use the lower num percent of the manufacturers rated capacity of the load cell to determine the jacking force .
do not exceed a temporary tensile stress of num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
anchor prestressing steel at an initial stress that will result in the retention of a working stress after all losses of not less than those required .
for pretensioned members do not allow the initial release stress after seating and before other losses to exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel for stressrelieved strands and num percent for lowrelaxation strands .
for posttensioned members do not allow the initial release stress after seating to exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
num pretensioned members .
cast pretensioned members to the tolerances shown in table num. a prestressing steel .
protect prestressing steel placed in the stressing bed from contamination and corrosion if the stressing bed is to be exposed to weather for more than num hours before encasement in concrete .
free strands of kinks or twists .
accurately hold prestressing steel in position and tension according to subsection num .
do not allow strands to unwind more than one turn .
keep a record of the jacking force and elongation measurements after the strands are tensioned to num percent of final jacking force .
tension prestressing steel to the required stress .
include in elongation computations strand anchorage slippage splice slippage in place horizontal movement of the structural member during prestressing operations and prestressing steel temperature changes between the time of tensioning and the time when the concrete takes its initial set .
computations must be prepared by a professional engineer .
section num num maintain the prestress bed forms strands and reinforcement bar temperature within num f num c of the temperature of the concrete to be placed in the forms .
support strands with rollers at points of direction change when strands are tensioned in a draped position .
use freerunning rollers with minimal friction .
initially when strands are tensioned and then pulled into the draped position tension to no more than the required tension minus the increased tension due to forcing the strand to a draped profile .
if the load in a draped strand at the dead end as determined by elongation measurements is less than num percent of the jack load tension the strand from both ends of the bed .
make the load as computed from the sum of elongations produced by jacking at both ends agree within num percent of the jack load .
within num hours before placing concrete check the tension on the prestressing strands .
the method and equipment for checking the loss of prestress will be approved by the co .
if strands are tensioned individually check each strand for loss of prestress .
retension to the original computed jacking stress for strands that show a loss of prestress in excess of num percent .
if strands are tensioned in a group check the entire group for total loss of prestress .
release and retension the entire group if the total prestress shows a loss in excess of num percent or if individual strands appears significantly different from the rest of the strands in the group .
b releasing steel .
release the prestress load to the concrete after the concrete has attained its required release compressive strength .
do not expose the concrete to temperatures below freezing for at least num days after casting .
cut or release strands such that lateral eccentricity of the prestress force is minimized .
cut off prestressing steel flush with the end of the member except as noted in the plans .
c debonding strands .
use solid or split plastic sheathing with a minimum thickness of num inches num millimeters to debond strands .
before placing concrete use tape to thoroughly seal split and solid sheathing including ends to prevent the migration of concrete mortar along the strand .
num storing transporting and erecting .
do not ship prestressed concrete members until concrete cylinder tests manufactured of the same concrete and cured under the same conditions as the members indicate that the concrete in each member has attained the minimum required design strength and is at least num days old except decked bulbt sections must be at least num days old .
before transporting prestressed concrete members provide written certification from a professional engineer conforming to the qualifications of subsection num that the members were fabricated and visually inspected according to the contract and meet minimum quality requirements .
store transport and erect precast prestressed girders slab units and box units in the upright position with the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the member approximately the same as when the member is in its final position .
prevent cracking or damage during hoisting handling and storing of the precast units .
replace units damaged by improper handling or storing .
num posttensioned members .
construct posttensioned members to the tolerances shown in table num .
construct supporting falsework so that the superstructure is free to lift off the falsework and shorten during posttensioning .
detail formwork left inside box girders to support the roadway slab to offer minimum resistance to girder shortening due to shrinkage and posttensioning .
a ducts .
use mortartight ducts that are sufficientlyrigid to maintain their shape and alignment during concrete placement and grout installation .
use ducts conforming to the following minimum wall thicknesses section num num num metal duct num⅝ inch num millimeter diameter num gage num millimeter num metal duct num⅝ inches num millimeter diameter num gage num millimeter num high density polyethylene hpde num gage num millimeter num high density polypropylene hdpp num gage num millimeter num metal duct with bar tendons preassembled num gage nummillimeter with duct for tendons composed of single prestressing bars provide ducts with a minimum internal duct diameter of at least ¼ inch num millimeters larger than the outside diameter of the prestressing bar .
for multiple wire bar or strand tendons provide a duct nominal internal crosssectional area of at least two and onequarter times the net area of the prestressing steel .
when tendons are to be placed by the pull through method provide a duct nominal internal crosssectional area of at least two and onehalf times the net area of the prestressing steel .
make positive joints between duct sections .
do not make angles at the joints .
use waterproof tape at the joints .
bend ducts without crimping or flattening .
use ferrous metal or polyethylene couplings to connect ducts to anchoring devices .
protect ducts against crushing excessive bending dirt contamination and corrosive elements during transport handling and storing .
in case of duct damage seal duct with tape or splice a duct coupler over the damaged section to form a seal that prevents cement paste from entering the duct during the placement of concrete and to prevent leakage during grouting operations .
provide ducts and anchorage assemblies with inlets for the injection of grout into the duct after prestressing according to the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
provide ducts with outlets to allow the escape of air water grout and bleed water according to the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
provide inlets and outlets with an inner diameter of at least ¾ inch num millimeters for strand tendons and of at least ½ inch num millimeters for single bar tendons .
extend the length of outlets a sufficient distance out of the concrete member to allow for the proper closing of the outlets .
place inlets and outlets at a minimum in the following locations anchorage area of the tendon high points of the duct when the vertical distance between the highest and lowest point is more than num inches num millimeters inlet at or near the lowest point of the tendon outlet at low points of the duct major changes in the crosssection of the duct such as couplers and anchorages and outlet at a distance less than num inches num millimeter downstream from high point outlets .
section num num show inlet and outlet locations on drawings .
provide positive mechanical shutoff valves for inlets and outlets .
provide inlets and outlets with valves caps or other devices capable of withstanding the grouting pressure .
securely fasten ducts in place to prevent movement .
maintain distances from the forms by stays blocks ties hangers or other approved supports .
use precast mortar blocks of approved shape and dimensions .
separate layers of ducts by mortar blocks .
space duct supports according to the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
cover the ends of ducts to prevent the entry of water or debris .
connect inlets and outlets to the duct with metallic or plastic structural fasteners .
do not use components that react with the concrete cause corrosion of the prestressing steel or contain water soluble chlorides .
b placing concrete .
where the end of a posttensioned assembly will not be covered by concrete recess the anchoring devices so that the ends of the prestressing steel and all parts of the anchoring devices are at least num inches num millimeters inside the end surface of the members .
before placing concrete demonstrate that ducts are unobstructed .
immediately after concrete placement blow out the metal conduit with compressed oilfree air to breakup and remove mortar in the conduit before it hardens .
approximately num hours after the concrete placement flush the metal conduits with water containing lime calcium oxide or slaked lime calcium hydroxide in the quantity of num pounds per gallon num grams per liter .
blow the water out with compressed oilfree air .
for posttensioned members that are to be steam cured do not install prestressing steel until curing is complete .
c anchorages and distribution .
give at least num days notice before installing end fittings or heading wires .
when wires are used provide an edge distance for any hole for prestressing wire through a stressing washer unthreaded bearing ring or plate of at least ¼ inch num millimeters from the root of any threads or the edge of any ring plate or washer .
anchor posttensioned prestressing steel at the ends by permanent type anchoring devices capable of developing not less than num percent of the ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
if the anchoring device is sufficiently large and is used in conjunction with a steel grillage embedded in the concrete that effectively distributes the anchor load to the concrete the steel distribution plates or assemblies may be omitted .
enclose loop tendon anchorages in ducts for their entire length .
d prestressing steel .
use a corrosion inhibitor to protect prestressing steel installed in ducts before placing and curing of the concrete .
use a corrosion inhibitor that does not adversely affect the steel concrete or bond strength of the steel to concrete .
if prestressing steel is installed in the ducts within num days after concrete curing stressing and grouting are completed no corrosion inhibitor is required .
section num num e posttensioning .
wait at least num days after the last concrete has been placed in the member or until tests on concrete cylinders indicate that the concrete has attained the minimum compressive strength .
demonstrate that the prestressing steel is free and unbonded in the duct .
straighten wires if necessary to produce equal stress in all wires wire groups or parallel lay tendons that are stressed simultaneously .
remove side forms for girders before posttensioning .
record gauge pressures and prestressing steel elongation at all times while tensioning prestressing steel and submit records .
determine the friction loss in the prestressing process that is the difference between tension at the jack and minimum tension in the prestressing steel according to the aashto load and resistance factor design lfrd bridge design specifications .
use suitable shims or other approved devices to attain the specified anchor set loss .
f grouting .
provide class a b c or d grout as specified and prestressing steel that is free of dirt loose rust grease or other deleterious material .
bond posttensioned prestressing steel to the concrete by filling the void space between the duct and tendon with grout according to the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
perform grouting operations using staff with grouting experience on projects of a similar type and magnitude .
perform grouting operations under the immediate supervision of an individual skilled in various aspects of grouting and who is certified by the american segmental bridge institute asbi grouting certification program .
furnish the name of the grouting operations supervisor and proof of their asbi certification and grouting experience before beginning grouting operations .
make available onsite before beginning grouting operations the required testing equipment for checking grout workability flowcone temperatures and other specified tests .
use grouting equipment capable of continuous operation with little variation of pressure which also includes a system for recirculating the grout while actual grouting is not in progress .
use grouting equipment capable of maintaining a pressure on completely grouted ducts and fitted with a valve that can be locked off without loss of pressure in the duct .
provide written certification that ingredients used in the grout meet the astm requirements contained in the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
this includes but is not limited to the following num cement mill test reports num mineral additives test reports num chemical admixtures reports and num test reports for other ingredients used in the grout .
for prepackaged grouts provide the manufacturers current certified mill test reports for the product .
do not use compressed air to aid in the pumping of grout .
section num num provide grout pumps of a positive displacement type capable of providing a continuous flow of grout and capable of maintaining an outlet pressure of at least num pounds per square inch num megapascal and with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
grout only when the efflux time of a grout sample immediately after mixing is between num and num seconds according to astm cnum.when hot weather conditions may cause quick setting of the grout cool the grout by approved methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping operations .
when freezing weather conditions are possible during and following placement of grout protect the grout from damage by freezing according to the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
provide a supply of potable water and standby flushing equipment capable of developing a pumping pressure of num pounds per square inch num megapascals and of sufficient capacity to flush out partiallygrouted ducts .
clean ducts of material that would impair bonding of the grout or interfere with grouting procedures .
blow out each duct with compressed oilfree air .
check inlets and outlets for their capacity to accept injection of grout by blowing compressed oilfree air through the system and proving each inlet and outlet in turn .
pass grout through a screen with ⅛ inch num millimeters maximum clear openings before entering the grout pump .
open grout vents before the start of grouting .
completely fill the duct by injecting grout from the lowest end of the tendon in an uphill direction .
pump grout continuously through the duct and waste at the outlet until no visible slugs of water or air are ejected and the efflux time of ejected grout is between num and num seconds .
maintain a continuous oneway flow of grout within a grouting stage .
close outlets in a similar manner one after the other in the direction of the flow .
for outlets placed a short distance downstream from a high point close that outlet before its associated high point outlet .
increase the grouting pressure at the injection end to at least num pounds per square inch num megapascals and hold for at least num seconds .
do not remove or open valves and caps until the grout has set .
abrasive blast clean the concrete surface of recessed anchorage assemblies .
fill anchor recesses with concrete conforming to the requirements for the structure and finish flush .
remove ends of vents num inch num millimeters below the roadway surface after grouting has been completed .
permanently seal recess areas .
do not release the falsework under the bottom slab supporting the superstructure until at least num hours after grouting of the posttension prestressing steel or until the grout strength is obtained .
section num num table num prestressed concrete member tolerances description tolerance precast girders with castinplace decknum length ¼ innum ft num in max .
num mmnum m num mm max .
width overall ⅜ in ¼ in num mm num mm depth overall ½ in ¼ in num mm num mm depth flanges ¼ in num mm width web ⅜ in ¼ in num mm num mm sweep num ⅛ innum ft num mmnum m variation from end squareness or skew num inft num in max .
num mmnum m num mm max .
camber variation from design camber ⅛ innum ft num mmnum m ½ in max .
num ft length num mm max .
num m length num in max .
num ft length num mm max .
num m length position of strands individual ¼ in num mm bundled ½ in num mm position from design location of deflection points for deflected strands num in num mm position of plates other than bearing plates num in num mm position of bearing plates ⅝ in num mm tipping and flushness of plates ¼ in num mm tipping and flushness of bearing plates ⅛ in num mm position of inserts for structural connections ½ in num mm position of handling devices parallel to length num in num mm transverse to length num in num mm position of stirrups longitudinal spacing num in num mm projection above top ¾ in num mm local smoothness num ¼ in in num ft num mm in num m any surface section num num table num continued prestressed concrete member tolerances description tolerance precast girders used in multibeam decks num length ¾ in num mm width overall ¼ in num mm depth overall ¼ in num mm depth top flange ½ in num mm depth bottom flange ½ in num in num mm num mm width web ⅜ in num mm sweep num up to num ft num m member length ¼ in num mm num to num ft num to num m member length ⅜ in num mm greater than num ft num m member length ½ in num mm variation from end squareness or skew ⅛ inft num mmm horizontal ½ in max .
num mm max .
vertical ½ in num mm camber variation from design camber ⅛ innum ft ½ in max .
num mmnum m num mm max .
differential camber between adjacent members of the same design ¼ innum ft ¾ in max .
num mmnum m num mm max .
position of strands individual ¼ in num mm bundled ¼ in num mm position from design location of deflection points for deflected strands num in num mm position of plates other than bearing plates num in num mm tipping and flushness of plates ¼ in num mm position of inserts for structural connections ½ in num mm position of handling devices parallel to length num in num mm transverse to length num in num mm section num num table num continued prestressed concrete member tolerances description tolerance precast girders used in multibeam decks position of stirrups longitudinal spacing num in num mm projection above top ¼ in ¾ in num mm num mm tipping of beam seat bearing area ⅛ in num mm position of dowel tubes num in num mm position of tie rod tubes parallel to length ½ in num mm vertical ⅜ in num mm position of slab void end of void to center of tie hole ½ in num mm adjacent to end block num in num mm local smoothness num ¼ in in num ft num mm in num m any surface posttension members position of post tensioning ducts ¼ in num mm position of tendon anchorage bearing plates ¼ in num mm num aashto i beams and bulbt girders .
num variation from straight line parallel to centerline of member .
num does not apply to top surface left rough to receive a topping or to visually concealed surfaces .
num box beams slabs decked bulb tee and multistem girders .
num variation from straight line parallel to centerline of member .
num does not apply to top surface left rough to receive a topping or to visuallyconcealed surfaces .
num painting steel .
use a wire brush or abrasive blast to remove dirt and residue not firmly bonded to the metal or concrete surfaces .
clean and paint the exposed ends of the prestress steel posttension anchor head assemblies and a numinch nummillimeter strip of adjoining concrete .
mix zincrich paint conforming to fss ttpnum .
work the paint into voids in the prestressing tendons .
apply one thick coat to surfaces that will be covered with concrete .
apply two coats to surfaces not covered with concrete .
num acceptance .
see tables num and num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
prestressing steel reinforcing steel anchor devices elastomeric bearings and material for concrete and grout will be evaluated under subsection num .
furnish production certifications with each shipment of hydraulic cement prestressing steel and reinforcing steel .
grouting will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
sampling and testing requirements will be according to the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
concrete for precast prestressed concrete members will be evaluated under subsections num num and num .
section num num concrete for posttensioned castinplace concrete members will be evaluated under section num .
construction of precast prestressed concrete members and posttensioned castinplace concrete members will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
reinforcing steel will be evaluated under section num .
falsework and forms will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable do not measure reinforcing steel and concrete for precast prestressed concrete structural members .
measure the concrete for posttensioned castinplace concrete structures under section num .
measure the reinforcing steel for posttensioned castinplace concrete structures under section num .
measure prestressed piling under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks prestressed concrete measured and tested for conformance num compressive strength aashto t num t num num per num yd³ num m³num discharge stream at point of placingnum yes upon completing tests grout pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures each mixture each source no num sample according to aashto r num except composite samples are not required .
num in addition to the test cylinders required to determine numday strength cast two release cylinders for each concrete member .
cure the releasestrength cylinders with the concrete member that they represent .
section num num section num .
reinforcing steel description num this work consists of furnishing and placing reinforcing steel .
material num conform to the following subsection reinforcing steel num construction requirements num order lists .
on reinforcing steel order lists use the same respective bar marks for labeling as shown in the plans .
submit order lists and bending diagrams for approval .
approval does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the accuracy of the lists and diagrams .
do not order material until the lists and diagrams are accepted .
do not fabricate vertical reinforcement in columns walls piers and shafts until footing elevations are established in the field .
num identification .
ship bar reinforcement in standard bundles tagged and marked according to crsi manual of standard practice .
num bending .
fabricate reinforcing bars according to aci spnum aci detailing manual .
cold bend reinforcing bars that require bending .
limit the overall height or drop bending tolerance of deck truss bars to plus num inch num millimeter or minus ¼ inch num millimeters .
do not bend bars partially embedded in concrete except as shown in the plans or otherwise permitted .
provide standard hooks conforming to aci spnum .
num protection of material .
store reinforcing steel above the ground on platforms skids or other supports .
protect from physical damage rust and other surface deterioration .
use reinforcing steel only when the surface is clean and the minimum dimensions crosssectional area and tensile properties conform to the physical requirements for the size and grade of steel specified .
do not use reinforcing steel that is cracked laminated or is covered with dirt rust loose scale paint grease oil or other deleterious material .
num epoxycoated reinforcing steel .
support coated bars on padded contact areas .
pad bundled bands .
lift with a strong back multiple supports or a platform bridge .
prevent bartobar abrasion .
do not drop or drag bundles .
before placement inspect bars for coating damage .
replace and do not use bars with a total damaged area in any numinch nummillimeter length that exceeds num percent of the surface area of that length of the bar .
section num num clean other damaged coatings by removing surface contaminants and the damaged coating .
roughen the area around the damage and remove rust by blast cleaning or power tool cleaning .
use a prequalified astm anum patchingrepair material to patch defects in the coating that are discernible to the unaided eye .
overlap the patching material onto the original coating for num inches num millimeters or as recommended by the manufacturer .
provide a minimum num mil nummicrometer dry film thickness on the patched areas .
take necessary steps to minimize damage to the coating of installed bars .
clean and patch damage to coatings noted after installation as described above .
promptly treat the bar according to the resin manufacturers recommendations and before detrimental oxidation occurs .
coat mechanical splices after splice installation according to astm anum for patching damaged epoxy coatings .
num placing and fastening .
place fasten and support the bars according to the crsi manual of standard practice .
coat chairs tie wires and other devices used to support position or fasten epoxycoated reinforcement with a dielectric material .
use precast concrete blocks or metal supports .
attach concrete block supports to the supported bar with wire cast in the center of each block .
use class num plastic protected or class num type b stainless steel protected metal supports in contact with exposed concrete surfaces .
use stainless steel conforming to astm anum type num .
space slab bar supports no more than num inches num millimeters apart transversely or longitudinally .
do not use bar supports either directly or indirectly to support runways for concrete buggies or other similar construction loads .
replace damaged supports .
place bars within num½ inches num millimeters of the plan location .
do not cumulate spacing variations .
do not allow the average of any two adjacent spaces to exceed the required spacing .
place reinforcing steel in deck slabs within ¼ inch num millimeters of the vertical plan location .
using a template check the clear cover over deck reinforcing steel before placing deck concrete .
provide num inches num millimeters clear cover for reinforcement .
the tolerance on minimum concrete cover is minus ⅜ inch num millimeters .
for concrete surfaces cast against the ground provide a minimum num inches num millimeters of clear cover over reinforcement .
tie reinforcing at intersections around the perimeter of each mat and at not more than numinch nummillimeter centers or at every intersection whichever is greater .
tie bridge deck reinforcing bars at not more than num inch num millimeter or every intersection whichever is greater .
tie bundle bars together at intervals not exceeding num feet num meters .
do not bundle bars unless the location and splice details are specified .
do not place concrete in members until the reinforcing steel placement is approved .
num splices .
splicing except as shown in the plans is not permitted without approval .
provide lap lengths shown in the plans .
splice reinforcing bars only where shown in the plans or accepted drawings .
make lapped splices by placing the reinforcing bars in contact and wiring them together so as to maintain the alignment and position of the bars .
section num num if welding of reinforcing steel is permitted use welders with current certifications and make the welds conform to aws structural welding code reinforcing steel d num dnumm .
do not weld reinforcing steel if the chemical composition of the steel exceeds the percentages in table num .
table num reinforcing steel components chemical composition percent carbon c num manganese ma num carbon equivalent c.e .
num mechanical couplers may be used instead of welding if approved .
use couplers with a strength that is at least num percent of the required yield strength of the reinforcing steel .
do not exceed num inches num millimeters total slip of the reinforcing bar within the splice sleeve when loading in tension to num kips per square inch num megapascals and relaxing to num kips per square inch num megapascals for bar sizes up to no .
num no .
num as measured between gage points clear of the splice sleeve .
if welded wire fabric is shipped in rolls straighten into flat sheets before placing .
splice sheets of mesh or bar mat reinforcement by overlapping not less than nummesh width plus num inches num millimeters .
securely fasten at the ends and edges .
num acceptance .
reinforcing steel and epoxy coating material will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
furnish a production certification with each shipment of reinforcing steel .
placement of reinforcing steel will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure reinforcing steel excluding laps added for the contractors convenience .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
steel structures description num this work consists of constructing steel structures and the steel structure portions of composite structures .
this work also includes furnishing fabricating and erecting structural steel and incidental metal construction .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections bearing devices num bolts and nuts numd castings num galvanized coatings num highstrength bolts nuts and washers nume painting num pins and rollers num preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seal for bridges numg sheet lead num steel forgings num steel grid floors num steel pipe num structural steel num temporary works num welded stud shear connectors num construction requirements num drawings and diagrams .
submit drawings according to subsection num. a fabrication drawings .
show complete detailed dimensions and sizes of component parts of the structure and details of miscellaneous parts .
show the direction of plate rolling where specific orientation of plates is required .
show plate girder flanges and webs cut from plates so the long dimension of the girder parallels the rolling direction .
identify the type and grade of each piece that is to be made of steel other than aashto m num grade num num steel .
show assembly marks that are crossreferenced to the original pieces of mill steel and their certified mill test reports .
shopwelded splice locations shown on the drawings are subject to approval .
locate shopwelded splices to avoid points of maximum tensile or fatigue stress .
locate splices in webs at least num inches num millimeters from shop splices flange butt joints or stiffeners .
additional nondestructive tests may be required on shopwelded splices .
section num num b erection drawings .
fully illustrate the proposed method of erection .
show details of falsework bents bracing guys deadmen lifting devices and bridge member attachments .
show the erection sequence crane and barge locations crane capacities lifting point locations and bridge member masses .
show complete details for anticipated phases and erection conditions .
if required by the co during drawing review provide calculations showing that allowable stresses are not exceeded and that member capacities and final geometry are correct .
see section num for additional requirements .
c camber diagram .
show the camber at each truss or arch rib panel point at field splice locations and at the specified span length fractions of continuous beams and girders or rigid frames .
show calculated cambers to be used in preassembly of the structure as required in subsection num. d transportation drawings .
show support points tiedowns temporary stiffening trusses or beams and other details needed to support and brace the member .
provide calculation sheets showing selfweight plus dynamic load allowance stresses induced by the loading and transportation procedure .
use dynamic load allowance stresses of at least num percent of the dead load stress .
do not allow fatigue stresses to exceed the constantamplitude fatigue threshold for the appropriate categories .
verify computed girder stresses satisfy the aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge design specifications .
ship and store members in the same orientation as the completed structure unless otherwise approved by the co. num fabrication notice .
give written notice at least num days before beginning fabrication work .
do not manufacture material before notification and drawings are approved .
num inspection .
structural steel may be inspected at the fabrication site according to subsection num .
ultrasonically inspect girder flanges before fabrication according to astm anum and the following a inspect after flanges are stripped from the master plate b use supplementary requirement snum for acceptance standards and c inspect flanges in the plant or warehouse where the flanges are stripped .
furnish copies of mill orders at the time orders are placed with the manufacturer .
furnish certified mill test reports and production certifications before the start of fabrication using material covered by these reports .
furnish a production certification from the manufacturer according to subsection num .
include on certified mill test reports the chemical analyses and physical test results for each heat of steel used in the work and for steels with specified impact values include the results of charpy vnotch impact tests .
confirm on the test report that the material was so produced when finegrain practice is specified .
furnish production certifications instead of mill test reports for material that is not normally supplied with mill test reports and for items such as fills minor gusset plates and similar material when quantities are small and the material is taken from stock .
section num num num storing material .
store structural material above the ground on platforms skids or other supports .
keep material without dirt grease and other foreign matter .
protection from corrosion and stray electrical currents .
num fabrication .
fabricate structural steel in a fabricating plant that is certified under the aisc quality certification program .
furnish and fabricate fracture critical elements according to aashto lrfd bridge design specifications and clause num of the aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
remove mill scale and foreign material from exterior surfaces of exterior girders of unpainted weathering steel by blast cleaning according to sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning .
then dry the surface and apply at least three uniform applications of water mist at num hour intervals to ensure uniform weathering .
do not heat curved steel girders .
do not drill cut or weld portions of structural members unless shown in the plans or approved in writing .
a steel identification .
use a system of assemblymarking of individual pieces and cutting instructions generally by cross referencing of the assemblymarks shown on the drawings with the corresponding item covered on the mill purchase order .
provide information to the shop that maintains the identity of the original piece .
identify material furnished from stock by heat number and mill test report .
during fabrication and before assembling members show the specification of each piece of steel other than grade num num steel .
mark steel using steel die stamping or firmly attaching a substantial tag to pieces of steel which will be subject to fabricating operations which might obliterate paint marking before assembling into members .
these fabrication operations include blast cleaning galvanizing heating for forming or painting .
use lowstress type steel die stamps .
avoid impressions near edges of tensilestressed plate members .
do not use die stamps on fracturecritical members .
furnish an affidavit certifying the identification of steel has been maintained throughout the fabrication operation .
b plates .
num rolling direction .
cut and fabricate steel plates for main members and splice plates for flanges and main tension members so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the principal tensile and compressive stresses .
num plate cut edges .
a edge planing .
remove sheared edges on plates thicker than num inches num millimeters to a depth of ¼ inch num millimeters beyond the original sheared edge or beyond reentrant cuts produced by shearing .
fillet reentrant cuts before cutting .
num oxygen cutting .
perform oxygen cutting according to aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
section num num num visual inspection and repair of plate cut edges .
visually inspect and repair plate cut edges .
conform to aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
b flange plates .
furnish flange plates with either oxygencut edges that have ground corners chamfered at least num inch num millimeters or furnish universal mill plates .
c web plates .
use oxygen cutting to provide the prescribed camber in web plates of builtup beams and girders box girders and box arches .
cut sufficient extra camber into the webs to provide for camber losses due to welding and cutting .
d truss members .
prepare longitudinal edges of plates in welded sections of truss web and chord members by oxygen cutting .
use grinding to chamfer the edges of the corners of plates at least num inch num millimeters when plates are not joined by welding .
e stiffeners and connection plates .
sheared edges may be used on plate thicknesses up to ¾ inches num millimeters for stiffeners and connection plates welded transverse to girder webs and flanges .
universal mill plate may be used for plate thicknesses up to num inch num millimeters .
furnish other stiffeners and connection plates with oxygencut edges .
f lateral gusset plates .
bolted lateral gusset plates may be furnished with sheared edges provided the thickness is less than or equal to ¾ inches num millimeters .
oxygen cut parallel to lines of stress gusset plates and other connections welded parallel to lines of stress in tension members where the plate thickness exceeds ⅜ inches num millimeters .
g splice plates and gusset plates .
furnish with oxygencut edges .
h bent plates .
furnish unwelded loadcarrying rolled steel plates .
bend plates at right angles to the direction of rolling except coldbent ribs for orthotropicdeck bridges may be bent in the direction of rolling .
before bending round the plate corners to a radius of num inch num millimeters throughout the portion of the plate where the bending occurs .
num cold bending .
do not coldbend fracturecritical steels and fracturecritical members .
for other steels and members cold bend according to table num so that no plate cracking occurs .
allow for springback of grades num num and numw numw steels equal to about three times that for grade num num steel .
use a lower die span of at least sixteen times the plate thickness for break press forming .
num hot bending .
if a radius shorter than the minimum specified for cold bending is required hot bend the plates at a temperature less than num f num c except for grades numw numw num num and numw numw .
when steel plates are heated to temperatures greater than num f num c for grade num num and grade numw numw or greater than num f num c for grade numw numw requench and temper according to the producing mills standard practice and test to verify restoration of specified properties .
do not heat grade hps numw hps numw to a temperature greater than num f num c. requenching and tempering is not required for grade hps numw hps numw steel heated to this limit .
section num num table num minimum coldbending radiinum grade kips per square inch megapascals thickness t t ¾ inch t num mm ¾ inch t num inch num mm t num mm num inch t num inches num mm t num mm t num inches t num mm num num numt numt numt numt num num nums nums numw numw or hps numw hps numw numt numt numt numt hps numw hps numw numt numt numt numt num num numt numt numt numt numw numw numt numt numt numt num values shown are for the concave face of the metal bent perpendicular to the direction of final rolling .
if the bend is parallel to the direction of final rolling multiply the minimum radii shown by num that is numt perpendicular to rolling equates to numt parallel to rolling .
c stiffener fit .
fabricate mill grind or weld girder end bearing stiffeners and concentrated load bearing stiffeners to provide full bearing on the flanges to which the load is transmitted or received .
fabricate intermediate stiffeners to provide a tight fit against the compression flange .
d abutting joints .
mill or saw cut abutting joints in truss and column compression members to obtain a square joint and uniform bearing .
other joints not required to be faced may have openings up to ⅜ inch num millimeters .
e bearing surface facing .
finish bearing surfaces according to table num and asme bnum surface roughness waviness and lay part i .
table num asme surface roughness values bearing surface surface roughness value µin µm steel slabs num num heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded num num milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers num num bridge rollers and rockers num num pins and pin holes num num sliding bearings num num machine sliding bearings with a surface roughness greater than num microinches num micrometers so the lay of the cut is parallel to the direction of movement .
section num num fabricate bearing parts to provide uniform even contact with the adjacent bearing surface .
limit the maximum gap between bearing surfaces to num inches num millimeter .
machine the base plate sliding surfaces if the plane and true base and sole plates exceed the surface roughness value of table num .
do not machine surfaces of fabricated assemblies until heat treatment and fabrication on the assembly is complete .
f straightening material .
straighten plates angles other shapes and builtup members using methods that do not fracture or damage the metal when approved by the co. use mechanical means or a limited amount of localized heat when approved by the co. do not exceed the temperatures shown in table num and control the heat application with temperatureindicating crayons liquids or bimetal thermometers .
remove external forces from the material to be straightened except for the mechanical stress designed to be used in conjunction with the heat .
table num maximum straightening temperatures material to be straightened maximum temperature grade hps numw grade hps numw num f num c grade numw grade numw num f num c other steels num f num c num annealing and stress relieving .
normalize and anneal full annealing according to astm anum .
maintain uniform temperatures throughout the furnace during the heating and cooling so the temperature at no two points on the member differs by more than num f num c. record each furnace charge identify the pieces in the charge and show the temperatures and schedule used .
provide proper instruments including recording pyrometers for determining member temperatures .
provide records of the treatment operation for approval .
do not anneal or normalize hps numw hps numw or hps numw hps numw steel members without approval .
see table num for the maximum stress relieving holding temperature for these grades .
stress relieve members such as bridge shoes pedestals or other parts that are builtup by welding sections of plate together according to subsection num of aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
num bolt holes .
punch or drill bolt holes .
if required below either subpunch or subdrill holes num inch num millimeters smaller than the nominal bolt diameter and after assembling ream or drill full size .
a punched holes .
unless subpunching and reaming is required by subsection numh punch material forming parts of a member with no more than num metal thicknesses if the material thickness is no greater than num ¾ inch num millimeters for structural steel num ⅝ inch num millimeters for highstrength steel or num ½ inch num millimeters for quenched and tempered alloy steel .
section num num punch holes num inch num millimeters larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
ream holes that require enlarging to admit bolts .
produce clean cut holes without torn or ragged edges .
b reamed or drilled holes .
subdrill and ream or drill holes fullsize where there are more than five thicknesses or where the main material is thicker than subsection numanum thru num .
assemble and securely hold together connecting parts that are being reamed or drilled and matchmark before disassembling .
where practical use twist drills twist reamers or rotobroach cutters directed by mechanical means .
ream or drill cylindrical holes num inch num millimeters larger than the nominal bolt diameter that are perpendicular to the member .
remove burrs on the outside surfaces .
c accuracy of holes .
drilled or reamed holes may be up to num inch num millimeter larger than the true decimal equivalent of the nominal diameter of the drill or reamer .
punched holes may be slightly conical .
slotted holes produced by flamecutting or a combination of drilling or punching and flame cutting may be up to num inch num millimeter larger than the nominal width .
grind flame cut surfaces smooth to a maximum surface roughness of num microinches num micrometers .
d accuracy of hole group before reaming .
punch subpunch or subdrill holes to allow a cylindrical pin num inch num millimeters smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole can be inserted in holes after assembling before reaming .
in addition produce at least num percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane such that a cylindrical pin ⅛ inch num millimeters smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole can be inserted perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting .
e accuracy of hole group after reaming .
use dimensioned steel templates with hardened steel bushings in the holes .
use connection centerlines when locating templates from the milled or scribed ends of members .
produce at least num percent of the holes in a contiguous group of holes with a maximum offset of num inch num millimeter between adjacent thicknesses of metal after reaming or drilling .
f numericallycontrolled drilled field connections .
drill or punch fullsized bolt holes in unassembled pieces and connections using numericallycontrolled drilling or punching equipment .
g holes for ribbed bolts turned bolts or other approved bearingtype bolts .
provide finished holes with a driving fit .
h preparation of field connections .
drill full size holes through all thicknesses of material assembled in proper position for field connections and field splices .
do not punch fullsize holes in longitudinal main loadcarrying members transverse floor beams or components designated as fracture critical members .
other options include the following num main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents towers each face plate girders and rigid frame connections and splice holes .
subpunch or subdrill and ream while assembled or drill full size to a steel template .
num rolled beam stringers continuous over floor beams or cross frames .
drill fullsize holes for field splices unassembled to a steel template .
num floor beam and stringer field end connection holes .
subpunch and ream while assembled or drill full size to a steel template .
section num num num cross frames lateral bracing components and the corresponding holes in connection plates between girders and cross frames or lateral components .
punch fullsize holes .
locate position and firmly bolt the template in place when reaming or drilling full size fieldconnection holes through a steel template .
use duplicates of templates used for reaming matching members or the opposite faces of a single member .
locate templates used for connections on like parts or members so that the parts or members are duplicates and require no matchmarking .
num pins and rollers .
a fabricating pins and rollers .
fabricate straight and smooth pins and rollers without flaws .
forge and anneal pins and rollers or use coldfinished carbon steel shafting for diameters less than num inches num millimeters .
slowly cool forged pins to a temperature below the critical range to prevent damage from rapid cooling .
bore a hole in the pin not less than num inches num millimeters in diameter fulllength along the pin axis before annealing .
b boring pin holes .
do not exceed the pin diameter by more than num inch num millimeters for pins num inches num millimeters or less in diameter or exceed by more than num inch num millimeter for larger pins when boring pin holes .
bore pin holes smooth straight at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each other .
produce the final surface using a finishing cut .
produce a maximum variation in the distance outsidetooutside of end holes in tension members and insidetoinside of end holes in compression members of num inch num millimeter from that specified .
bore pin holes in builtup members after the member is assembled .
c threads for bolts and pins .
conform to the asme bnum unified inch screw threads un and unr thread form class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads asme bnumm metric screw threads m profile tolerance class numg for external threads and class numh for internal threads .
provide six threads per inch num millimeters for pin ends with a diameter of num⅜ inches num millimeters or greater .
num eyebars .
provide eyebars that are straight and without twists .
limit the inclination of bars to the plane of the truss to a num percent slope .
locate pin holes on the centerline of the eyebar .
securely clamp eyebars that are to be placed sidebyside in the structure in the order they are to be placed on the pin .
bore the pin holes to the finished diameter from both ends or flame cut the pin holes at least num inches num millimeters smaller than the finished pin diameter .
simultaneously cut the edges of eyebars that lie between the transverse centerline of their pin holes with two mechanicallyoperated torches abreast of each other guided by a substantial template to prevent distortion of the plates .
use lowstress type steel die stamps to matchmark eyebars for shipment and erection .
locate stamps on the visible edge each member when the bars are nested in place on the structure .
num assemblybolting .
clean metal contact surfaces .
assemble securely pin and draw together member parts .
drill ream and bolt the assembly .
if necessary take assembly apart to remove burrs and shavings produced by the operation .
section num num assemble the members without twists bends and other deformation .
drift only enough to bring the parts into position without enlarging holes or distorting metal .
num welded connections .
conform to aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
install shear connector studs according to chapter num .
perform preproduction testing according to subsection num and inspect installed studs according to subsection num .
num preassembly of field connections .
submit method and details of preassembly for approval .
preassemble field connections of truss arch continuous beam plate girder bent tower and rigid frame main members .
use preassembly methods and details consistent with approved erection procedures and camber diagrams .
assemble girders and beams in their cambered no load condition .
when members are assembled with webs vertical support the members at intervals of num feet num meters or twotenths of the span length whichever is less .
when the webs are horizontal support intervals may be increased provided there is no noticeable deflection between points of support .
assemble trusses in full deadload position unless the design of the structure provides for secondary stresses created by the fully cambered assembly .
start assembly from a location in the structure and proceed in one or both directions .
support trusses at each panel point .
preassemble at least three contiguous panels .
for successive assemblies include at least one section or panel of the previous assembly plus two or more sections or panels added at the advancing end .
for structures longer than num feet num meters make each assembly at least num feet num meters long .
verify the geometry of the completed structure or unit .
verify or prepare field splices .
a bolted connections .
where applicable assemble major components with milled ends of compression members in full bearing .
while assembled ream subsized holes to the specified size .
b check assemblynumericallycontrolled drilling .
make a check assembly for each major structural type of each project based on proposed order of erection joints in bearings special complex points or similar considerations .
assemble at least three contiguous shop sections .
for trusses assemble members in at least three contiguous panels but not less than the number of panels associated with three contiguous chord lengths such as the length between field splices .
other shop assemblies are not required .
obtain approval of each assembly before reaming holes or dismantling the assembly .
inaccurate camber alignment hole alignment milled joint fit or other problems may require additional check assemblies .
c fieldwelded connections .
do not field weld connections unless specifically shown on the drawings .
verify the fit of members including the proper space between abutting flanges with the segment preassembled .
d match marking .
match mark connecting parts preassembled in the shop to ensure proper fit in the field .
provide a diagram showing matchmarks .
section num num num connections using unfinished turned or ribbed bolts .
use bolts conforming to astm anum grade a with single selflocking nuts or double nuts .
use beveled washers where bearing faces have a slope more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
a turned bolts .
furnish hex headed bolts of the nominal size specified with a body surface ansi roughness less than num microinches num micrometers .
ream holes to provide for a light driving fit .
keep bolt threads outside of the holes .
provide a washer under the hexagonal nut .
b ribbed bolts .
furnish round headed bolts conforming to asme bnum round head bolts inch series asme bnumm bolts metric round head short square neck with continuous longitudinal ribs .
provide a body diameter measured on a circle through the points of the ribs num inch num millimeters greater than the nominal diameter specified for the bolts .
furnish hexagonal nuts that are either recessed or have a washer of suitable thickness .
ream holes to provide for a driving fit .
ream the hole and provide an oversized replacement bolt if the ribs compress or deform allowing the bolt to twist before drawing tight .
num connections using highstrength bolts .
a bolted parts .
use only steel material within the grip of the bolt with no compressible material such as gaskets or insulation .
fabricate steel parts to fit solidly together after bolts are stressed .
remove burrs that prevent solid seating .
limit the slope between the bolted surface and the plane normal to the bolt axis to num. b surface conditions .
clean dirt foreign material and scale except tight mill scale from joint surfaces at the time of assembly .
remove paint including inadvertent overspray from areas within the bolt pattern .
in noncoated joints exclude or remove paint closer than num inch num millimeters or one bolt diameter whichever is larger from the edge of holes .
c installation .
use fasteners of the same lot number for each connection .
protect fasteners from dirt and moisture .
only remove the fasteners from protected storage that are to be installed and tensioned during a work shift .
return unused fasteners to protected storage at the end of the shift .
do not remove asdelivered lubricant from fasteners .
discard and replace fasteners for slipcritical connections that accumulate rust or dirt before installing .
provide a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or other acceptable bolt tension measuring device .
use the measuring device to perform the rotationalcapacity test and to confirm the following table num requirement for the complete fastener assembly calibration of the wrenches if applicable and understanding and proper use of the tightening method .
section num num table num minimum fastener tensionnum nominal bolt diameter nominal bolt diameter and thread pitch astm anum pounds kilonewtons astm anum pounds kilonewtons ½ inch mnum num num num num num ⅝ inch mnum num num num num num ¾ inch mnum num num num num num num inch mnum num num num num num num inch mnum num num num num num num⅛ inch mnum num num num num num num¼ inch mnum num num num num num num⅜ inch mnum num num num num num num equal to num percent of the specified minimum tensile strength of bolts as specified for tests of full size astm anum and anum bolts with unc threads metric coarse thread series ansi bnumm loaded in axial tension rounded to the nearest num pounds num kilonewton .
for short grip bolts perform the calibrated wrench verification test using a direct tension indicator with solid plates .
check the direct tension indicator with a longer grip bolt in the tension measuring device before testing short grip bolts .
conform to subsection numcnum through num as applicable for confirming testing frequency number of tests and test procedure .
provide documentation of annual testing by an approved testing agency confirming the accuracy of the tension measuring device .
install fasteners with specified washers in properly aligned holes .
tension using methods in subsection numcnum through num to the minimum tension specified in table num .
when it is impractical to turn the nut tension the fastener by turning the bolt while preventing the nut from rotating when approved by the co .
provide adequate capacity and sufficient air to tension each bolt in about num seconds if impact wrenches are used .
do not reuse astm anum fasteners and galvanized astm anum fasteners .
if approved nongalvanized astm anum bolts may be reused once .
touching up or retorqueing previously tensioned bolts which may have been loosened by the tensioning of adjacent bolts will not be considered reuse provided the tensioning continues from the initial position and does not require greater rotation than that shown in table num .
section num num table num nut rotation from the snugtight conditionnum bolt length measured from underside of head to end of bolt geometry of outer faces of bolted parts both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num bevel washer not used both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis bevel washers not used up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameternum num turn num turn num turn num applicable only to connections where all material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
num nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
the tolerance is minus num plus num for bolts installed by onehalf turn or less .
the tolerance is minus num plus num for bolts installed by twothird turn or more .
num determine the required rotation by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating the actual conditions .
num rotationalcapacity tests .
use washers even if not required in the actual installation .
perform jobsite rotationalcapacity tests for fastener assemblies according to astm anum and the following a tighten the fastener to a snugtight condition according to subsection numcnum .
use the bolt tension measuring device to tighten the fastener two times the required turns shown in table num if impact wrenches are used .
b verify the maximum recorded tension is at least num times the minimum fastener tension shown in table num .
record the tension and torque .
c verify the measured torque at the maximum recorded tension does not exceed the value obtained by the following equation torqueusc numpd torquemetric numpd where torque measured torque in footpounds newtonmeters p maximum recorded tension in pounds newtons d nominal bolt diameter in feet meters num washers .
conform to astm fnum .
use a hardened beveled washer where the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope greater than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
section num num use hardened square or rectangular beveled washers for american standard beams and channels .
if necessary clip washers on one side to within seveneighths times the bolt diameter measured from the washer center .
hardened washers are not required for connections using astm anum and astm anum bolts except under the following conditions a use a hardened washer under the turned element when the tensioning is done by the calibrated wrench method .
b use a hardened washer under both the head and the nut when a num bolts are installed in material having a specified yield point less than num kips per square inch num megapascals .
c use a hardened washer conforming to astm fnum where astm anum bolts of any diameter or astm anum bolts equal to or less than numinch mnum diameter are installed in oversize or shortslotted holes in an outer ply .
d use numinch nummillimeter minimum thickness hardened washers conforming to astm fnum under both the head and the nut instead of standard thickness hardened washers where astm anum bolts larger than numinch mnum diameter are installed in oversize or short slotted holes in an outer ply .
do not use multiple hardened washers with a combined thickness equal to or greater than num inch num millimeters to satisfy this requirement .
e use a numinch nummillimeter minimum thickness plate washer or continuous bar where astm anum bolts of any diameter or astm anum bolts equal to or less than numinch mnum diameter are installed in a longslotted hole in an outer ply .
provide a structural grade steel bar or plate washer that need not be hardened with standard holes and of sufficient size to cover the slot .
f use a numinch nummillimeter minimum thickness hardened washer conforming to astm fnum under both the head and the nut instead of washers or bars of structural grade material where astm anum bolts larger than numinch mnum diameter are installed in long slotted holes in an outer ply .
do not use multiple hardened washers with a combined thickness equal to or greater than num inch num millimeters to satisfy this requirement .
alternate design fasteners that provide a bearing circle on the head or nut of at least the diameter of an astm fnum hardened washer may be used without washers .
num turnofnut installation method .
install bolts in connection holes and pull the plies to firm contact throughout the connection .
tighten bolts snugtight beginning with the most rigid part of the connection and proceeding to the free edges .
verify that plies are in firm contact throughout the connection .
apply the rotation shown in table num beginning with bolts in most rigid part of the connection and proceeding to the free edges .
do not allow rotation of the fastener part not turned by the wrench .
use a bolt tensionmeasuring device at the start of work to verify that the tension on at least three fastener assemblies for each bolt diameter length and grade is at least num percent greater than the tension shown in table num .
periodically test other fastener assemblies when required by the co .
section num num num calibrated wrench installation method .
install bolts with hardened washers under the turned element and pull the plies to firm contact throughout the connection .
tighten bolts snugtight beginning with the most rigid part of the connection and proceeding to the free edges .
set a calibrated wrench to deliver the torque required to produce a bolt tension at least num percent greater than the tension shown in table num .
use the calibrated wrench to tension bolts beginning with the most rigid part of the connection and proceeding to the free edges .
touch up previously tensioned bolts until bolts are tensioned to the prescribed amount .
use a bolt tensionmeasuring devise at least once each shift to verify the tension on the fastener assemblies installed .
test at least three fastener assemblies of each bolt diameter length and grade installed in that shift .
recalibrate a wrench when the prescribed tension is not achieved or when a significant difference is noted in the surface condition of the bolts threads nuts or washers .
when tightening from a snugtight condition verify that the wrench adjustment selected by the calibration does not produce a nut or bolt head rotation greater than permitted in table num .
torque nuts in the tightening direction when measuring the torque using manual torque wrenches .
num direct tension indicator dti installation method .
use dtis conforming to astm fnum and installed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
position the dti under the stationary element or place a hardened washer between the dti and the turned element .
install bolts with dtis and required hardened washers and pull the plies to firm contact throughout the connection while holding the stationary element against rotation .
remove and replace all dtis where the number of spaces in which a num inches num millimeters feeler gage is refused in the dti exceeds the number listed in the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications table .
for uncoated dtis used under a stationary or turned element and for coated galvanized painted or epoxycoated dtis used under a stationary element further tension the bolts until the number of refusals of the num inches num millimeters feeler gage is equal to or greater than the number listed in the aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications table .
remove and replace bolts that are tensioned so that no visible gap remains .
for coated dtis used under a turned element further tension the bolts until all spaces verify that the num inches num millimeters feeler gage shows refusal in all spaces .
verify the tension in a calibrated bolttension measuring device .
use a special flat insert in place of the normal bolt head holding insert .
perform three verification tests for each combination of fastener assembly rotationalcapacity lot dti lot and dti position relative to the turned element bolt head or nut to be used on the project .
install the fastener assembly in the tensionmeasuring device with the dti located in the same position as in the work .
restrain the element intended to be stationary bolt or nut from rotation .
conduct verification tests in two stages according to aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications table .
num alternate design bolt installation method .
when approved furnish alternate fasteners that meet the material manufacturing and chemical composition requirements of astm anum or astm anum and a meet the mechanical property requirements of the same specification in fullsize tests and section num num b have body diameter and bearing areas under the head and nut or their equivalent not less than those provided by a bolt and nut of the same nominal dimension .
install alternate design bolts in connection holes according to the manufacturers recommendations and pull the plies to firm contact throughout the connection .
tighten bolts snugtight without yielding or fracturing the control or indicator element of the fastener .
further tension fasteners beginning with bolts in most rigid part of the connection and proceeding to the free edges .
proper tensioning of the bolts may require more than a single cycle of systematic partial tensioning .
replace individual fastener assemblies if yielding or fracture occurs before the final tensioning cycle .
verify the tension according to subsection numcnum num or num .
num inspection .
inspect the tensioned fasteners in the presence of the co .
replace or retension loose or relaxed fasteners .
cutting with a torch is not permitted for removal of fasteners .
a nonthreaded fasteners .
ping each fastener with a hammer to test for soundness .
b threaded fasteners .
use an inspection torque wrench to verify tensioning unless alternate fasteners or dti devices are used allowing verification by other methods .
calibrate the inspection torque wrench at least once each inspection day .
individually place three fastener assemblies of the same grade size and condition as those under inspection in a device calibrated to measure bolt tension .
use a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt if washers are used on the structure .
use the same material that abuts the part turned in the tension measuring device as used on the structure if washers are not used on the structure .
in the calibration device tighten each bolt to the specified tension .
apply the inspecting wrench to the tightened bolt to determine the torque required to turn the nut or head num degrees approximately num inch at a numinch num millimeters at a nummillimeter radius in the tightening direction .
use the average of the torque required for all three bolts as the jobinspection torque .
randomly select num percent at least two of the tensioned bolts on the structure in each connection represented by the test bolts .
apply the jobinspection torque to each selected bolt with the inspecting wrench turned in the tensioning direction .
if this torque turns no bolt head or nut the fastener is properly tensioned .
if the torque turns one or more bolt heads or nuts apply the jobinspection torque to all bolts in the connection .
retorque and reinspect fasteners whose head or nut turns .
num welding .
conform to aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm for welding welder qualifications prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds .
for tubular connections conform to aws structural welding code steel dnum dnumm section num part d. do not weld or tack brackets clips shipping devices or other nonrequired material to members unless shown on the drawings .
num erection .
conform to section num for falsework and forms .
use steel erectors certified under the aisc quality certification program .
a handling and storing material .
place stored material on skids above ground .
keep material clean and properly drained .
place and shore girders and beams upright .
support long members such as columns and chords on skids placed close enough together to prevent deflection damage .
section num num b bearings and anchorages .
furnish and install bridge bearings according to section num .
verify substructure concrete built under a previous contract was properly constructed before ordering material for the superstructure .
c erection procedures .
num conformance to drawings .
erect according to approved drawings .
submit revised drawings and verification of stresses and geometry for modifications to or deviations from the approved erection procedure for approval .
num erection stresses .
allow for erection stresses locked in the structure as a result of erection methods or equipment that differ from those previously approved .
provide additional material necessary to keep both temporary and final stresses within the allowable limits used in the design .
provide temporary bracing or stiffening devices to accommodate handling stresses in individual members or segments .
num maintaining alignment and camber .
support structural segments to produce the proper alignment and camber in the completed structure .
install cross frames and diagonal bracing during erection to provide stability and ensure correct geometry .
provide temporary bracing at any stage of erection .
d field assembly .
clean bearing surfaces and permanent contact surfaces .
assemble material as shown on the drawings and matchmarks .
do not hammer damage or distort members .
assemble splices and field connections with at least half the holes filled with fittingup bolts and cylindrical erection pins before installing and tightening the balance of the highstrength bolts .
use fittingup bolts that are the same highstrength bolts used in the installation or other bolts of the same nominal diameter .
use cylindrical erection pins with a diameter num inch num millimeter larger than the bolts .
fill at least a quarter of the holes with fittingup bolts and at least another quarter with erection pins .
place pins in the corner holes of the splice plates .
fill at least threefourths of the holes of splices and connections carrying traffic .
systematically remove fittingup bolts and cylindrical erection pins and replace them with tightened highstrength bolts .
start from the most rigid part of connection and proceed to the free edges .
release temporary erection supports at a splice or connection only after bolts are installed and tightened .
show special assembly and support situations on the erection drawings .
e pin connections .
use pilot and driving nuts when driving pins .
drive pins so that the members fully bear on the pins .
screw pin nuts tight and burr the threads at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
f misfits .
correct minor misfits using small amounts of reaming cutting grinding and chipping .
remove and replace members misfit due to shop fabrication error or deformation during handling or transporting .
num acceptance .
material except bearing devices and painting for steel structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of structural steel steel forgings and highstrength bolts nuts and washers .
section num num construction of steel structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
painting will be evaluated under section num .
bearing devices will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure structural steel computed according to aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
include metal items incidental to the structure and specified in the contract .
when measurement is by contract quantity changes in quantities resulting from alternative details proposed by the contractor and accepted as a part of the drawings are not subject to adjustment according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
bridge railing description num this work consists of furnishing erecting removing and resetting bridge railing .
bridge railing is designated as concrete steel aluminum or timber according to the predominant material contained in the railing .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections aluminum alloy for bridge rail num aluminum bolt heads and nuts num aluminum welding wire num box beam rail numb painting num reinforcing steel num steel structures num structural concrete num timber structures num construction requirements num general .
accurately place anchor bolts to provide correct and true alignment of the railing .
set anchor bolts so that they project not more than ⅜ inch num millimeters beyond the nut when tightened .
chamfer or round by grinding or filing sharp exposed metal edges .
do not erect railing until centering or falsework for the supporting span is removed .
construct bridge railing so that it does not follow unevenness in the curb sidewalk or wall that supports the railing .
install railing to present a smooth and uniform appearance in its final position .
set posts vertical .
num concrete railing .
see section num .
num steel railing .
see section num .
num aluminum railing .
see section num except as amended by the following a cutting .
material that is ½ inch num millimeters thick or less may be cut by shearing sawing or milling .
saw or mill material that is over ½ inch num millimeters thick .
do not flame cut .
make cut edges true smooth and without excessive burrs or ragged breaks .
fillet reentrant cuts by drilling before cutting .
b bending .
material may be heated to a maximum num f num c for a period not to exceed num minutes to facilitate bending .
section num num c rivet and bolt holes .
drill rivet and bolt holes to finished size or subpunch smaller than the nominal diameter of the fastener and ream to size .
subpunch to a diameter that is smaller than that of the finished hole by at least onequarter the thickness of the piece .
make the finished diameter of holes not more than num percent greater than the nominal diameter of the fastener except num fabricate slotted bolt holes as required and num fabricate anchor bolt holes up to num percent larger not to exceed ½ inch num millimeters larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
d welding .
weld according to aws structural welding code aluminum dnum dnumm .
e contact with other material .
protect aluminum alloys that contact other material as follows num aluminum alloys in contact with other metals .
coat the contacting surfaces with dielectric aluminumimpregnated caulking compound or place a synthetic rubber gasket between the surfaces .
num aluminum alloys in contact with stone or concrete .
a where a bond is not required .
coat the contacting surfaces with aluminumimpregnated caulking compound or with heavy bituminous paint pigmented with aluminum powder or paste .
b where a bond is required .
coat the contacting aluminum surface with zincchromate paint .
allow paint to dry before installation .
num aluminum alloys in contact with wood .
coat the contacting wood surface with three coats of paint according to section num and coat the contacting aluminum surface with aluminumimpregnated caulking compound .
num timber railing .
see section num .
num remove and reset bridge railing .
remove and store the existing bridge railings and appurtenances .
replace railings supports and hardware damaged during removal storage or resetting .
num painting .
when required by the contract paint according to section num .
num acceptance .
material except concrete painting reinforcing steel structural steel and timber for bridge railings will be evaluated under section num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of bridge railing .
concrete will be evaluated under section num except compressive strength will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of bridge railings will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
reinforcing steel will be evaluated under section num .
structural steel will be evaluated under section num .
timber will be evaluated under section num .
section num num painting will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
timber structures description num this work consists of fabricating treating erecting and painting structural timber .
this work also includes required lumber and hardware .
material num conform to the following section and subsections galvanized coatings drains num hardware num painting num structural carbon steel drains numa structural glued laminated timber num treated structural timber and lumber num untreated structural timber and lumber num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
use slings or other devices to protect the corners of heavy timbers and banded packages of lighter timber .
cut and form lumber and timber so joints have even bearing over their entire contact surface .
do not use shims in making joints .
close all joints .
drive nail and spike heads flush with the wood surface .
use the same end face and edge of the timber member for all layout dimensions .
bore holes from mating faces .
num storing material .
store material in an area cleared of weeds rubbish or other objectionable material .
elevate material at least num inches num millimeters above the ground .
provide sufficient support to prevent sagging .
openstack untreated material to shed water .
allow for free air circulation by stacking material in layers on stickers that extend across the full width of the stack .
align stickers vertically and space them at regular intervals .
closestack treated material to shed water .
protect material from the elements .
use waterresistant paper or opaque polyethylene film if material is be covered .
do not use impervious membranes such as polyethylene film during dry weather .
slit or puncture individual wrappings full length on the lower side to permit water drainage .
store and protect glued laminated timber according to the aitc num recommended practice for protection of structural glued laminated timber during transit storage and erection .
section num num num holes for drift pins dowels bolts and lag screws .
bore holes before preservative treatment .
bore holes for round drift pins and dowels to a diameter num inch num millimeter less than the diameter of the pin or dowel .
bore holes for square drift pins and dowels to a diameter equal to the side dimension of the pin or dowel .
bore holes for galvanized bolts to a diameter num inch num millimeter larger than the diameter of the bolt .
bore holes for lag screws according to subsection num. of the aitc timber construction manual .
num treating timber .
indicate the preservative used penetration in inches millimeters retention in pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter assay method .
cut frame and bore timbers before treatment when practical .
do not cut or bore timber below the highwater mark in coastal waters .
handle treated timber according to the awpa published consumer information sheet .
do not drip or spill preservative into the aquatic environment or onto the ground .
handle treated timbers to prevent damage to their surfaces .
do not use cant dogs hooks or pike poles .
field treat cuts or abrasions with preservative .
dip soak spray or apply three brush coats of the same preservative according to awpa mnum standard for the care of preservativetreated wood products .
impregnate holes bored after treatment with the same preservative using tools suitable for proper application .
plug unused holes with the same treated timber .
num hardware .
galvanize hardware and fasteners including nails spikes bolts washers and timber connectors .
do not galvanize malleable iron or cast iron hardware .
use washers under bolt heads and nuts in contact with wood .
use malleable iron washers with a diameter approximately three times the bolt diameter .
use cast iron washers when the timber is in contact with the ground .
use square washers only when specified .
cut off excess bolt lengths of more than num inch num millimeters .
after final tightening check or burr bolts with a pointing tool to prevent loosening of the nuts .
num countersinking .
countersink screws bolts and nuts where required .
treat countersunk recesses with an approved preservative before filling except in railings .
fill the recess with hot pitch or other approved filler after bolts screws and nuts are in place .
num framing .
do not slab or trim treated piles when fitting sway or sash braces .
securely fasten braces to smaller piles using treated blocks to fill the gaps .
num framing bents .
firmly and evenly bed mud blocks to solid bearing .
tamp in place .
when concrete is cast set dowels for anchoring sills and posts to project at least num inches num millimeters above the tops of the pedestals .
finish concrete pedestals supporting framed bents so that sills or posts bear evenly on the pedestals .
section num num make sills bear evenly and true on mud blocks piles or pedestals .
bolt sills into place with drift bolts that extend into the mud blocks or piles for at least num inches num millimeters .
where possible remove material in contact with sills for circulation of air around the sills .
num bent caps .
make timber caps bear evenly and uniformly over the tops of aligned supporting posts or piles .
secure caps with drift bolts extending at least num inches num millimeters into the approximate center of each post or pile .
num bracing .
bolt the ends of bracing through the pile post cap or sill .
brace intermediate intersections with posts or piles with bolts and spikes with wire or boat spikes as required .
use galvanized spikes in addition to bolts .
make bracing bear firmly against the pile or cap to which it is bolted .
provide and place shims as necessary to prevent bending of the bracing more than num inch num millimeters out of true when bracing bolts are tightened .
where the space between the bracing and cap or pile is a less than num inch num millimeters shims are not needed b num½½ inches num millimeters place two ogee washers with their narrow faces together or other approved washers on each bolt that passes through the space or c over num inches num millimeters use wooden shims of the proper thickness .
fabricate the wooden shims from the same treated wood used in the structure or white oak .
do not use builtup wooden shims .
make wooden shims from a single piece of lumber with the width not less than num inches num millimeters and the length not less than the width of the bracing measured along the cap or pile .
do not adze trim or cut treated members to avoid the use of shims .
num stringers .
size stringers at bearings .
position stringers so knots near edges are in the top portion of the stringer .
outside stringers may have butt joints with ends cut on a taper .
lap interior stringers so both stringer ends have full length bearing on a floor beam or cap .
stagger joints where stringers are two panels in length .
separate lapped ends of untreated stringers by at least ½ inch num millimeters for air circulation .
use drift bolts to securely fasten the lapped ends .
place crossbridging at the center of each span .
cut crossbridging members to provide full bearing on the stinger sides at each end .
securely toenail the crossbridging with at least two nails in each end .
if blocking is used make it fit snugly and securely .
num plank floors .
use plank that is surfaced on four sides snums .
singleply timber floors consist of a single thickness of planks supported on stringers .
grade plank thickness so no two adjacent planks vary in thickness by more than ⅛ inch num millimeters .
lay the planks heart side down with ¼ inch num millimeters space between them for dry seasoned material and with no joint space for unseasoned material .
spike each plank securely to each stringer .
twoply timber floors consist of two layers of flooring supported on stringers .
treat the lower layer according to subsection num .
lay the top layer either diagonally or parallel to the roadway centerline .
section num num stagger joints at least num inches num millimeters .
securely fasten each top layer member to the lower layer .
where the top layer is placed parallel to the centerline of the roadway use special care to securely fasten the ends of the flooring .
bevel the ends of top layer members at each end of the structure .
num transversely nail laminated decks .
use numinch nummillimeter nominal thickness laminations surface one edge hit or miss ⅛ inch num millimeters scant snumeh or m ⅛inch nummillimeter scant and one side hit or miss ⅛ inch num millimeters scant snumsh or m ⅛inch nummillimeter scant .
place the laminations on edge and at right angles to the centerline of roadway .
attach each piece to the preceding piece using galvanized spikes of sufficient length to pass through two pieces and at least halfway through the third piece .
drive spikes at each end and at approximately numinch nummillimeter intervals alternately diving near the top and bottom edges .
where timber stringers are used use spikes to toenail every other piece to every other stringer .
when steel stringers are used securely attach the pieces using approved galvanized metal clips .
use pieces of sufficient length to bear on at least four stringers .
do not splice pieces between stringers .
space end joints on a stringer no closer than every third piece .
space end joints in adjoining pieces no closer than every second stringer .
num glue laminated panel decks .
when handling and transporting avoid bending panels especially transverse to the laminated pieces .
when lifting a panel support it at a sufficient number of points .
do not drag or skid panels .
protect the panel edges from damage .
when dowels are used between panels use a template or drilling jig to properly space dowel holes .
drill holes the same diameter as the dowel and ¼ inch num millimeters deeper than one half the dowel length .
slightly taper or round dowel tips and lubricate dowels to facilitate the connection process .
start the tips of the dowels partially and equally in the holes of the panels to be joined .
draw the panels together keeping the edges parallel until the panels abut tightly .
securely fasten each panel to each stringer .
num wheel guards and railings .
surface snums wheel guards rails and posts .
place wheel guards in not less than numfoot nummeter lengths .
squarely buttjoint rails at posts .
num trusses .
avoid irregularities in alignment .
in horizontal projection fabricate chords straight and true from endtoend .
in vertical projection fabricate chords to a smooth corded curve through panel points conforming to the correct camber .
make bearing surfaces fit accurately .
do not make uneven or rough cuts at the points of bearing .
num painting .
when required by the contract paint according to section num .
num acceptance .
material for timber structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of structural timber and lumber .
if treated indicate the preservative used penetration inches millimeters retention in pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter assay method and the best management practice used in treating timber members .
construction of timber structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
painting will be evaluated under section num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring untreated and treated structural timber and lumber by the thousand board feet measure cubic meters measure in the structure .
compute the quantities from nominal dimensions and actual lengths except for transversely nail laminated decks and glue laminated panel decks .
measure transversely nail laminated decks and glue laminated panel decks in place after dressing .
measure timber piles under section num .
measure timber bridge rail under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
dampproofing description num this work consists of dampproofing concrete or masonry surfaces .
material num conform to the following subsections asphalt numb primer numa construction requirements num dampproofing .
cure the concrete or masonry surface according to subsection num except do not use liquid membrane curing compound .
allow concrete surface to dry at least num days after completion of curing .
apply dampproofing to a dry clean reasonably smooth surface that is free of dust and loose material .
apply dampproofing in dry weather when the air and surface temperatures are num f num c or higher .
apply primer to the surface and allow it to dry .
apply two coats of asphalt at the rate of approximately num pounds per num square feet num kilograms per square meter of surface per coat .
apply prime coat and asphalt coats uniformly fully covering the surface and thoroughly work them into the surface .
make the total of the final two asphalt coats approximately num inch num millimeters thick .
allow asphalt coats to harden before allowing contact with water or backfill material .
num acceptance .
material for dampproofing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
applying dampproofing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
waterproofing description num this work consists of waterproofing concrete surfaces .
waterproofing consists of inplace membrane or preformed membrane systems .
material num conform to the following subsections asphalt numb asphalt roll roofing nume mastic numd primer numa sealants fillers and seals num waterproofing fabric numc construction requirements num general .
store waterproof fabric in a dry and protected place .
do not store rolls standing on end .
ensure the concrete surface is free of projections or depressions that might cause puncture of the membrane .
clean the concrete surface of dust and loose material .
do not place membranes on wet concrete .
do not place membrane on new concrete until at least num days after completion of the concrete curing process as defined in subsection num .
apply waterproofing in dry weather when the temperature is above num f num c and rising .
apply primer and membrane beginning at the lowest point of the work .
num inplace membrane system .
stir asphalt frequently as it is heated to a temperature between num and num f num and num c. apply hot asphalt at a rate not less than num gallons per num square feet num liters per square meter on finished horizontal surface and not less than num gallons per num square feet num liters per square meter on vertical surface .
ensure placed fabric is mopped by end of shift .
prevent water from getting between the waterproofing and the waterproofed surface at the edges and at openings in the membrane for drains and pipes .
provide flashing at curbs and against girders spandrel walls and other area with separate sheets that lap the main membrane at least num inches num millimeters .
seal flashing with either a metal counterflashing or by embedding the upper edges of the flashing in a groove joint filler .
section num num provide horizontal and vertical expansion joints with sheet copper or lead in a u or v form .
fill the joint with hot joint filler after the membrane has been placed .
carry the membrane continuously across expansion joints .
for joints that are essentially open joints but are not designed to provide for expansion pack the joint with oakum and fill with hotpoured joint filler before placing the membrane .
at the ends of a structure carry the membrane down the fill face of the abutment and provide for movement .
install material as follows a apply a coat of primer and allow to dry b mop a coat of hot asphalt slightly wider than half the width of waterproof fabric and cover the entire area of concrete c immediately roll a starter strip of halfwidth waterproof fabric into the asphalt .
press the waterproof fabric into place to rid it of air bubbles and to conform it closely to the surface d mop hot asphalt over the top of the starter strip to completely conceal the weave and an adjoining section of concrete surface slightly wider than half the fabric width e immediately roll a fullwidth strip of fabric into the fresh asphalt pressing it into place as before f mop this second strip and an adjoining section of concrete surface slightly wider than half the fabric width g place a third strip of fabric to lap the first strip by not less than num inches num millimeters .
continue this process of lapping each strip of fabric at least num inches num millimeters over the strip placed before the last strip until the entire surface is covered with num layers of fabric .
lap the ends at least num inches num millimeters .
do not allow the fabric to touch an unmopped surface and h mop the entire surface with hot asphalt after all waterproof fabric has been placed .
ensure laps are sealed .
repair or replace waterproofing that leaks .
use patches extending at least num inches num millimeters beyond the outermost damaged portion and extend the second ply at least num inches num millimeters beyond the first .
apply protective covering according to subsection num .
num preformed membrane system .
preformed membrane systems consist of a primer applied to the prepared surface and a single layer of adhering preformed membrane sheet .
a prime application .
install oilresistant adhesivebacked construction paper to mask expansion dams or headers .
section num num thoroughly mix and apply primer by spray or squeegee to the entire area to be sealed .
apply the neoprenebased primer in one coat at a rate of approximately num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
apply resin or solventbased primer in one coat at a rate of approximately num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
continuously agitate the primer during application .
b membrane installation .
place the membrane continuously over masked areas .
place the membrane on neoprenebased primers within num hours resinbased primers within num hours and solventbased primers within num hours of placing the primer .
if this time is exceeded reapply the primer .
place the membrane by hand or by mechanical methods .
lap membrane sheets in the direction of water flow .
num bridge decks .
a install a numinch nummillimeter minimum width strip along the juncture of deck and base of barrier railing or curb face at the low side of the deck with the sheet extending up the face num inches num millimeters b starting at the gutter line lay sheets longitudinally and side lapped with adjacent sheets by not less than num½ inches num millimeters and end lapped by not less than num inches num millimeters c place a numinch nummillimeter minimum width strip at the juncture of deck and base of curb or railing at the high side of the deck extending up the face num inches num millimeters .
d at open joints at deck bleeder pipes and at other locations as needed cut the membrane sheet and turn into the joint or bleeder as the sheet is being laid and e for rubberized asphalt sheets and modified bitumen sheets apply mastic as a bead along the exposed edge of the membrane sheet that extends up the barrier railing or curb face and that ends in the highside gutter .
num surfaces other than bridge decks .
conform to subsection numbnum and the following a place membrane vertically with each successive sheet lapped to the preceding by at least num inches num millimeters b lap horizontal splices by at least num inches num millimeters c place a troweled bead of manufacturers recommended mastic or sealing tape along exposed edges of the installed membrane d flash projecting pipe conduits sleeves or other facilities passing through the preformed membrane waterproofing and e use prefabricated or fieldfabricated boots fitted coverings or other devices as necessary to provide watertight construction .
roll the surface with hand rollers or other apparatus as necessary to develop a firm and uniform bond with the primer and minimizes wrinkles and air bubbles .
section num num patch tears cuts or narrow overlaps using a satisfactory adhesive and by placing sections of membrane sheet over the defective area such that the patch extends at least num inches num millimeters beyond the defect .
on modified bitumen sheets with a permanent polyester film use a propane torch to melt the polyester film on the section to be patched then place the patch over the heated surface .
press or roll patches firmly onto the surface .
apply a protective coving .
num protective coving .
apply a protective covering immediately after waterproofing to prevent damage to the membrane from sunlight weather traffic or construction operations .
for waterproofed surfaces against which backfill will be placed cover the membrane with ⅛ inch num millimeters thick hardboard or other approved material .
num alternate membrane systems .
submit for approval waterproofing membrane systems from the state department of transportations qualified products list qpl that complies with the maximum profile grade and superelevations shown in the plans .
construct alternate membrane systems according to the manufacturers recommendations and as approved by the co. num overlay placement .
limit traffic on the membrane to necessary construction equipment and emergency vehicles .
for roadway surfaces of bridge decks place a protective layer of asphalt concrete pavement as specified .
place the overlay continuously over masked areas and subsequently cut at or near the expansion joint after the overlay is in place .
place a hot asphalt concrete overlay within num hours after placing the membrane .
do not windrow asphalt concrete on the membrane ahead of the paving machine .
do not use an asphalt concrete pickup machine .
do not turn equipment on the membrane to avoid membrane movement and damage .
avoid abrupt starts and stops .
sweep the membrane surface before placing the overlay .
repair damaged areas on the membrane before commencing overlay placement .
apply a light tack coat according to section num before placing the overlay .
limit the laydown temperature of the mix to a maximum of num ºf num ºc .
num acceptance .
material for waterproofing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
applying of waterproofing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
removal of concrete by hydrodemolition description num this work consists of removing concrete with high pressure water jets .
material num conform to the following subsection water numc construction requirements num submittal .
submit the following for approval by the co a sequence and schedule of work b concrete removal procedures and c list of equipment to be used .
num general .
furnish water required to operate the hydrodemolition equipment .
protect adjacent property from dislodged concrete during operations .
construct debris shields to prevent debris and wastewater from entering waterways travel lanes open to public traffic or areas designated not to be disturbed .
use filtering methods to ensure wastewater is free of concrete particles and sediment .
dispose of wastewater and debris off the project according to subsection num .
num equipment .
a hydrodemolition system .
furnish a selfpropelled and completely programmable hydrodemolition system designed for concrete removal as specified .
calibrate equipment to specific project parameters before beginning hydrodemolition production work .
if hydrodemolition equipment can not be calibrated to the satisfaction of the co remove equipment and provide another hydrodemolition system .
adjust equipment at the beginning of each day on an area of representative concrete designated by the co before commencing operations .
verify settings will remove concrete as specified .
adjust settings as necessary to achieve the desired removal of concrete .
recalibrate during the work if parameters change such as degree of concrete deterioration or the concrete strength changes .
section num num record the following settings and notify the co num water pressure gauge num water usage in gallons liters per minute num machine staging control step feet meters per minute forward travel num nozzle size num nozzle speed revolutions per minute num transverse nozzle travel speed .
only applicable if hydrodemolition nozzle is not fixed and moves transversely on a track between stops before staging to the next step .
report transverse nozzle travel speed in feet meters per second and num effective pass width of hydrodemolition unit .
effective pass width is defined as the width of hydrodemolition that has uniform pressure water and dwell time per machine staging control step .
report effective width in feet meters .
b vacuum system .
furnish a vacuum system equipped with num fugitive dust control devices capable of removing wet debris and water in the same pass and num a pressurized washing system capable of cleaning the concrete surface during the vacuum operation to dislodge debris and slurry .
num concrete removal .
remove concrete as follows a shallow concrete removal for deck scarification .
if a hydrodemolition machine is used for concrete scarification in preparation for a deck overlay clean the deck by an approved method of water blasting with num pounds per square inch num kilopascals minimum pressure until sound concrete is exposed .
scarify to the depth shown in the plans .
if no depth is shown remove at least ¼ inch num millimeters of material .
b concrete cover removal .
for planned removal of concrete or removal of unsound or deteriorated concrete remove concrete to the depth shown in the plans or down to sound concrete .
provide at least num inch num millimeters below the bottom of the exposed reinforcing steel .
when removing unsound concrete be careful to remove only to the depth that sound concrete is encountered provided it meets the at least num inch num millimeters below the bottom of the reinforcing steel .
do not damage remaining sound concrete or reinforcing steel .
when the bond between existing concrete and reinforcing steel is destroyed remove the concrete adjacent to the reinforcing steel to a depth that permits new concrete to bond to the reinforcing steel .
remove loose and unsound concrete resulting from the hydrodemolition operations below the minimum depth .
verify concrete removal as necessary or at least every num feet num meters along the cutting path .
section num num in areas inaccessible to the hydrodemolition equipment use approved handheld water blasting equipment or powerdriven hand tools such as jack hammers mechanical chipping tools or chipping hammers .
do use jack hammers heavier than nominal num pound num kilogram class and chipping hammers heavier than num pound num kilogram class .
operate mechanically driven tools at a maximum angle of num degrees from the concrete surface .
if necessary use hand tools such as hammers and chisels to remove the final particles of concrete to achieve the required depth .
leave a rough surface after the concrete is removed .
immediately remove residue water dust and concrete to prevent rebonding to the surface or reinforcing steel .
num reinforcing steel .
do not cut or damage reinforcing steel designated to remain .
use methods acceptable to the co to repair or replace reinforcing steel damaged by operations .
inspect the reinforcement with the co after the concrete has been removed .
replace reinforcing steel by tying new reinforcing steel to the existing reinforcing steel when more than num percent of its section is lost .
if the deteriorated portion of the reinforcing steel is closer to the edge of the patch than the overlap distance designated in the plans extend the limits of the patch to provide the required overlap distance with acceptable reinforcing steel .
provide a minimum numinch nummillimeter clearance between the ends of new reinforcing steel and the existing slab face .
match the number type and spacing of the new reinforcement steel to the existing reinforcing steel .
num surface preparation .
before placing new concrete clean the concrete surface and exposed reinforcing steel of rust loose and rebounded material and other contaminants that may inhibit bonding with new concrete .
if compressed air is used provide a filter in the air line to ensure that the air delivered is oilfree .
protect the steel and surface from contamination until the new concrete is placed .
num acceptance .
removal of concrete by hydrodemolition will be evaluated under subsection num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
structural concrete injection and crack repair description num this work consists of repairing cracks in concrete structures by injecting epoxy into the cracks .
material num conform to the following subsection epoxy resin adhesives num polymer concrete and mortar num construction requirements num crack preparation .
notify the co at least num days before beginning work .
the co will identify work areas and mark the cracks to be repaired .
submit the following for approval num days before beginning work a personnel qualifications b the manufacturers recommended material and c describe the material to be used including the properties of each material and the specifications to which the material comply .
an injection procedure for performing the work .
remove dirt laitance and other debris from the exterior and interior of the crack .
apply a temporary surface seal material to the face of the crack .
use a surface seal material with sufficient strength and adhesion to confine the injected epoxy resin adhesive until cured .
provide openings entry ports in the surface seal along the crack .
make the distance between entry ports at least the thickness of the concrete member being repaired .
num injection procedure .
maintain the epoxy resin adhesive component mix ratio within num percent by volume as prescribed by the manufacturer .
do not use solvents to thin the epoxy .
use positive inline displacement type equipment to meter mix and inject the epoxy at pressures not to exceed num pounds per square inch num kilopascals .
begin injecting epoxy at the lowest entry port .
continue the injection at the first port until epoxy flows from the next highest port .
plug the first port and inject epoxy into the second port until epoxy flows from the next highest port .
continue this sequence until the entire crack is filled .
perform the following tests for each injection unit at the beginning and at the end of each day the unit is used .
section num num a ratio check test .
disconnect the mixing head of the injection equipment .
pump the two adhesive components through a ratio check device having two independent valved nozzles capable of controlling the flow rate and back pressure by opening or closing the valves .
use a pressure gauge capable of sensing back pressure behind each valve .
adjust the discharge pressure to num pounds per square inch num kilopascals for both epoxy components .
simultaneously discharge both epoxy components into separate calibrated containers .
compare the discharged quantities to determine the mix ratio .
after the test is completed at num pounds per square inch num kilopascals discharge pressure repeat the procedures for num pounds per square inch num kilopascals discharge pressure .
b pressure check test .
disconnect the mixing head of the injection equipment .
attach the two adhesive component delivery lines to a pressure check device having two independent valved nozzles capable of controlling the flow rate and pressure by opening or closing the valves .
use a pressure gauge capable of sensing the pressure buildup behind each valve .
close the valves on the pressurecheck device and operate the equipment until the gauge pressure on each line reads num pounds per square inch num kilopascals .
stop the pumps and check that the gauge pressure does not drop below num pounds per square inch num kilopascals within num minutes .
c records .
maintain and make available complete and accurate records of the ratio and pressure check tests .
additional ratio and pressure check tests may be required .
num coring .
take one numinch nummillimenter diameter test core according to aashto t num for every num feet num meters of repaired crack at designated locations .
the crack repair is acceptable when the epoxy bonding has penetrated at least num percent of the crack volume within the core sample .
when a test core is unacceptable redo that numfoot nummeter crack segment or the segment that the core represents and resample .
repeat this procedure until acceptable crack repair is achieved .
num finishing .
remove the surface seal and fill sample core holes with polymer concrete and mortar .
finish the face of the crack the entry ports and the core holes flush with the adjacent surface and finish the surface to match the adjacent concrete .
num traffic control .
provide traffic control beginning with the application of epoxy paste surface seal .
continue providing traffic control for num hours after completion of the crack injection work or until the injected epoxy resin adhesive has reached a compressive strength of at least num pounds per square inch num megapascals whichever is less .
provide traffic control to slow traffic to a maximum speed of num miles num kilometers per hour .
for bridge deck repairs stage traffic so that the edge of the nearest travel lane is no closer than the center of the adjacent girder unless specified in the contract .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for structural concrete injection and crack repair will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
structural concrete injection and crack repair work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks daily startup shutdown testing epoxy resin adhesive process control num ratio check mix subsection numa daily before starting work and after ending work injection unit no subsection numc pressure check subsection numb production epoxy resin adhesive measured and tested for conformance num penetration of material into crack subsection num num core for every num feet num meters of repaired crack length inplace after epoxy resin injection completed no upon completion of test section num num section num .
temporary works description num this work consists of the design construction inspection maintenance and removal of temporary works for the construction and repair of permanent structures .
this work also includes temporary facilities used in construction that do not become part of the permanent structure .
material num select material consistent with the safety and quality required by the design assumptions .
furnish factory fabricated components of vertical shoring towers according to fhwardnum certification program for bridge temporary works .
design requirements num design .
design temporary works that will support loads imposed and provide the necessary rigidity to produce the lines and grades shown in the plans for the final structure .
design temporary works according to the aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge design specifications or aashto guide design specifications for bridge temporary works .
ensure the design load on manufactured devices is within the load rating recommended by the manufacturer .
design falsework and forms that support deck slabs and overhangs on girder bridges to ensure no differential settlement between the girders and the deck forms during placement of deck concrete .
limit the calculated deflections of falsework and formwork members for castinplace concrete structures as follows a falsework member vertical deflection num of the span under the dead load of the concrete only regardless of the fact that deflection may be compensated for by camber strips b formwork other than sheathing num of the span under the dead load of the concrete only or the lateral pressure of fluid concrete only and c formwork sheathing ⅛ inch num millimeters or num of the centertocenter distance between studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales .
design falsework and forms for concrete supported on steel structures to ensure loads are applied to girder webs within num inches num millimeters of a flange or stiffener .
distribute the loads in a manner that does not produce local distortion of the web .
brace or tie exterior girders upon which overhanging bridge deck falsework brackets are hung to the adjacent interior girders as necessary to prevent rotation of exterior girders or overstressing the exterior girder web .
submit foundation design calculations and other relevant foundation design data for approval .
do not use deck overhang form brackets that require holes to be cast or drilled into the bridge girders .
section num num do not apply loads to existing new or partially completed structures in excess of the load carrying capacity of any part of the structure as determined according to aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
do not use permanent or stayinplace deck forms unless specified .
num drawings .
submit drawings according to subsection num .
furnish design calculations and supporting data in sufficient detail to permit a structural and safety review of the proposed design .
show information to allow the design of components to be checked independently .
provide catalog or equivalent data indicating a manufactured devices recommended safe load capacity .
indicate the proposed sequence rate of placement direction of placement and location of construction joints when concrete placement is involved .
show anticipated total settlements and deflections of the falsework and forms .
include falsework footing settlements joint takeup and deflection of beams or girders .
submit the erection procedure and temporary support system for steel girder erection .
include calculations in sufficient detail to substantiate that the girder geometry is correct .
provide supporting calculations showing the falsework design accommodates the erection procedure without over stressing the structural steel and produces the required final structural geometry intended continuity and structural action .
construction requirements num foundations .
determine the allowable bearing capacity of the foundation material on which the supports for temporary works will rest .
perform load tests to verify proposed bearing capacity values that are in doubt marginal or in other high risk situations .
specified foundation support values for the permanent structure may be used in the design of falsework foundations provided foundations are at the same elevation and on the same soil as those of the permanent structure .
if temporary works are to be supported on temporary fill construct the fill according to section num and verify the bearing capacity of the placed material .
do not locate the edge of footings closer than num inches num millimeters from the intersection of the bench and the top of the slope .
do not locate the edge of the footings closer than num inches num millimeters or the depth of excavation whichever is greater from the edge of excavation unless shoring adequately supports the footing excavation .
provide adequate site drainage and erosion control protection to ensure the integrity of the foundation material for the temporary works supports .
if piles are used capacities may be estimated and later confirmed during construction using standard procedures based on the driving characteristics of the pile .
use the dynamic formula according to section num to determine ultimate pile capacity in the absence of more sophisticated methods of determining pile capacity .
the contractor may use load tests to confirm the estimated capacities .
perform load tests to verify proposed bearing capacity values that are in doubt marginal or in other high risk situations .
num construction .
construct temporary works according to the approved drawings and the aashto construction handbook for bridge temporary works .
use material and workmanship consistent with that assumed in the design of the temporary works .
section num num do not weld or use driven devices to fasten temporary works to portions of the permanent structure unless shown on the approved drawings .
furnish and place form panels for exposed surfaces in uniform widths of not less than num inches num millimeters and in uniform lengths of not less than num feet num meters except where the width of the member formed is less than num inches num millimeters .
arrange panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure .
place panels for vertical surfaces with the long dimension horizontal and with horizontal joints level and continuous .
place panels with the long dimension parallel to the footing for walls with sloping footings and that do not abut other walls .
align form panels on each side of the panel joint by supports or fasteners common to both panels .
devices may be cast into the concrete for later use in supporting forms or for lifting precast members .
do not use driven devices for fastening forms or form supports to concrete .
use form ties consisting of form bolts clamps or other devices necessary to prevent spreading of the forms during concrete placement .
do not use form ties consisting of twisted wire loops .
make the angle points for chords in wall stems fall at vertical rustication joints when architectural treatment is required .
form exposed curved surfaces to follow the shape of the curve except on retaining walls that follow a horizontal curve .
the wall stems may be a series of short chords if all of the following apply a chords within the panel are the same length b chords do not vary from a true curve by more than ½ inch num millimeters at any point and c all panel points are on the true curve .
provide telltales with surveyed measurements or other acceptable means for accurate measurement of falsework settlement .
do not use the ground surface near falsework supports as a reference elevation .
record settlement to the nearest ⅛ inch num millimeters during concrete placement .
discontinue concrete placement and take corrective action if settlement or deflections occur that deviate more than ⅜ inch num millimeters from those shown on the falsework drawings .
if satisfactory corrective action is not taken before initial set remove unacceptable concrete .
num maintenance and inspection .
inspect and maintain temporary works in an acceptable condition .
clearly mark the capacity on each manufactured component according to fhwardnum .
perform an indepth inspection of the temporary works in the presence of the co not more than num hours before beginning each concrete placement or before allowing people to enter a cofferdam or excavation support structure .
perform inspections and provide certifications according to fhwardnum .
submit written results of the inspections before a placing concrete b allowing people to enter a cofferdam or excavation support structure or c loading temporary works .
section num num inspect other temporary works at least once a month to ensure they are functioning properly .
use a professional engineer to inspect cofferdams shoring support of excavation structures and support systems for load tests before loading .
include a certification that the system meets the requirements .
num removal .
remove temporary works except as follows a portions of driven falsework piles that are more than num inches num millimeters below subgrade within roadbeds num inches num millimeters below the original ground or finished grade outside of roadbeds or num inches num millimeters below the established limits of a navigation channel b footing forms where their removal would damage the structural integrity of the cofferdams or other work and c forms from enclosed cells where access is not provided .
remove temporary works as to permit the structure to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own deadload .
remove temporary works upon completion of the work unless permitted to remain .
do not disturb or damage the finished work .
remove debris and restore the area to its original or planned condition .
the removed temporary works remain the property of the contractor .
after the concrete has been in place for num hours removal of railing and barrier forms and forms that do not support the dead load of concrete members is permitted .
do not remove forms until the concrete has reached at least num pounds per square inch num megapascals strength and in a manner that produces no damage to the surface .
cure concrete according to subsection num when forms are removed less than num days after concrete placement .
do not remove forms supporting the dead load of concrete members until the concrete has reached num percent of the design compressive strength and has been in place for at least num days .
do not remove falsework supporting any span of a simple span bridge until the concrete excluding concrete above the bridge deck has reached num percent of the design compressive strength and has been inplace at least num days .
do not remove falsework supporting any span of a continuous or rigid frame bridge until the concrete in that span and in the adjacent portions of each adjoining span for a length equal to at least onehalf the length of the span where the falsework is to be released meets the requirements for simple span bridges .
do not release falsework for posttensioned portions of structures until the prestressing steel has been tensioned .
remove falsework for arch bridges uniformly and gradually .
begin at the crown and work toward the springing points .
remove falsework for adjacent arch spans simultaneously .
section num num install a reshoring system if falsework supporting the sides of girder stems with slopes steeper than numvnumh are removed before placing deck slab concrete .
design the reshoring system with lateral supports which resist rotational forces acting on the stem including those caused by the placement of deck slab concrete .
install the lateral supports immediately after each form panel is removed and before release of supports for the adjacent form panel .
num acceptance .
temporary works will be evaluated under subsections num num and num .
measurement and payment num do not measure temporary works for payment .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
painting description num this work consists of removing and applying paint .
material num conform to the following section and subsection paint num water numa construction requirements num qualifications .
provide the following a painting contractors certified according to sspc qpnum certification field application to complex industrial and marine structures sspc qpnum certification program field removal of hazardous coatings or sspc qpnum certification program shop painting certification program as appropriate for the work .
when painting more than num square feet num square meters of steel surface demonstrate qualifications by obtaining sspc qp num certification for field painting or either sspc qp num certification or the aisc sophisticated paint endorsement spe for shop painting .
maintain the qualification throughout the work .
notify the co if the qualification expires or is revoked .
b competent personnel according to sspc qp num with the following num sspc competent person certificate num certificate of completion of num cfr num lead in construction training num minimum of num years industrial field painting experience and num minimum of num days of field supervisory or management experience in paint removal projects .
num submittals .
submit a written plan for approval at least num days before beginning work that details the measures to be used for protecting the environment public adjacent property and workers .
include the following a manufacturers msds and product data sheets for cleaning and painting products .
b a detailed containment plan for removed material cleaning products and paint .
design and construct safe containment structures that will support the loads imposed .
do not apply loads to the existing structure in excess of the load carrying capacity of any part of the structure .
include details of attachment .
make connections that do not require welding or drilling holes in the existing structure .
make connections with clamps or other approved devices .
submit working drawings and construction details according to subsection num .
section num num c a detailed disposal plan for removed material used cleaning products and paint debris .
d specific safety measures to protect workers from site hazards including falls fumes fires or explosions .
e if paint being removed is a hazardous material include specific safety measures to comply with num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num and num cfr parts num .
document compliance upon request .
f emergency spill procedures .
g certifications and experience according to subsection num .
num protection of public property and workers .
comply with sspcpa guide num guide to safety and health requirements for industrial painting projects and osha requirements .
if a hazardous material containing lead or chromium is removed comply with the following a sspc guide num guide for containing surface preparation debris generated during paint removal operations b sspc guide num guide to the disposal of leadcontaminated surface preparation debris c num cfr num lead osha safety and health regulations for construction d num cfr num epa national primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for pmnum epa e num cfr num epa national primary and secondary ambient air quality standards for lead and f num u.s.c .
num resource conservation and recovery act rcra .
collect and dispose of material including waste water that is used in preparing cleaning or painting according to subsection num .
num protection of the work .
use tarps screens paper cloth or other suitable means to protect adjacent surfaces that are not to be painted .
prevent contamination of freshly painted surfaces by dust oil grease or other harmful or deleterious material .
num general .
perform work according to the accepted plan in subsection num .
stop work and take corrective action if the measures fail to perform as intended .
a surface preparation .
notify the co at least num days before beginning operations .
perform the following num remove dirt dust and other contaminants from the surface using methods recommended by the paint manufacture and num clean the surface to the specified cleanliness level .
section num num b paint .
conform to the following num handling and storing material .
use safe handling practices conforming to the manufacturers msds and product data sheets .
store paint in original unopened containers with labels intact and in weathertight spaces where temperature is maintained between num and num f num and num c. do not open paint containers until required for application that day .
do not use paint from a punctured container or from a container with its lid seal broken .
do not use paint with an expired shelf life .
mix paint according to the manufacturers recommendations .
mix paint with mechanical mixers for sufficient time to thoroughly blend the pigment and solvent together .
continue the mixing during application .
do not thin paint that is formulated ready for application .
strain paint after mixing except where application equipment is provided with strainers .
use strainers of a size to remove only skins and undesirable matter but not to remove the pigment .
where a skin has formed in the container cut the skin loose from the sides of the container and remove and discard it .
if the volume of the skin is visually estimated to be more than num percent of the remaining paint discard the paint .
num surface preparation and weather limitations .
thoroughly dry the surface to be painted .
if no information is provided apply paint when a the surface temperature is between num and num ºf num and num ºc b the surface temperature is num ºf num ºc or more above the dew point according to astm dnum and c the humidity is num percent or less unless specified otherwise on the manufacturers product data sheets .
provide a controlled environment to meet requirements when necessary .
num application .
apply paint according to the manufacturers recommendations .
apply paint by brush spray roller or combination of methods permitted by the manufacturers product data sheet .
a brushes .
use brushes with sufficient bristle body and length to spread the paint in a uniform film .
use round oval shaped brushes or flat brushes no wider than num½ inches num millimeters .
evenly spread and thoroughly brush out the paint as it is applied .
b sprayers .
use airless or conventional spray equipment with suitable traps filters or separators to exclude oil and water from the compressed air .
use compressed air that does not show black or wet spots when tested according to astm dnum .
use the spray gun tip sizes and pressures recommended by the manufacturer .
c rollers .
select rollers and covers suitable for the surface and paint to be applied .
use rollers only on flat even surfaces .
do not use rollers that leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
use sheepskin daubers bottle brushes or other acceptable methods to paint surfaces that are inaccessible for painting by regular means .
paint in a neat and workmanlike manner that does not produce excessive paint buildup runs sags skips holidays or thin areas in the paint film .
correct thin areas skips holidays and other deficiencies before the next application of paint .
tint succeeding applications of paint to contrast with the paint being covered .
obtain color approval for the finish coat before application .
section num num paint surfaces that will be inaccessible after erection with the full number of undercoats required before erection .
after erection thoroughly clean areas where the undercoating is damaged or deteriorated and spot coat these with the specified undercoats to the required thickness before applying the final coat .
measure the wet film thickness during application and adjust the application rate to obtain the required dry film thickness .
num curing .
cure each coat of paint according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num structural iron and steel .
a surface preparation .
num new surfaces or surfaces with existing paint removed .
remove dirt mill scale rust and other foreign material from exposed surfaces by blast cleaning to near white metal according to sspcsp numnace no .
num nearwhite blast cleaning .
prepare surfaces inaccessible to nearwhite metal blast cleaning according to sspcsp num power tool cleaning to bare metal .
use compressed air without oil or moisture when tested according to astm dnum .
do not use unwashed sand or abrasives that contain salts dirt oil or other foreign matter .
protect machinery sealed bearings journals motors and moving parts against entry of abrasive dust .
blast clean with clean dry slag mineral grit steel shot or steel grit .
use a suitable gradation to produce a dense uniform anchor pattern .
produce an anchor profile height of num to num mils num to num micrometers but not less than that recommended by the paint system manufacturers product data sheet .
measure anchor profile height according to astm dnum method c. remove dirt dust and other debris from the surface by vacuuming or other approved methods .
apply primer to bare metal surfaces within three days of cleaning .
repeat the blast cleaning if the cleaned surfaces rust or become contaminated before painting .
num surfaces with existing sound paint .
do not remove sound paint unless specified .
protect adjacent areas of work from damage .
clean visible oil grease and road tar according to sspc sp num solvent cleaning .
prepare surfaces according to a nace wjnumsspcsp wjnum waterjet cleaning of metals clean to bare substrate wjnum or b sspcsp numnace no .
num brushoff blast cleaning .
prepare surfaces inaccessible to water jetting or brushoff blasting according to sspcsp num commercial grade power tool cleaning .
num surface with unsound paint .
perform spot abrasive blast cleaning according to sspcsp num commercial blast cleaning .
provide a sharp angular surface profile by an abrasive blasting procedure .
produce a minimum profile of num mil num micrometers or the paint manufacturers recommendation whichever is greater .
extend the prepared area at least num inches num millimeters into adjacent tightly adhering intact coating .
section num num feather edges of tightly adherent existing paint to produce a smooth appearance when repainting the surface .
repeat solvent and surface cleaning if surfaces rust or become contaminated before painting .
before painting clean surfaces and staging areas with a vacuum or other approved methods .
b paint application .
apply each coat to the wet film thickness as recommended by the paint manufacturer to obtain the specified dry film thickness .
verify the application rate of each coat with a wet film paint thickness gauge immediately after applying paint to the surface .
confirm the application rate by measuring the dry film thickness after the solvent has evaporated from the surface .
num new surfaces or surfaces with existing paint removed .
furnish a paint system shown in table num .
table num structural iron and steel painting systems for new surfaces or surfaces with existing paint removed paint system primer intermediate finish num num aggressive environments salt zincrich paint sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry epoxypolyamide sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry aliphatic polyurethane sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry num num aggressive environments salt zincrich moisturecured polyurethane sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry zincrich moisturecured polyurethane sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry moisturecured polyurethane sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry num num less aggressive environments no salt latex primer sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry latex sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry latex sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry num paint systems num or num are for the corrosion protection of iron and steel in aggressively corrosive atmospheric environments such as marine industrial high humidity or structures exposed to deicing salts .
num paint system num is for use in those environments without high concentrations of salts or pollutants that cause aggressive corrosion environments .
section num num num surfaces with existing sound paint .
furnish a paint system shown in table num .
table num structural iron and steel painting systems for surfaces with existing sound paint paint system primer num intermediate finish num num aggressive environments salt moisturecured polyurethane sspcpaint num or num num num mils dry num num µm dry moisturecured polyurethane sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry moisturecured aliphatic polyurethane sspcpaint num or aliphatic polyurethane sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry num num aggressive environments salt epoxy polyamide sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry epoxypolyamide sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry epoxypolyamide sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry num num less aggressive environments no salt zinc oxide alkyd linseed oil primer sspcpaint num type ii num num mils dry num num µm dry alkyd sspcpaint num num num mils dry num num µm dry silicone alkyd sspcpaint num type ii num num mils dry num num µm dry num use primer only on areas where paint is removed to bare metal .
otherwise apply only intermediate and finish paints .
num paint systems num or num are for the corrosion protection of iron and steel in aggressively corrosive atmospheric environments such as marine industrial high humidity or structures exposed to deicing salts .
num paint system num is for use in those environments without high concentrations of salts or pollutants that cause aggressive corrosion environments .
verify the compatibility of the proposed system with the existing system as follows a select a test area of at least num square feet num square meters in a condition representative of the condition of the structure .
perform the specified level of surface preparation and apply the proposed system to the existing topcoat and to the existing primer .
perform tests according to astm dnum .
observe for lifting bleeding blistering wrinkling cracking flaking or other evidence of incompatibility .
b verify that no indication of incompatibility exists at least num days after the application of each product .
perform adhesion tests according to astm dnum selfaligning system .
section num num notify the co if failure is due to adhesion between coating and substrate or between applied coats or cohesion failure within a coating layer .
if failure occurs choose a more compatible paint system and repeat the compatibility process .
the dry paint thickness on steel structures will be determined using a type num electronic film thickness gauge according to sspcpa num measurement of dry coating thickness with magnetic gages an ultrasonic coating thickness gage according to sspcpa num measurement of dry coating thickness on cementitious substrates or by using destructive methods according to astm dnum .
if destructive methods are used repair test locations in an approved manner .
num lumber and timber .
dry timber to a moisture content of num percent or less .
remove cracked or peeled paint loose chalky paint dirt and other foreign material on previously painted timber .
use wire brushing scraping or other approved methods .
when timber is treated with a water borne preservative wash and brush away visible salt crystals on the wood surface .
allow wood to dry before painting .
remove dust or other foreign material from the surface just before painting .
furnish a paint system shown in table num .
the primer may be applied before erection .
fill cracks checks nail holes or other depressions flush with the surface using approved putty after the primer dries and the timber is in place .
evenly spread and thoroughly work the paint into corners and recesses .
allow the full thickness of the applied coat of paint to dry before applying the next coat .
section num num table num paint for other structural material substrate primer intermediate finish lumber timber dressed surface exterior alkydoil wood primer mpi num num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry lumber timber rough surface exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry masonry block exterior latex masonry block primer mpi num num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex flat mpi num or semigloss mpi num num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex flat mpi num or semigloss mpi num num num mils dry num num µm dry concrete epoxy single coat low gloss mpi num or semigloss mpi num num num mils dry num num µm dry .
aluminum metal primer mpi num num num mils dry num num µm dry light industrial coating exterior waterbased mpi num num or num num num mils dry num num µm dry light industrial coating exterior waterbased mpi num num or num num num mils dry num num µm dry other metals metal primer num num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry exterior latex mpi num or alkydoil mpi num wood primer num num mils dry num num µm dry num for galvanized surfaces use a vinyl wash primer sspcpaint num num to num mil num to num micrometers dry thickness .
num masonry block and concrete structures .
remove laitance dust or other deleterious material from the concrete surface .
give the cleaned surface a light abrasive sweep to remove mortar wash or other contaminants .
remove residue and dust by vacuuming or other approved methods .
furnish a paint system shown in table num .
evenly spread and thoroughly work the paint into corners and recesses .
allow the full thickness of the applied coat of paint to dry before applying the next coat .
num other metals .
furnish the paint system shown in table num. a aluminum .
prepare aluminum surfaces to be painted according to astm dnum .
use the type of treatment and method of preparation appropriate to the condition of the surface and paint to be applied .
b galvanized surfaces .
prepare galvanized surfaces to be painted according to astm dnum .
use the method of preparation appropriate to the condition of the surface to be painted newly galvanized partially weathered or weathered galvanized steel .
section num num num acceptance .
paint material will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
sample paint according to astm dnum .
test paint properties according to fedstd numd paint varnish lacquer and related materials methods of inspection sampling and testing if required .
surface preparation will be evaluated under subsection num .
painting application will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
bearing devices description num this work consists of furnishing and installing bridge bearings .
bearing devices are designated as elastomeric rocker roller and sliding plate .
material num conform to the following section and subsections bearings elastomeric plain or laminated numa bolts and nuts threaded anchor bolts numd galvanized coatings num nonshrink grout numb polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe surfaces for bearings num steel structures rocker roller and sliding bearings num construction requirements num general .
a drawings .
submit drawings according to subsection num and section num of the aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge construction specification .
show details of bearings including material proposed for use .
do not begin fabrication until drawings are approved by the co. b fabrication .
fabricate bearings according to section num of aashto lrfd bridge construction specification .
finish bearing components surfaces in contact with each other or with concrete but not embedded in concrete according to subsection nume .
preassemble bearing assemblies and check for proper completeness and geometry .
galvanize steel bearing components and anchor bolts .
do not galvanize stainless steel bearing components or anchor bolts .
c packaging handling and storing material .
clearly identify each bearing component and mark on its top the location and orientation in the structure before shipping .
securely bolt strap or otherwise fasten bearings to prevent relative movement .
package bearings to prevent damage during shipping handling or storing .
do not dismantle bearing assemblies onsite unless necessary for inspection or installation .
dismantle under the direct supervision or with the approval of the manufacturer .
furnish a listing of all individual bearing numbers .
store bearing devices to prevent damage from weather or other hazards .
section num num d construction and installation .
clean bearings of deleterious material .
install and set bearings to the dimensions shown on the drawings or prescribed by the manufacturer .
adjust bearings according to the manufacturers instructions to compensate for installation temperature and future movements .
set bearings level at the elevation and position shown on the drawings .
provide full and even bearing on all external bearing contact surfaces .
notify the co if bearing surfaces are at improper elevations not level or if bearings can not be set properly .
submit a written proposal to modify the installation for approval .
bed metallic bearing assemblies on concrete with an approved filler or fabric material when not embedded in concrete .
set elastomeric bearing pads directly on properly prepared concrete surfaces without bedding material .
machine bearing surfaces seated directly on steel to provide a level and planar bearing surface .
num elastomeric bearings .
fabricate comply with testing and acceptance criteria and mark elastomeric bearings according to aashto m num .
test and accept bearings specified by hardness and designed according to method a of aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge design specifications according to appendix xnum of aashto m num instead of section num full size bearing test .
place bearings on a level surface .
correct misalignments in the support to form a level surface .
do not weld steel girders or base plates to the exterior plates of the bearing unless there is more than num½ inches num millimeters of steel between the weld and elastomer .
do not expose the elastomer or elastomer bond to instantaneous temperatures greater than num f num c. num rocker roller and sliding plate bearings .
fabricate and finish rocker roller and sliding plate bearings according to section num .
remove burrs rough and sharp edges and other flaws .
stress relieve rocker roller and other bearings that are built up by welding sections of plate together before boring straightening or final machining .
thoroughly coat contact surfaces with oil and graphite before placing roller bearings .
install rocker roller and sliding bearings vertically at the specified mean temperature after release of falsework and after shortening due to prestressing forces .
account for variations from mean temperature of the supported span at time of installation and other anticipated changes in length of the supported span .
ensure the superstructure has full and free movement at movable bearings .
position cylindrical bearings so their axes of rotation align and coincide with the axis of rotation of the superstructure .
num masonry sole and shim plates for bearings .
provide metal plates conforming to aashto m num grade num num .
fabricate and finish steel according to section num .
form holes in bearing plates by drilling punching or controlled oxygen cutting .
remove burrs by grinding .
set bearing plates in a level position and provide a uniform bearing over the bearing contact area .
when plates are embedded in concrete make provisions to keep them in correct position as the concrete is placed .
section num num num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe surfaces for bearings .
furnish ptfe material that is factorybonded mechanically connected or recessed into the backup material .
bond or mechanically attach the fabric containing ptfe fibers to a rigid substrate .
use a fabric capable of carrying unit loads of num pounds per square inch num megapascals without cold flow .
use a fabricsubstrate bond capable of withstanding a shear force equal to num percent of the perpendicular or normal application loading plus other bearing shear forces without delamination .
use approved test methods and procedures according to section num of aashto lrfd bridge construction specification .
perform at least one material test on the material used in the sliding surface for each lot of bearings .
if required by the contract test complete bearings for complete bearing friction .
if the test facility does not permit testing of completed bearings manufacture extra bearings and prepare samples of at least numkip numkilonewton capacity at normal working stresses by sectioning the bearing .
measure the coefficient of friction between two mating surfaces .
provide test results showing the static and dynamic coefficients of friction meet the requirements for the design coefficient of friction specified in the contract or by the manufacturer for approved material .
num anchor bolts .
furnish threaded anchor bolts .
adjust bolt locations for superstructure temperature and anticipated lengthening of bottom chord or bottom flange due to dead load after setting as required .
do not restrict free movement of the superstructure at movable bearings .
preset anchor bolts before concrete placement or install anchor bolts in drilled holes after concrete placement .
drill holes num inch num millimeters in diameter greater than the bolt if nonshrink cement grout is used to secure the bolts .
follow adhesive manufacturers recommendations for holediameter if an approved chemical adhesive is used to secure the bolts .
num bedding of masonry plates .
clean the contact surfaces of the concrete and steel before placing the bedding material and installing bearings or masonry plates .
if bedding is specified place filler or fabric as bedding material under masonry plates and install it to provide full bearing on contact areas .
if bedding material is not specified comply with subsection num of aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications as directed by the co. num acceptance .
bearing devices will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of bearing devices .
bearing device installation will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
drilled shafts description num this work consists of furnishing and constructing reinforced concrete drilled shafts .
material num conform to the following section and subsections neat hydraulic cement grout numanum reinforcing steel num slurry drilling fluids num structural carbon steel casings numa structural concrete num water numa construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a crosshole sonic logging engineer onsite supervisors and installation personnel with experience installing and testing drilled shafts .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least num drilled shaft projects of similar complexity over the past num years .
include project names locations and contact information for project owners .
num construction plan .
at least num days before starting drilled shaft work submit the following according to subsection num a proposed drilled shaft construction schedule and sequence .
schedule shaft installation to avoid interconnection or damage to shafts in which placed concrete has not achieved final set .
b proposed drilling hole cleaningpreparation and reinforcementconcrete placement equipment and procedures for the ground conditions expected to be encountered .
provide specific shaft drilling and concreting procedures to mitigate problems associated with ground water surface water bodies or both .
demonstrate an understanding of the subsurface conditions at the site by referencing available subsurface data provided in the contract boring logs .
indicate procedures to minimize disturbance to the construction site or overlaying or adjacent structure or services .
discuss potential drilling difficulties and indicate methods and tooling that will be used to remove obstructions from the excavation .
c proposed drilled shaft excavation and construction methods used to ensure shaft stability during construction and reinforcementconcrete placement .
include proposed shaft drilling procedures for maintaining required horizontal and vertical shaft alignment and a disposal plan for excavated material .
if shaft casing is required provide casing dimensions and detailed procedures for permanent casing installation or temporary casing installation and removal .
section num num d proposed methods for mixing testing circulating using maintaining and disposing of slurry if used .
provide a detailed slurry mix design and its suitability to the subsurface conditions .
e details of reinforcement placement including bracing centering centralizers and lifting and support methods .
f proposed structural concrete mix design according to subsection num. g concrete placement methods including proposed operational procedures for freefall tremie or pumping methods .
h the method used to form an emergency horizontal construction joint during concrete placement .
specific guidance on installation of and construction plan requirements for drilled shafts can be found in fhwanhinum drilled shafts construction procedures and lrfd design methods .
num trial drilled shafts .
when trial drilled shafts are required perform the work according to the applicable requirements of subsection num .
before drilling holes for production shafts demonstrate that the proposed methods and equipment are adequate by drilling a trial drilled shaft adjacent to the production shafts at a location approved by the co. make the centertocenter spacing between the trial shaft and production shafts at least three shaft diameters or two bell diameters whichever is larger .
construct the trial drilled shaft to the same size and to the tip elevation of the deepest production shaft shown in the plans .
when bells are specified for production shafts include a bell in the final trial shaft to verify the feasibility of belling in the specified bearing stratum .
install casing if caving occurs or the hole deforms sufficient to encroach upon the planned placement of the reinforcement cage with specified minimum concrete cover .
seat the casing to prevent caving and to allow dewatering of the hole when required .
remove material from inside the hole .
keep casing in place at least num hours while attempting to remove all water in the hole .
record the rate of groundwater seepage into the hole .
after this num hour period fill the hole with saturated sand while the casing is removed to simulate the concreting operation and casing removal for the production drilled shafts .
concrete or reinforcing steel is not required in the trial drilled shaft .
modify methods and equipment if the trial drilled shaft does not meet performance requirements as determined by the co .
submit a new installation plan and drill a new trial shaft for approval .
num shaft drilling .
a drilling .
drill holes according to the approved installation plan .
excavate structural footings supported on drilled shafts and construct fills before initiating shaft drilling .
provide equipment and tooling with the capability to drill shafts of the specified diameter and lengths num percent longer than those specified .
position the drilled shaft within num inches num millimeters of the required position in a horizontal plane at the topofshaft elevation .
do not allow the constructed alignment of a vertical shaft to vary from the required alignment by more than ¼ inch per num inches num millimeters per num millimeters of hole depth .
section num num num boring log .
use a geologist or an engineer to maintain a boring log of material excavated from the drilled shaft .
include the following information a description and approximate top and bottom elevation of each type of soil or rock material encountered and the date and time the soil or rock material was encountered b elevation and approximate rate of seepage or groundwater encountered c equipment used to drill the shaft time required to complete the shaft bit changes breakdowns and other drilling difficulties encountered and d remarks .
num drilling methods .
use the uncased dry construction method where groundwater level and soil conditions are suitable to construct the shaft in a relatively drystable excavation and may be visually inspected before placing concrete .
use casing wet construction method or both for shafts that do not meet the requirements for the dry construction method .
a dry method .
this method consists of drilling the shaft removing accumulated water and loose material from the excavation placing the reinforcing cage and concreting the shaft in a relatively dry excavation .
the dry construction method can only be used when the excavation meets the following num less than num inches num millimeters of water accumulates above the base of the hole during a numhour period when no pumping is permitted num the sides and bottom of the hole remain stable without detrimental caving sloughing or swelling over a numhour period immediately following completion of the excavation or overreaming when approved by co and num loose material and water can be satisfactorily removed before inspection and before reinforcement and concrete placement .
b wet method .
this method consists of using water or slurry to maintain shaft stability while advancing the excavation to final depth placing the reinforcing cage and concreting the shaft .
in addition perform the following num desanding and cleaning drilling slurry num final cleaning of the excavation using a bailing bucket air lift submersible pump or other approved devices and num placing shaft concrete with a tremie or concrete pump beginning at the shaft bottom .
maintain the drilled hole to the specified nominal diameter before placing reinforcement elements and concrete .
increase the hole diameter at least ½ inch num millimeters to a maximum of num inches num millimeters when approved by the co if ground softening swelling or slurry cake buildup occurs .
case the hole use a slurry during drilling or both if the drilled hole continues to degrade and encroach upon the planned placement of the reinforcement cage with specified minimum concrete cover .
extend exterior casings from above the waterline to a subsurface elevation to protect against water action during placement and curing of the concrete when drilled shafts are located in open waters .
install the exterior casing in a manner that will provide a positive seal at the bottom of the casing to prevent piping of water or entry of other material from the shaft excavation behind the casing .
section num num remove drill cuttings other loose debris or both from the bottom of the hole upon completion of drilling .
clean the drilled hole leaving no more than ½ inch num millimeters of sediment on the bottom of the hole .
reduce the depth of accumulated water to num inches num millimeters or less before placing concrete in shafts constructed using the dry method .
do not drill additional shafts allow wheel loads vibrationinducing equipment or other construction activities within num feet num meters or num shaft diameters whichever is greater of a newly constructed shaft for at least num hours .
fill rejected drill holes with lean concrete .
b slurry .
premix slurry with potable water according to the slurry manufacturers instructions to allow for hydration before introduction into the shaft excavation .
use slurry tanks of adequate capacity for slurry circulation storage and treatment .
do not use excavated slurry pits or the shaft excavation to mix the slurry .
do not add slurry component directly into the shaft excavation .
provide desanding equipment to limit slurry sand content as specified in tables num and num at any point within the shaft .
verify sand content immediately before placing concrete .
desanding is not required for setting temporary casings sign posts or lighting mast foundations .
maintain the level of slurry in the excavation at least num feet num meters above the highest expected adjacent piezometric water pressure head for mineral slurry or num feet num meters above the highest expected piezometric water pressure head for polymer or water slurry .
stop drilling and take corrective measures when there is a sudden loss of slurry from the hole .
prevent the slurry from setting up in the shaft .
discontinue the use of slurry and use an approved alternative method if the slurry construction method fails to produce the desired results .
maintain density viscosity and ph of the mineral or polymer slurry throughout shaft excavation and concrete placement according to tables num and num .
take slurry samples using an approved sampling tool .
extract slurry samples from the base of the shaft and num feet num meters up from the base of the shaft .
perform num sets of tests during the first num hours of slurry use .
the testing frequency may be decreased to one test set for every num hours of slurry use when results are acceptable and consistent .
section num num table num acceptable range of values for mineral slurry property in hole at time of test concreting method densitynum density balance api numbnum section num pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter num num num num viscosity marsh funnel ap numbnum section num seconds per quart seconds per liter num num num num ph num num ph paper or meter sand content num max .
api numbnum section num num density values shown are for fresh water .
increase density values num pounds per cubic foot num kilograms per cubic meter for saltwater .
perform tests when slurry temperature is above numf num c. num american petroleum institute api numbnum recommended practice for field testing waterbased drilling fluids .
comply with manufacturers recommendations and table num test requirements for polymer slurry .
submit the name and telephone number of the manufacturers representative to the co. table num acceptable range of values for polymer slurry property in hole at time of test concreting method densitynum density balance api numbnum section num pounds per cubic foot kilograms per cubic meter num max .
num max .
viscosity marsh funnel ap numbnum section num seconds per quart seconds per liter num num num num ph num num ph paper or meter sand content num max .
api numbnum section num num density values shown are for fresh water .
increase density values num pounds per cubic foot num kilograms per cubic meter for saltwater .
perform tests when slurry temperature is above num f num c. num see note num in table num .
correct slurry when sample do not meet the requirements of tables num or num .
do not place concrete until the results of the resampling and retesting are approved .
section num num c casings .
install temporary casing to prevent sloughing of the top of the shaft excavation unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated to the co that surface casing is not required .
install temporary casing regardless of excavation method when sidewall conditions warrant additional stabilization or mitigation of excessive groundwater infiltration .
use smooth clean watertight steel casings of sufficient strength to withstand handling installation stresses concrete placement and surrounding earth pressures .
casing diameters are outside diameters when shown in the plans .
the diameter of a permanent casing is subject to american petroleum institute tolerances applicable to regular steel pipe .
make the outside diameter of the casing no less than the specified size of the shaft .
install casings to produce a positive seal at the bottom of the shaft to prevent piping of water or other material into or out of the excavated hole .
stabilize the excavation with slurry backfill or other methods approved by the co if it becomes necessary to remove a casing .
maintain an adequate head of water or slurry inside the casing to prevent piping or sloughing of material at the bottom of the hole when drilling below the water table .
subsurface casings are to be considered temporary unless designated as permanent casing .
remove temporary casing concurrent with concrete placement .
maintain the concrete within the casing so fluid trapped behind the casing is displaced upward and discharged at the ground surface without contaminating or displacing the shaft concrete .
temporary casings that have become bound or fouled during shaft construction and can not be practically removed are considered to be a defect in the drilled shaft .
correct defective shafts using methods approved by the co. corrective action may consist of but is not limited to the following num removing the shaft concrete and extending the shaft deeper to compensate for loss of frictional capacity in the cased zone num providing straddle shafts to compensate for capacity loss or num providing a replacement shaft .
cut permanent casing off at the required elevation and leave in place num reinforcing steel and crosshole sonic logging csl access tubes placement .
perform reinforcing steel work according to section num .
securely wire together contact reinforcing steel lap splices .
tie and support the reinforcing steel so it remains within the required tolerances .
securely tie concrete spacers or other approved spacing devices at fifth points around the cage perimeter and space at intervals not to exceed num feet num meters along the length of the cage .
use spacers of approved material at least equal in quality and durability to the shaft concrete .
install steel csl access tubes for each drilled shaft at locations specified and according to astm dnum .
extend access tubes at least num inches num millimeters above shaft top and a maximum of num inches num millimeters above shaft bottom .
use num½ inch num millimeters nominal diameter schedule num mild steel standard black pipe conforming to astm anum any grade type e type f or type s for csl access tubes .
provide a watertight end plug at the lower end of the pipe and make joints watertight .
fill the csl access tubes with potable water before placing concrete in the drilled shaft .
temporarily cap the top of the tubes to prevent debris or concrete from entering the tubes .
section num num place the reinforcing steel cage as a unit immediately after the drilled hole is inspected accepted and before concrete placement .
remove cage when directed by the co for reinspection if concrete is not placed immediately .
handle reinforcing cages in a manner to avoid distortion or racking of the steel .
provide positive support at the top for the reinforcing steel cage during concrete placement .
maintain the top of the reinforcing steel cage no more than num inches num millimeters above and no more than num inches num millimeters below the required elevation .
make acceptable corrections if the reinforcing steel cage is not maintained within tolerances .
do not construct additional shafts until the method of reinforcing steel cage support has been approved .
do not proceed with installation of subsequent shafts until csl testing has been completed on the first drilled shaft and the results have been approved in writing by the co. approval to proceed with the construction of subsequent shafts before receiving approval of the first shaft will be based on observations of workmanship during construction of the first shaft and the following a contractors conformance with the approved shaft installation plan b contractors daily reports and inspectors daily logs of excavation rebar and concrete placement and c concrete placement logs and volume curves .
the co will provide written notification to proceed with subsequent shaft construction within num hours after completion of the first shaft .
if the co determines the first shaft to be of questionable quality discontinue all shaft construction until the csl test results of the first shaft are received and reviewed and the shaft accepted in writing by the co. after the first drilled shaft has been accepted do not change construction methods equipment or material used to construct subsequent shafts unless otherwise approved .
num concrete for drilled shafts .
use a removable form or other approved means to form the shaft to at least num inches num millimeters below finished ground when the top of shaft is above ground .
forms may be removed provided the requirements in subsection num are complied with and the shaft concrete has not been exposed to saltwater or moving water for num days .
strip the forms without damaging the concrete .
remove the top portion of the drilled shaft concrete before continuing with column construction when it is determined the concrete has been affected by underwater placement .
place concrete immediately after excavation is complete and the reinforcing steel cage with csl access tubes is in place .
furnish concrete conforming to section num except class a structural concrete having a slump of num inches num millimeters for shafts constructed without drilling fluid class a structural concrete having a slump of num inches num millimeters for shafts constructed with drilling fluid and class s concrete for under water placement .
section num num do not use seal concrete above the freezethaw or wetdry zone of the hole .
place underwater concrete according to subsection nume except as modified in this section .
the method of underwater placement is subject to co approval .
adjust approved admixtures for project conditions to ensure that the concrete has the minimum required slump for at least num hours .
submit trial mix and slump loss test results for concrete at ambient temperatures appropriate for site conditions .
place each load of concrete within num hours of batching .
longer placement time may be permitted if the concrete mix maintains the minimum required slump for longer than num hours .
do not retemper concrete that has developed its initial set .
place concrete in one continuous operation from bottom to top of the shaft .
continue placing concrete after the shaft excavation is full and until acceptable quality concrete is evident at the top of shaft .
consolidate the top num feet num meters of the shaft concrete using acceptable vibratory equipment before initial concrete set .
finish the top of the shaft to within plus num to minus num inches plus num to minus num millimeters of the required elevation .
do not consolidate shaft concrete until water or slurry above the finish concrete level has been removed .
place concrete using the following methods a freefall .
use freefall placement only in dry holes .
ensure the concrete falls directly to the shaft base without contacting either the rebar cage or shaft sidewall .
drop chutes may be used to direct placement of freefall concrete .
drop chutes consist of a smooth tube of either onepiece construction or sections that can be added and removed .
support the drop chute so that the maximum height of freefall of the concrete measured from the bottom of the chute is num feet num meters .
reduce the height of freefall or rate of concrete flow into the excavation if concrete placement causes the shaft excavation to cave or slough strikes the rebar cage or sidewall .
use tremie or pumping to place the concrete if placement can not be satisfactorily accomplished by freefall placement .
b tremies .
use tremies for concrete placement in either wet or dry holes .
a tremie consists of a hopper and tube of sufficient length mass and diameter to discharge concrete at the shaft base .
do not use tremies that contain aluminum parts that will come in contact with the concrete .
furnish a tremie tube with clean and smooth inside and outside surfaces and sufficient wall thickness to prevent crimping or sharp bends .
provide tubes with an inside diameter at least six times the maximum size of aggregate used in the concrete mix but not less than num inches num millimeters .
use a watertight tremie according to subsection nume for wet holes .
construct the discharge end of the tremie to permit free radial flow of concrete during placement .
place the tremie discharge at the shaft base elevation .
place the concrete in a continuous flow .
keep the tremie discharge immersed at least num feet num meters below the surface of the fluid concrete .
maintain a positive head of concrete in the tremie at all times .
if the tremie discharge is removed from the fluid concrete column and discharges concrete above the rising concrete surface into displaced water remove the reinforcing cage and concrete complete necessary sidewall removal as directed and reconstruct the shaft .
c pumps .
use pumped concrete placement in either wet or dry holes .
use a numinch nummillimeter minimum diameter discharge tube with watertight joints .
place the discharge tube at the shaft base elevation .
section num num use a sealed discharge tube according to subsection nume for wet holes .
if a plug is used remove it from the hole or use a plug made from approved material that will prevent a defect in the shaft if not removed .
place the concrete in a continuous flow .
keep the pump discharge tube immersed at least num feet num meters below the surface of the fluid concrete .
remove the reinforcing cage and concrete if the discharge tube is removed from the fluid concrete column and discharges concrete into displaced water .
complete necessary sidewall removal as directed by the co and reconstruct the shaft .
num integrity testing .
a testing .
perform integrity testing on all production drilled shafts according to astm dnum .
test drilled shafts between num and num days after concrete placement .
furnish drilled shaft bottom and tip elevations access tube lengths surveyed tube positions and date of concrete placement before testing to the csl subcontractor and the co .
perform tests between all tube pairings in the shaft including adjacent perimeter access tubes and diagonally between tubes .
if an access tube is unacceptable for testing such as tube is not plumb tube does not retain water tube is obstructed tubeconcrete debonding has occurred drill a plumb core hole to the appropriate depth and install a fullygrouted replacement tube or propose an alternative integrity test method that is acceptable to the co. tremie fill access tubes with neat hydraulic cement grout after integrity testing inspection and data analysis are completed and accepted by the co. b test results and reporting .
submit preliminary results for each shaft tested before csl test personnel leave the site .
submit a detailed csl report to the co within num days of testing .
allow num days for the co to conduct a review of the data before continuing construction on the tested shaft and before issuing the final written report .
include the following in the csl report num project identification and dates of csl testing num table and a schematic showing shafts tested with identification of tube coordinates and collar elevation num names of personnel that performed the csl tests and interpretations and their affiliations num type of equipment used for testing num data logs and waterfall diagrams num xy plots of first arrival times amplitude and velocity versus shaft depth and num interpretations analyses and results .
identify and provide detailed discussion of each anomalous zone detected by the csl .
anomalous zones are areas where velocity reduction exceeds num percent of the average velocity of properly placed and cured shaft concrete at the time of testing .
collect and process additional data sufficient to construct threedimensional colorcoded tomographicimages with twodimensional crosssections between tubes within anomalous zones .
section num num num acceptance .
a material for drilled shafts will be evaluated as follows num slurries will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
num concrete will be evaluated under section num .
concrete tremie placed or pumped will be sampled at point of discharge into the tremie or concrete pump hopper .
num reinforcing steel will be evaluated under section num. b construction of drilled shafts will be evaluated under subsections num num and num as follows num drilled shafts exhibiting velocity reductions less than or equal to num percent of the average velocity of properly placed and cured shaft concrete at the time of testing are acceptable .
num where velocity reductions exceed num percent of the average velocity of properly placed and cured shaft concrete at the time of testing furnish additional imaging and other data required in subsection numb to enable further evaluation of the shaft .
drill at least two core holes to intercept the anomalous zone and obtain core samples from the suspect area when required by the co .
the co will evaluate the crosshole sonic logging data the tomographic imaging data and the retrieved core data and make a determination as to the presence of substantive defects .
remove and replace rejected shafts or propose alternatives according to subsection num .
submit design modifications to drilled shafts or load transfer mechanisms foundation elements and drawings according to subsection numbnum .
do not begin remedial work until drawings have been approved by the co .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure drilled shafts from the plan top elevation to the approved tip .
do not measure portions of shafts extending deeper than approved .
measure trial drilled shafts determined to be satisfactory from the approved tip elevation to the ground surface at the center of the shaft .
do not measure concrete or reinforcing steel .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the drilled shaft contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for drilled shafts will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the structural concrete compressive strength pay factor .
section num num section num .
shotcrete description num this work consists of constructing one or more courses of shotcrete on a prepared surface .
shotcrete aggregate grading is designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections airentraining admixtures wet mix only num anchorage devices num chemical admixtures wet mix only num concrete coloring agents num curing material num hydraulic cement num penetrating stain num pozzolans num reinforcing fibers num reinforcing steel num shotcrete aggregate num steel welded wire reinforcement plain for concrete numh water numa welded deformed steel wire fabric numj construction requirements num qualifications .
submit the following for approval at least num days before shotcrete operations begin a foreman .
name and a résumé describing experience in shotcrete construction on at least five projects of similar complexity .
b nozzle operator .
name and a résumé describing experience in shotcrete construction .
provide a aci nozzle operator certification for the orientations in which shotcrete will be applied and of having completed at least one similar application as a nozzle operator on a project of similar complexity .
num composition shotcrete mix design .
design and produce shotcrete mixtures that conform to table num and aci num specification for shotcrete .
verify mix design with trial mixes prepared from the same source proposed for use .
submit the following for approval at least num days before placing shotcrete a proposed shotcrete mix design with mix proportions and aggregate grading .
when applicable include air content dosage and type of admixture section num num b representative samples of shotcrete material if requested by the co .
results of shotcrete preconstruction testing demonstrating compliance with table num c proposed method for applying shotcrete d other information necessary to verify compliance with aci num e shotcrete material certifications f fiber samples if used and g description of proposed equipment for mixing and applying shotcrete .
include the manufacturers instructions recommendations literature performance and test data .
in addition conform to the equipment requirements in aci num guide to shotcrete and include the following num water supply system .
for dry mix provide a job site water storage tank .
provide a positive displacement pump with a regulating valve that is accurately controlled to provide water at the required pressure and volume .
num mixing .
use equipment capable of handling and applying shotcrete containing the specified maximum size aggregate and admixtures .
provide an air hose and blow pipe to clear dust and rebound during shotcrete application .
num hydration stabilizing admixtures .
when hydration stabilizing admixtures are used include admixtures in the shotcrete mix design .
base dosage on the time needed to delay the initial set of the shotcrete for delivery and discharge on the job .
include the design discharge time limit in the dosage submittal .
the maximum allowable design discharge time is num½ hours .
use an approved and compatible hydration activator at the discharge site to ensure proper placement and testing .
determine dosage required to stabilize shotcrete using job site material and field trial mixtures .
the extendedset admixture will control the hydration of cement minerals and gypsum .
when requested provide the service of a qualified person from the admixture manufacturer to assist in establishing the proper dose of extendedset admixture and to make dosage adjustments required to meet changing job site conditions .
section num num table num composition and property requirements of shotcrete mixtures type of shotcrete process minimum cement content lbydnum kgmnum maximum water cementitious material ratio air content minimum numday compressive strength fc psi mpa num num maximum boiling absorption num maximum permeable void volumenum num maximum mean core gradenum num num maximum watersoluble chloride ion cl content by mass of cementnum num num wet num num num num num num num num num wet ae num num num grading a num num grading b num num num num num num num dry num num num num num num num num num num sample according to astm cnum .
measure air content on composite samples that have been acquired from material delivered to the shotcrete machine before pumping according to aashto t num or aashto t num .
a tolerance of num percent is allowed .
a minimum inplace shotcrete air content of num percent is required after shooting .
num prepare and cure test panels according to subsection numanum .
drill numinch nummillimeter diameter cores according to subsection numanum .
num conduct and report compressive strength tests according to subsection numanum .
calculate mean compressive core strength as the average strength of at least three individual cores taken from the same nonreinforced test panel .
every arithmetic average of any three consecutive mean core strengths must equal or exceed num fc with no individual core less than num fc .
num perform and report coating quality tests according to subsection numanum .
no individual test may be greater than the maximum specified .
num when shotcrete is applied over reinforcement conduct and report core grading according to subsection numanum .
calculate mean core grade as the average of at least three individual core grades taken from the same reinforced test panel .
the mean core grade must not be greater than the maximum mean core grade with no individual core grade greater than num .
num when shotcrete is applied over reinforcement perform and report watersoluble chloride ion cl content testing according to subsection numanum .
no individual test may be greater than the maximum specified .
num perform during preconstruction testing only .
num produce a mix with a cement to aggregate ratio based on dry loose volumes of not less than num to num for the construction and repair of concrete structures and for encasing steel members and not less than num to num for lining ditches and channels and for paving slopes .
use a water content as low as practical so that mix is sufficiently wet to adhere properly and sufficiently dry so that it will not sag or fall from vertical or inclined surfaces or separate in horizontal work .
section num num num preconstruction testing .
a field trials .
conduct preconstruction shotcrete field trials before starting shotcrete production .
num test panels .
prepare and cure test panels according to astm cnum .
construct steel or wood test panel forms containing no reinforcement with a minimum width and length of num inches num millimeters and a minimum depth of num inches num millimeters with either square or sloped sides .
when shotcrete is to be applied over reinforcement construct additional steel or wood test panel forms containing reinforcement with a minimum width and length of num inches num millimeters and a minimum depth of num inches num millimeters with either square or sloped sides .
use reinforcement of the same size and spacing required for the project .
shoot test panels using the personnel material equipment operating pressures and mix designs proposed for the project .
produce test panels for each proposed mix proportion each anticipated shooting orientation and each proposed nozzle operator .
as soon after shooting and is safe to prevent damage cover and tightly wrap the panels with material conforming to astm cnum or store the panels in a moist room conforming to aashto m num .
num coring .
at least num days after shooting drill at least three numinch nummillimeters diameter cores from each test panel according to aashto t num .
moisture condition the cores in sealed plastic bags or nonabsorbent containers according to section num of aashto t num .
deliver government cores to the laboratory designated by the co. num testing .
at least num days but no later than num days after shooting perform and report coating quality tests including density boiling absorption and volume of permeable voids according to astm cnum .
test at least three samples from each nonreinforced test panel .
samples may consist of cores or pieces of cores or test panels that are without observable cracks fissures or shattered edges .
before compressive strength testing saw or tool the ends of the cores to eliminate projections and to achieve perpendicularity to the longitudinal axis .
at num days after shooting conduct and report compressive strength tests according to aashto t num .
test at least three cores from each nonreinforced test panel .
when shotcrete is applied over reinforcement visually grade at least three cores from each reinforced test panel according to section num of aci num at least num days but no later than num days after shooting .
between num and num days determine the maximum watersoluble chlorideion concentration on at least three different test panel samples according to astm cnum .
num mix design approval .
submit the test data and results as well as a visual description of each core to the co .
include details concerning presence of voids sand pockets lamination and other inadequacies .
approval of the nozzle operator and mix design will be based on preconstruction field trials and test results .
the test results must meet the requirements of table num including the following a compressive strength tests .
calculate the mean compressive core strength of at least three individual numinch nummillimeter diameter cores taken from the same test panel .
the mean of any three consecutive core strengths must equal or exceed num fc with no individual core less than num fc .
section num num b coating quality tests .
calculate density boiling absorption and volume of permeable voids for each test sample .
no individual test may be greater than the maximum permissible values shown in table num. c core grading tests .
calculate the mean core grade from at least three individual core grades .
the mean core grade must not be greater than the maximum permissible value shown in table num with no individual core grade greater than num .
when a prequalification test panel is rejected by the co a second panel may be shot .
if the nozzle operators second mean core grade is greater than num that nozzle operator is not permitted to shoot shotcrete on the project .
core grading is performed during preconstruction testing only as a way of prequalifying nozzle operators .
d watersoluble chloride ion concentration tests .
calculate the watersoluble chloride ion concentration for each test sample .
no individual test may be greater than the maximum permissible values shown in table num .
watersoluble chloride ion analysis is performed during preconstruction testing only as a way of ensuring corrosion protection of the reinforcement .
b submissions .
submit field quality control test reports with the test data and results .
include the following information in the reports num date and time of test panel shooting including panel dimensions size and spacing of reinforcement when used and type of curing num test panel identification including panel number shooting orientation mix proportions and nozzle operator num date time method of panel coring number of test samples obtained from each panel and sample preparation methods num test sample identification by panel number sample number and sample dimensions and num date time and types of tests performed .
num shotcrete construction .
produce shotcrete according to aci num and the following a surface preparation .
when shotcrete is to be placed over existing concrete or rock remove loose or deteriorated material from the existing surface by chipping with pneumatic or hand tools .
cut shoulders approximately num inch num millimeters deep along the perimeter of repair areas on existing concrete .
remove curing compound on previouslyplaced shotcrete surfaces by sandblasting or other approved method .
maintain prepared surfaces in a clean and dry condition .
install approved depth gauges to indicate the thickness of the shotcrete layers .
install depth gauges on numfoot nummeter centers longitudinally and transversely with no less than two gauges per increment of surface area to receive the shotcrete .
moisten surfaces .
when applying shotcrete to previouslyplaced shotcrete or concrete provide a saturated surface dry condition .
soak surfaces with water num to num hours before application .
immediately before shotcreting blow the surfaces free of water .
when applying shotcrete to soil thoroughly compact the soil to provide a firm foundation .
ensure the soil lack free surface water before placing shotcrete .
section num num b reinforcing .
install reinforcing steel when required .
support reinforcing steel so it is not displaced during shotcrete application .
support the reinforcing steel by anchor studs or bolts installed in the existing surface .
space anchors at no more than num inches num millimeters on overhead surfaces num inches num millimeters on vertical surfaces and num inches num millimeters on top horizontal surfaces .
use at least three anchors in each individual area .
reinforce areas where shotcrete thickness exceeds num½ inches num millimeters with a single layer of either num by num wnum by wnum or num by num wnum by wnum num by num mwnum by wnum or num by num mwnum by wnum welded wire fabric .
place fabric parallel to the proposed finished surface .
support fabric at least ½ inch num millimeters from the existing surface .
provide a minimum num inch num millimeters cover over steel items including anchors reinforcing bars and wire fabric .
c temperature and weather conditions .
conduct cold and hot weather shotcreting operations according to subsection num .
do not perform shotcrete operations during high winds and heavy rains .
maintain the temperature of the shotcrete mix between num and num f num and num c. do not place shotcrete against frozen surfaces .
place shotcrete when the surface and ambient temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
d shotcrete application .
use the same nozzle operator that created acceptable test panels .
num apply shotcrete within num minutes of adding cement to the mixture unless an approved hydration stabilizer is used .
if a hydration stabilizer is approved deliver and place the shotcrete within the approved design discharge time limit up to num½ hours maximum .
num limit the layer thickness of each shotcrete application to num inches num millimeters .
thicker applications may be approved if the contractor can demonstrate that no sloughing or sagging is occurring .
if additional thickness is required broom or scarify the applied surface and allow the layer to harden .
provide a saturated surface dry condition to the surface before applying an additional layer .
num remove laitance loose material and rebound .
promptly remove rebound from the work area .
num taper construction joints to a thin edge over a distance of at least num inches num millimeters .
wet the joint surface before placing additional shotcrete on the joint .
do not use square construction joints .
num finish shotcrete as directed by the co. num curing shotcrete .
cure the surface according to subsection num .
for intermediate shotcrete surfaces or if a stained or finished final surface is required cure the shotcrete according to subsection numb .
if no stained or finished surface is required apply curing compound to the final exposed shotcrete surface according to subsection numc .
maintain shotcrete at a temperature above num f num c until shotcrete has achieved a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
num penetrating stain .
apply according to the manufacturers instructions if penetrating stain is used .
num production report .
prepare and submit a written report within num hours of shotcrete production and application for each shift .
include the following information a quantity and location of shotcrete applied including photos of areas where shotcrete was placed section num num b observations of success or problems of equipment operation application final product condition and other relevant issues during production and application c batch numbers if applicable d name of nozzle operator and e names and signature of person performing the observation .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements and the quality characteristic category .
material for shotcrete will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of hydraulic cement .
the shotcrete mixtures air content density density boiling absorption and permeable void volume will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
compressive strength will be evaluated under subsection num .
see table num for requirements .
the shotcrete placement system will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring shotcrete by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the shotcrete contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for shotcrete will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the compressive strength pay factor .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sample frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time source aggregate quality num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num per material type source of material yes before producing mix design shotcrete composition measured and tested for conformance num all subsection num num per mix design yes before producing production aggregate fine coarse measured and tested for conformance num gradationnum aashto t num t num num per day flowing aggregate stream bin belt discharge conveyor belt or stockpile yes when requested before batching moisture test aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sample frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time shotcrete measured and tested for conformance num boiling absorption permeable void volume num astm cnum num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per job production test panelsnum see note num see note num density aashto t num num per load num truck mixer or agitator num upon completing tests air contentnum aashto t num or t num statistical num compressive strengthnum ii aashto t num num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per day production test panelsnum see note num see note num num gradation requirements are shown in table num .
num mixture property requirements are shown in table num .
num sample according to astm cnum .
see table num note num for allowable reductions in sampling and testing frequencies .
num prepare and cure nonreinforced test panels according to astm cnum for mixture properties testing .
construct steel or wood test panel forms to a minimum width and length of num inches num millimeters and a minimum depth of num inches num millimeters with either square or sloped sides .
num core numinch nummillimeter diameter samples at least num days after the field trial and moisture condition in sealed plastic bags or nonabsorbent containers according to section num of aashto t num .
as directed by the co deliver government cores to the designated laboratory for testing .
num test at least three samples from each nonreinforced test panel at least num days but no later than num days after casting .
samples may consist of cores or pieces of cores as detailed in subsection numanum .
num test at least three numinch nummillimeter diameter moisture conditioned cores from each nonreinforced test panel num days after casting .
section num num section num .
micropiles description num this work consists of furnishing and installing micropiles .
material num conform to the following subsections centralizers and spacers nume chemical admixtures num hydraulic cement numa neat hydraulic cement grout numanum reinforcing bars numb steel pipes numa water numa construction requirements num qualifications .
provide a professional engineer onsite supervisors and installation personnel with experience installing and testing micropiles .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least five micropile projects of similar complexity over the past num years .
include project names locations and contact information for project owners .
num submittals .
at least num days before starting micropile work submit the following according to subsection num a start date b micropile construction sequence c micropile types sizes spacings depths installation angles and ultimate strengths for range of material to be encountered d tendons full moment splices permanent casing and additional hardware with manufacturers product data sheets specifications catalog cuts and mill certificates e manufacturer recommendations for tendon and hardware handling storing assembly and working temperature ranges .
hollow bar micropiles are unacceptable unless specified or approved by the co f grout type mix design mixing equipment placement procedures and num and numday grout compressive strengths test results section num num g grouting pressure volume and location if post grouting system is used h procedures and material for repairing corrosion protection coatings in the field i drilling methods and equipment j alternative drilling and grouting methods including grout additives k additional material needed to achieve required bond capacities such as grout socks l methods to ensure borehole stability during excavation and grout placement m micropile testing methods and equipment including type and capacity of reaction load system drawings and supporting calculations for structural components of the micropile load test apparatus and n identification number and calibration test certification for each jack pressure gauge and electronic load cell .
clearly indicate the serial number of each component of the testing assembly on calibration graphs .
submit results from calibration tests conducted by an independent testing laboratory within the previous num days .
num installation .
stage micropile installation to avoid interconnection or damage to piles with uncured grout .
before drilling holes for constructing production micropiles install preproduction micropiles for verification load tests .
install verification and production micropiles as follows a drilling .
provide equipment capable of drilling soil boulder colluvium and alluvium and bedrock to anticipated depths .
drill micropile holes to the required diameter and length according to table num and the construction schedule and sequence .
if an obstruction prevents the advancement of the pile abandon the hole and fill the hole with grout .
drill a new hole at a location approved by the co .
remove drill cuttings and other loose debris from the hole .
b casing reinforcing bar and splicing .
place reinforcing bars with centralizers according to table num .
use centralizers sized to within ½ inch num millimeters of the drill hole diameter .
construct micropile splices to the required design strength .
align casing joints and reinforcing bar splices to avoid eccentricity or angles at splices .
locate threaded pipe casing joints at least two casing outer diameters from bar splices .
when multiple bars are used stagger the bar splices by at least num inches num millimeters .
if specified or approved weld according to subsection numa .
c grouting .
use a positive displacement grout pump according to subsection numbnum .
use a neat hydraulic cement grout in one continuous operation .
mix admixtures according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not use compressed air to directly pressurize the grout .
section num num grout the micropile the same day the micropile hole is drilled .
inject grout from the lowest point of the drill hole until clean pure grout flows from the top of the micropile .
grout may be pumped through tremie tubes hollow stem augers or drill rods .
ensure complete continuity of the grout column during all phases of grouting and casing extraction .
control the grout pressures and grout takes to prevent excessive heave in cohesive soils or fractured formations .
grout the entire pile to the design cutoff level .
after grouting is complete fill the grout tube with grout if it will remain in the hole .
allow grout within the micropiles to attain the minimum design strength before loading .
observe site conditions in the vicinity of the micropile construction on a daily basis and suspend operations and notify the co if num ground heave subsidence or grout leakage is observed num micropile structure is adversely affected or num adjacent structures are damaged from drilling or grouting .
table num micropile construction tolerances micropile attribute allowable variance center of micropile num inches num millimeters from indicated plan location or pile spacing pilehole alignment num of design alignment top elevation num to num inch num millimeters above the design vertical elevation center of reinforcing steel num inches num millimeters from pile center num testing and stressing .
a testing equipment .
see subsection numa .
b stressing .
place stressing equipment over the micropile so that the jack bearing plates load cells and stressing assembly are axially aligned with the micropile and the micropile is centered within the equipment .
do not apply loads greater num percent of the structural capacity of the micropile .
place the reference pressure gauge in series with the pressure gauge and jack so they need not be unloaded and repositioned during a test .
raise the load from one increment to another .
hold the load for the required time beginning immediately after the load is applied and record the micropile top movement to the nearest num inch num millimeters with respect to an independent fixed reference point .
repump the jack as necessary to maintain a constant load .
monitor the load with a pressure gauge .
if the load measured by the pressure gauge and the load measured by the reference pressure gauge differ by more than num percent recalibrate the jack pressure gauge and reference pressure gauge .
num verification tests .
the co will designate locations for sacrificial micropiles for verification tests .
test according to tables num and num .
section num num table num verification test load schedule cycle load hold time minutes num al num num dl num num dl num num dl num num al num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num al num num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl loadhold test num num dl num al num num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl maximum test load num num dl num num dl num num dl num al num al alignment load no greater than num percent of dl num dl applied to the pile before setting the movement recording devices .
zero dial gauges after the first setting of al .
dl unfactored design load .
hold the load to within num percent and measure and record pile top movement at num num num num num num num num num num and num minutes .
section num num a verification test is acceptable based on one of the following results a total vertical movement does not exceed num inches num millimeters under dl .
if an al is used then the allowable movement will be reduced by multiplying by a factor of dlaldl b deflection rate is linear or decreasing and does not exceed num inch num millimeter per log cycle time from num to num minutes or num inch num millimeters per log cycle time from num to num minutes under num times the dl or c slope of the load versus deflection at end of increment curve does not exceed num inch per kip num millimeters per newton at each test load increment .
if the micropile verification is unacceptable test another to establish the cause and make design or construction modifications .
these modifications may include installing replacement test micropiles modifying the installation methods increasing the bond length regrouting with preplaced regrout tubes or changing the micropile type .
submit modifications requiring changes to the structure and retest the new system as directed by the co .
submit micropile geometry construction testing details and verification test results for approval before installing production micropiles .
remove verification test micropiles to an elevation below existing ground level .
if construction methods or foundation material change perform additional verification tests .
num proof tests .
the co will designate production micropiles for proof testing .
test according to tables num and num .
a proof test is acceptable based on one of the following results a total vertical movement does not exceed num inches num millimeters under the unfactored design load dl .
if an alignment load al is used then the allowable movement will be reduced by multiplying by a factor of dlaldl b deflection rate is linear or decreasing and does not exceed num inch num millimeter per log cycle time from num to num minutes or num inch num millimeters per log cycle time from num to num minutes under num times the unfactored design load num dl or c slope of the load versus deflection at end of increment curve does not exceed num inch per kip num millimeters per newton under the maximum test load num dl .
if a prooftested micropile is unacceptable proof test another micropile in the immediate vicinity .
establish the cause and make design or construction modifications for future piles .
submit modification requiring changes to the structure for approval .
section num num table num proof test load schedule load minimum hold time minutes al num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl loadhold test num num dl num num dl maximum test load num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num num dl num al num al see alignment load note in table num .
dl unfactored design load .
hold the load to within num percent and measure and record pile top movement at num num num num num num and num minutes .
if the movement measured between num and num minutes exceeds num inches num millimeter continue holding the load and measure and record pile movement at num num num and num minutes .
num test results and reporting .
provide preliminary results for each micropile tested to the co before testing personnel leave the site .
submit detailed verification and proof test load and deflection data in a tabular format .
submit a graph that plots total micropile top movement versus load the aline and the bline .
the aline is defined as num multiplied by the theoretical free test length elastic elongation .
the bline is defined as the theoretical free test length elastic elongation plus num multiplied by the theoretical bond length elastic elongation .
allow num days for the co to conduct a review of the data and approve micropile installation .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for micropiles will be evaluated under subsection num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of structural steel and casing .
construction of micropiles will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
reinforcing bars will be evaluated under section num .
section num num measurement num .
measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when production micropiles are measured by the linear foot meter measure from the plan top elevation to the approved tip elevation .
do not measure failed proof or verification tests or additional tests to verify alternative micropile installation methods proposed by the contractor .
payment num .
the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks mix design neat hydraulic cement grout num measured and tested for conformance num compressive strength astm cnum num per mix design source of material yes before producing production neat hydraulic cement grout num measured and tested for conformance num density aashto t num num per num piles mixer no num hours flow astm cnum point of discharge upon completion of test compressive strength astm cnum num set of num samplesnum grout plant verification test micropile performance subsection numbnum all installation no num days proof test micropile performance subsection numbnum num in num num from each grout plant per day of operation or per five micropiles whichever occurs more frequently .
section num num section num .
high performance concrete description num this work consists of furnishing placing finishing and curing high performance concrete hpc in bridge decks approach slabs and other structural elements .
in addition to the section num structural concrete properties hpc conforms to performance characteristics for the following a maximum chloride permeability .
total charge in coulombs passed over a specified period of time according to aashto t num except as modified in table num. b drying shrinkage .
drying shrinkage in microstrains according to astm cnum except as modified in table num .
material num conform to the following subsections airentraining admixtures num chemical admixtures num coarse aggregate for concrete num color coating num concrete coloring agents num curing material num fine aggregate for concrete num hydraulic cement num pozzolans num reinforcing fibers num water numa construction requirements num qualifications .
provide an onsite supervisor with experience completing of at least two hpc projects of similar complexity within the last num years .
num composition concrete mix design .
design and produce concrete mixtures that conform to the following a tables num and num and b chapter num of aci num building code requirements for structural concrete and commentary for determining required average compressive strength fcr .
submit hpc mix designs on fhwa form num num structural concrete mix design submittal .
section num num verify mix designs with trial mixes prepared according to aci num from proposed sources or with previous concrete production data for the mixture design submitted from proposed sources .
verify the performance characteristics and plastic properties in table num .
submit written concrete mix designs for approval at least num days before production .
include the items listed in subsection num in each concrete mix design submittal .
begin production only after the mix design is approved .
furnish a new mix design for approval if there is a change in a source of material source or when the fineness modulus of the fine aggregate changes by more than num .
num strengthmaturity relationship .
for the approved concrete mix design and anticipated weather develop a strengthmaturity relationship according to aashto t num .
submit the relationship for approval at least num days before production .
develop a new relationship if changes in the mix constituents hydration stabilizer dosage or weather affect the relationship .
provide a concrete maturity meter for the test section and production that a conforms to aashto t num b is rugged waterproof and able to withstand the construction environment c operates without an external power source for at least num days d collects and stores temperature and maturity data for at least num days and e determines equivalent maturity hours according to the arrhenius function .
num test section .
for bridge decks approach slabs and other flatwork construct a numfoot by numfoot by numinch nummeter by nummeter by nummillimeter test section .
for other structural elements construct a num by num by numfoot num by num by nummeter test section .
use the approved concrete mix design and the same methods of handling placing monitoring finishing curing and cleaning as intended for production placement .
sample and test for table num conformance .
use the strengthmaturity relationship developed for the approved mix design to determine inplace concrete compressive strength .
verify that the test section concrete has a similar time temperature relationship .
begin production only after the test section is evaluated and accepted .
section num num table num performance characteristics and plastic properties of hpc property specification chloride permeability aashto t num except as modified in table num num coulombs maximum at num days drying shrinkage astm cnum except as modified in table num num microstrains maximum compressive strength aashto t num num pounds per square inch num mpa minimum at num days watercementitious material ratio num maximum aggregate size ¾ inches num millimeters nominal maximum total cementitious content num num to num pounds per cubic yard num to num kilograms per cubic meter slump num aashto t num num to num inches num to num millimeters air content num aashto t num or aashto t num see subsection num sulfate resistance aashto m num type ipms or type is numms use type ii cement num per aashto m num watersoluble chloride ion content astm cnum num num percent by mass of cement maximum for reinforced concrete num percent by mass of cement maximum for prestressed concrete num the total cementitious content includes portland cement and all pozzolans added to the concrete mixture such as ground granulated blast furnace slag fly ash and silica fume .
num slump can be adjusted using a high range water reducer superplasticizer as long as the maximum watercementitious material ratio is not exceeded .
include the water contained in the aggregates above the amount of absorbed water in the calculation of the watercementitious material ratio .
num if the plastic air content is low when the concrete arrives onsite additional airentraining agent may be added to the concrete and mixed provided that num revolutions of the mixer has not been exceeded .
num for seawater exposure other portland cement types are permitted if the tricalcium aluminate cnuma content is num percent or less and the watercementitious material ratio is num or less .
num other cement types are permitted if the cnuma content is less than num percent .
num determine the watersoluble chloride ion content contributed from the ingredients including water aggregates cementitious material and admixtures between ages num and num days .
num handling and storing material .
see subsection num .
num measuring material .
see subsection num .
num batching plant mixers and agitators .
see subsection num .
section num num num mixing .
see subsection num .
when required add reinforcing fibers to the concrete mixture following manufacturers recommendations .
mix until uniformly distributed in the concrete mixture .
gradually add fibers to the concrete mixture .
num delivery .
see subsection num except do not use nonagitating equipment .
if reinforcing fibers reduce the workability do not add additional water to concrete mixture .
if approved by the co add a water reducing admixture conforming to aashto m num or a high range water reducing admixture .
num quality control of mix .
see subsection num .
deliver and sample concrete according to subsection numb except as modified in table num .
num temperature and weather conditions .
before placement maintain the temperature of the concrete between num and num f num and num c. install maturity meter probes and monitor concrete temperatures according to aashto t num .
monitor the temperature differential from the center of the concrete mass to its surface .
provide internal cooling external heating or insulation to insure the temperature differential does not exceed num f num c during placing curing cooling form stripping and after curing ends .
during curing maintain the temperature of the concrete mass interior below num f num c and temperature of the outer most surfaces above num f num c. a cold weather .
see subsection numa except as follows num place concrete for flatwork only when the ambient air temperature is num f num c and rising .
place concrete for other structural elements only when the ambient air temperature is num f num c and rising num protect concrete until the concrete maturity data indicates that minimum compressive strength is achieved and num at the end of the protection period start the cooling process when the average wind speed is less than num miles num kilometers per hour as measured num feet num meter from the concrete surface .
b hot weather .
see subsection numb except as follows num place concrete when the ambient air temperature is less than num f num c. num do not remove curing material until the concrete maturity data indicates that minimum compressive strength is achieved and the moist curing period is complete and num do not remove curing material until the calculated evaporation rate is less than num pounds per square foot num kilograms per square meter per hour as determined by figure num .
section num num c evaporation .
do not place concrete if the predicted evaporation rate determined without fogging and other protective measures is greater than num pounds per square foot num kilograms per square meter per hour as determined by figure num .
for wind speed use an anemometer with full scale accuracy to within num percent and for relative humidity use a psychrometer or hygrometer with full scale accuracy to within num percent .
measure wind speed and relative humidity num inches num millimeters above the concrete surface .
before placing install and demonstrate fogging equipment for approval and identify personnel to operate the equipment .
while placing finishing and curing surfaces take care to prevent crusting and plastic shrinkage cracking .
do not allow the surface of the freshly placed concrete to dry .
use fogging windbreaks and other protective measures as necessary to limit the expected evaporation rate to less than num pound per square foot num kilogram per square meter per hour as determined by figure num .
use pressure sprayers or atomizers to maintain a moist surface .
do not apply moisture under pressure directly to the concrete surface .
do not allow water to accumulate to cause a flow or wash on the concrete surface .
continue fogging the concrete surface until finishing operations are complete and the surface is covered .
do not wait until final set to cover the concrete surface .
d rain .
protect the concrete from rain during and after placement .
num handling and placing concrete .
see subsection num .
num construction joints .
see subsection num .
num expansion and contraction joints .
see subsection num .
num finishing plastic concrete .
see subsection num .
num concrete curing .
begin curing within num hours after the concrete achieves final set .
a flatwork curing .
use the water method according to subsection numb .
apply soaker hoses or other approved methods to keep the coverings saturated .
keep the concrete saturated and covered for the entire curing period .
b structural elements .
use a combination of the forms inplace method according to subsection numa and the water method according to subsection numb .
if forms are stripped or loosened before the end of the curing period complete the remainder of the curing using the water method .
during hot and cold weather cure until the inplace concrete compressive strength reaches the minimum shown in table num at measured locations according to aashto t num .
at other times cure until the inplace compressive strength reaches num percent of the minimum shown in table num .
cure flatwork at least num days and structural elements at least num days .
if directed by the co after curing clean staining or efflorescence to provide a uniform color to the concrete surface .
num texturing driving surfaces .
after curing produce a skidresistant surface by saw cutting grooves according to subsection numcnum .
section num num num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements and the quality characteristic category .
material for hpc will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of cementitious material .
the concrete mixtures slump air content density and temperature will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete compressive strength will be evaluated under subsection num .
the lower specification limit is the minimum required compressive strength at num days fc shown in table num .
remove and replace concrete represented by cylinders having a compressive strength less than num percent of the minimum numday compressive strength fc .
maximum chloride permeability will be evaluated under subsection num .
the upper specification limit is the maximum specified chloride permeability value at num days shown in table num .
drying shrinkage will be evaluated under subsection num .
the upper specification limit is the maximum shown in table num .
if the concrete mixture contains num gallons per cubic yard num liters per cubic meter of an approved shrinkage reducing admixture drying shrinkage testing is not required and drying shrinkage will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction including batching placing finishing and curing concrete of hpc structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
falsework and forms will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring hpc by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the structure .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the hpc contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for hpc will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the lower of the two pay factors determined for compressive strength or chloride permeability .
section num num table num sampling and testing requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate num num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsections num num including asr requirements num per material type source of material yes before producing mix design concrete composition measured and tested for conformance num all subsection num num per mix design yes production startup test section hpc measured and tested for conformance num num maximumnum chloride permeability aashto t num num set per test placement discharge stream at point of placement yes upon completing tests compressive strengthnum aashto t num num dryingnum shrinkage astm cnum production produced aggregate fine coarse measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per day flowing aggregate stream bin belt discharge conveyor belt or stockpile yes before batching fineness modulus aashto t num moisture test aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling and testing requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued hpc measured and tested for conformance num density aashto t num num per load point of discharge no upon completing tests air content aashto t num or aashto t num no slumpnum aashto t num no temperature astm cnum no dryingnum shrinkage astm cnum num set per numydnum num mnum hpc statistical num maximum chloride permeabilitynum ii aashto t num num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per day discharge stream at point of placement yes upon completing tests compressive strengthnum ii aashto t num t num section num num table num continued sampling and testing requirements num sample according to aashto r num except composite samples are not required .
num cast at least three num by numinch num by nummillimeter maximum chloride permeability cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
cure the cylinders for num days according to aashto m num .
then cure at num f num f num c num c in saturated lime water until aashto t num sample conditioning begins .
have the testing done at num days in an independent laboratory that is qualified to perform the testing and is approved by the co .
the set test result is the average of the measurements on three cylinders cast from the same load .
if pigment is used in the concrete mixture sample concrete at the batch plant before and after adding pigment .
test at least three specimens with and without pigment .
determine the average difference between the pigmented and nonpigmented test results .
adjust production test result by the average difference .
report both initial and adjusted test results .
num cast at least eighteen num by numinch num by nummillimeter compressive strength cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
have the testing done at num num num num and num days in an independent laboratory that is qualified to perform the testing and is approved by the co. a single compressive strength test result is the average result from three cylinders cast from the same load .
num drying shrinkage testing is not required if the concrete mixture contains num gallons per cubic yard num liters per cubic meter of an approved shrinkage reducing admixture .
num if testing is required use num by num by numinch num by num by nummillimeter prisms for drying shrinkage specimens .
cast at least three drying shrinkage prisms per set and carefully transport the prisms to the job site curing facility .
moist the prisms for the duration of the specified moist curing period for hpc elements .
have the testing done in an independent laboratory that is qualified to perform the testing and is approved by the co .
the zero measurement for percent drying shrinkage is the initial measurement taken at demolding of the specimens at num½½ hours after introduction of mixing water to the concrete mixture .
measure percent drying shrinkage at the end of specified moist curing period for the structural elements num num num num num and num days after the end of the specified field moist curing period .
drying shrinkage num days after the termination of moist curing num days drying can not exceed num percent of the maximum specified value .
the set drying shrinkage test result is the average result from three prisms cast from the same load .
num if reinforcing fibers are used at an addition rate greater than num percent by volume measure slump at the batch plant before the addition of fibers .
num cast at least six num by numinch num by nummillimeter compressive strength cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
test three cylinders at num days .
use the remainder of cylinders as designated by the co .
section num num section num .
concrete overlays for bridge decks description num this work consists of furnishing placing finishing and curing concrete for bridge deck overlays including the preparation of existing deck surfaces .
concrete overlay class is designated high performance concrete overlay hpco or latexmodified concrete lmc according to table num .
material num conform to the following subsections airentraining admixtures num chemical admixtures num coarse aggregate for concrete num concrete coloring agents num fine aggregate for concrete num hydraulic cement num latex emulsion admixture num pozzolans num reinforcing fibers numb water numa construction requirements num qualifications .
provide an onsite supervisor with experience completing of at least two overlay projects with the specific overlay class within the last num years .
num composition concrete mix design .
design and produce concrete overlay mixtures that conform to following a table num for the class specified and b chapter num of aci num building code requirements for structural concrete and commentary for determining required average compressive strength fcr .
section num num table num composition of concrete concrete overlay class property performance characteristics total cementitious material contentnum poundsyardnum kgmnum maximum water to cementitious material rationum slump inches mm air content course aggregate size number aashto mnum num maximum chloride permeability aashto t num coulombs maximum dry shrinkagenum astm cnum microstrains average bond strength at num days astm cnum poundsinchnum megapascals minimum compressive strength aashto t num poundsinchnum megapascals hpco num to num num to num num num to num num to num table num num num num num num num num num num lmcnum num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num the total cementitious material content includes portland cement and all pozzolans added to the concrete mixture such as ground granulated blast furnace slag fly ash and silica fume .
meet the requirements of table num .
num add num gallons num liters of latex emulsion per num pounds num kilograms of cement .
num include the water contained in the aggregates above the amount of absorbed water in the calculation of the watertocementitious material ratio .
num meet the processing requirements of aashto m num table num standard sizes of processed aggregate .
do not use gravel or alkalisilica reactive aggregates .
num dry shrinkage testing is not required if the concrete mixture contains num gallons per cubic yard num liters per cubic meter of an approved shrinkage reducing admixture .
section num num submit concrete overlay mix designs on fhwa form num num structural concrete mix design submittal .
verify the mix designs with trial mixes prepared according to aci num from proposed sources or with previous concrete production data for the mixture submitted from proposed sources .
verify the performance characteristics in table num .
submit written concrete mix designs for approval at least num days before production .
include the items listed in subsection numa through y in each mix design submittal .
furnish a new mix design for approval if a source of material changes or if the fine aggregate fineness modulus changes by more than num .
num strengthmaturity relationship .
see subsection num .
num surface preparation .
remove asphalt asphalt membranes and concrete overlays without damaging the concrete bridge deck .
use micro milling machine to remove existing overlays .
sound the bridge deck according to astm dnum to identify unsound concrete in deck .
do not perform surface preparation within num feet num meters of a new overlay until num hours after its placement .
submit a repair plan for approval by the co that includes the following a concrete repairs .
determine the depth of concrete cover over the existing reinforcement using a covermeter or ground penetrating radar .
remove unsound concrete according to subsections numb and num c. prepare and repair concrete according to section num .
remove at least num inch num millimeters of concrete around exposed or unbounded reinforcement .
remove and replace deteriorated reinforcement .
within num hours before placing repair concrete clean exposed concrete surfaces reinforcement and structural steel of rust and foreign material by abrasive shot blasting and pressurized water flushing .
in repair areas larger than num square feet num square meters with exposed reinforcement install prepackaged zinc sacrificial anodes on the reinforcement according to manufacturers recommendations .
num in areas larger than num square feet num square meters and smaller than num square feet num square meters install a pair of anodes on the reinforcement .
install the anodes at opposite sides of the repair and within num inches num millimeters of the edge of the repair and num in areas num square feet num square meters and larger install an additional pair of anodes for each incremental numsquare foot numsquare meter increase in the repair area .
use a concrete mixture conforming to table num class cae concrete to fill the repair area .
in repair areas not containing anodes an approved high strength concrete patching compound placed according to the manufacturers recommendations may be used .
fill repair areas level with the surface of the surrounding concrete deck .
cure repair areas according to subsection numb until the concrete obtains a compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
section num num b surface profiling .
provide a minimum profile of num inch num millimeters and a maximum of ¼ inch num millimeters on the substrate concrete to bond with the concrete .
use hydrodemolition according to section num or a micro milling machine .
after surface profiling approval and within num hours of expected overlay placement shotblast and pressure wash the substrate concrete .
use a potable water source with a minimum water pressure of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
remove concrete laitances oils fuels and other foreign and loose material detrimental to achieving a sufficient bond .
capture debris from shotblasting and pressure washing and properly dispose of it off site .
cover the prepared surface with polyethylene sheeting to prevent contamination .
c saturation .
thoroughly watersoak the clean concrete surface for at least num hours before placing the overlay concrete .
do not use burlap .
remove puddles of standing water using a vacuum or other approved equipment .
do not use a blower or compressed air to remove water .
num test section .
prepare the substrate concrete surface using the same methods intended for the overlay placement .
construct a num by numfoot num by nummeter test section on the substrate concrete at the same thickness as the overlay .
use the approved concrete mix design and the same methods of handling placing finishing and curing intended for actual placement .
sample and test for table num conformance .
demonstrate the maturity meter operation .
use the strengthmaturity relationship developed for the approved mix design to determine inplace compressive strength .
verify that the test section concrete has a similar time temperature relationship .
demonstrate methods for conforming to temperature requirements in subsection num .
demonstrate methods for cleaning staining or efflorescence to provide uniform color on the concrete surface .
begin production only after the test panel is evaluated and accepted .
num handling and storing material .
see subsection num .
protect latex emulsion from freezing and prolonged exposure to temperatures in excess of num f num c. store containers of latex admixture at the bridge site for a period not to exceed num days .
num measuring material .
see subsection num .
num batching plant mixers and agitators .
see subsection num and the following a class hpco .
furnish readymixed concrete produced and delivered according to aashto m num. b class lmc .
furnish proportioning and mixing equipment with an integral mobile unit with continuous mixing capability .
furnish a mixer with the following capabilities num capable of producing at least num cubic yards num cubic meter of concrete without recharging section num num num equipped with a cement metering device and recording meter accurate within a tolerance of minus num to plus num percent and with a ticket printout device to record the cement quantity added to the mix num equipped with a latex tank with a standpipe marked in gallons liters and a latex metering device accurate within a tolerance of minus num to plus num percent num equipped with a water flow control and flow indicator accurate within a tolerance of num percent in the range of expected use that is readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in aggregate moisture content num equipped with controls to regulate the quantity of other components required to produce the specified mix and num capable of discharging the mixture through a conventional chute directly in front of the finishing machine .
calibrate lmc equipment with material for the approved mix design within num months of the placement date .
keep the equipment maintained calibrated clean and free of partially dried or hardened material .
num mixing .
see subsection num and the following add reinforcing fibers to the concrete mixture following the manufacturers recommendations .
add fibers to the concrete mixture gradually to ensure the fibers are uniformly distributed throughout the concrete mixture .
num delivery .
see subsection num except do not use nonagitating equipment .
a class hpco .
if reinforcing fibers reduce workability do not add additional water to the concrete mixture .
adjust workability using admixtures from the approved mix design .
if the air content is low when the concrete arrives onsite add airentraining agent and mix .
b class lmc .
deliver concrete through the conventional chute of an integral mobile volumetric mixer directly in front of the finishing machine .
num quality control of mix .
see subsection num except as modified in table num .
num temperature and weather conditions .
before placement maintain the temperature of the overlay concrete mixture between num and num ºf num and num ºc .
install maturity meter probes and monitor concrete temperatures according to aashto t num .
monitor the temperature differential from the center of the concrete mass to the surface .
provide internal cooling external heating or insulation to ensure the temperature differential does not exceed num f num ºc during placing curing and immediately after curing ends .
using the strengthmaturity relationship developed for the approved concrete mixture determine inplace concrete compressive strength of the overlay .
measure concrete temperature and calculate inplace maturity .
a cold weather .
see subsection numa .
section num num b hot weather .
see subsection numb .
c evaporation .
see subsection numc .
d rain .
see subsection numd .
num handling and placing concrete .
see subsection num. a general .
see subsection numa .
b placing methods .
see subsection numc and the following num class hpco .
do not broom mortar from the concrete from the front edge of the placement .
num class lmc .
immediately ahead of placing overlay mixture broom a thin coat of the concrete overlay mixture and scrub it into the surface as a groutbond coat at the front edge of the placement .
work evenly over the surface in front of the front edge of the placement .
c consolidation .
see subsection numd .
use a selfpropelled finishing machine capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control .
ensure the length of the screed is sufficient to extend at least num inches num millimeters beyond the edge of both ends of the section being placed .
provide finishing machine capable of consolidating the concrete by vibration and of raising screeds to clear the concrete for traveling in reverse .
provide either a rotating rollertype or an oscillating screedtype finishing machine .
use rotating rollertype machines with one or more rollers augers and num to num vibrations per minute num to num hertz vibratory pans .
use oscillating screedtype machines with vibrators on the screeds whose frequency of vibration can be varied between num and num vibrations per minute num to num hertz .
use metal screeds with a bottom face of not less than num inches num millimeters wide .
use handheld vibrators at the concrete edges and adjacent to expansion joints .
num construction joints .
see subsection num and the following form the vertical edge at construction joints by bulkhead or saw cut .
make construction joints straight and vertical .
num expansion and contraction joints .
see subsection num .
num finishing plastic concrete .
see subsection num and the following a use a selfpropelled rotating cylinder machine either single or double roller that is capable of forward or reverse movement under positive control .
equip the machine with an oscillating screed and other devices required to continuously spread consolidate and finish the plastic concrete .
ensure the screed extends the full width of the deck b produce a longitudinal trowelled finish along the gutter line for a numinch nummillimeter width from the curb face and section num num c proceed at a constant rate so final finishing is complete before a plastic film forms on the concrete surface .
install a construction dam or bulkhead in case of major delay .
during minor delays of num hour or less protect the end of the placement from drying with layers of wet burlap .
num concrete curing .
prevent plastic shrinkage cracking and crusting of the surface .
use the water method of curing according to subsection numb .
use washed burlap and apply soaker hoses or other approved methods to keep the coverings saturated at all times .
install maturity meter probes and monitor concreter temperatures according to aashto t num .
maintain the concrete temperature of the outer most surfaces above num f num c. monitor the temperature differential from the center of the concrete mass to its surface .
using the strengthmaturity relationship developed for the approved concrete mixture determine the inplace concrete compressive strength of the concrete .
a class hpco .
wet cure the concrete for at least num days .
provide internal cooling external heating or insulation to ensure the temperature differential does not exceed num f num c. cure until the inplace concrete compressive strength of the overlay concrete reaches at least num percent of the minimum compressive strength shown in table num. b class lmc .
wet cure the concrete for at least num hours and until the maturity meter reading exceeds num maturity hours .
then air cure the concrete for an additional num hours and until the maturity meter reading exceeds num maturity hours .
num texturing .
after curing visually inspect the overlay for cracking or other damage and inspect for delamination .
perform bond test .
remove and replace delaminated or unbounded portions of the overlay or portions damaged by rain for freezing .
clean staining or efflorescence to provide a uniform color to the concrete overlay surface .
after the table num bond strength is obtained groove surface according to subsection numcnum .
continuously remove slurry and other residue from the overlay by vacuum pickup or other approved methods .
properly dispose of slurry and other residue off site .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements and the quality characteristic category .
material for concrete repair will be evaluated under subsection num .
material for overlay concrete will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of cementitious material .
the overlay concrete mixtures slump air content density and temperature will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
overlay concrete compressive strength will be evaluated under subsection num .
the lower specification limit is the minimum required compressive strength at num days fc shown in table num .
remove and replace concrete represented by cylinders having a compressive strength less than num percent of fc .
section num num maximum chloride permeability will be evaluated under subsection num .
the upper specification limit is the maximum specified chloride permeability value shown in table num .
a single chloride permeability test result is the average result from num samples cast from the same load and tested .
concrete drying shrinkage for class hpco will be evaluated under subsection num .
the upper specification limit is the maximum shown in table num .
if the concrete mixture contains num gallons per cubic yard num liters per cubic meter of an approved shrinkage reducing admixture drying shrinkage testing is not required and drying shrinkage will be evaluated under subsection num .
bond strength of the overlay will be evaluated under subsection num .
the lower specification limit is the minimum required bond strength at num days shown in table num .
construction of concrete overlays for bridge decks will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule except the overlay concrete contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for overlay concrete will be made at a price determined by multiplying the contract price by the lower of the three pay factors determined for compressive strength chloride permeability or bond strength .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source aggregate num num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsections num and num num per material type source of material yes when requested minimum num days before production reports must be dated within num year of intended use mix design concrete composition measured and tested for conformance num num all subsection num num per mix design source of material yes when requested minimum num days before production production startup test panel hpco measured and tested for conformance num maximum chloride permeabilitynum aashto t num num set per test placement discharge stream at point of placementnum yes when requested upon completing tests compressive strengthnum aashto t num num drying shrinkagenum num astm cnum tensile bond strength astm cnum num cores per test placement inplace after curing is complete section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks lmc measured and tested for conformance num maximumnum chloride permeability aashto t num num set per test placement discharge stream at point of placement yes upon completing tests compressive strengthnum aashto t num num tensile bond strengthnum astm cnum num cores per test placement inplace after curing is complete hpco and lmc densitynum aashto t num num per load point of discharge no upon completing tests air contentnum aashto t num or aashto t num no slumpnum aashto t num no temperature field measured no section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks aggregate fine coarse measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per day flowing aggregate stream bin belt discharge conveyor belt or stockpile yes before batching fineness modulus aashto t num moisture test aashto t num production hpco measured and tested for conformance num drying shrinkagenum num astm cnum minimum num per num ftnum num mnum point of discharge no upon completing tests hpco lmc statistical num maximum chloride permeabilitynum ii aashto t num num set per num ydnum num mnum but not less than num per day discharge stream at point of placement yes upon completing tests compressive strengthnum ii aashto t num t num tensile bond strengthnum ii astm cnum num set per num ftnum num mnum of overlay but not less than num per day inplace after curing is complete no section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks production continued hpco and lmc measured and tested for conformance num densitynum aashto t num num per load point of discharge no upon completing tests air contentnum aashto t num or aashto t num no slumpnum num aashto t num temperature astm cnum aggregate fine coarse measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per day flowing aggregate stream bin belt discharge conveyor belt or stockpile yes when requested before batching fineness modulus aashto t num moisture test aashto t num section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements num cast at least three num by numinch num by nummillimeter maximum chloride permeability cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
cure the hpco cylinders for num days and the lmc cylinders for num days according to aashto m num .
then cure the hpco cylinders at num f num f num c num c in saturated lime water until aashto t num sample conditioning begins and air dry the lmc cylinders at num f num f num c num c at num to num percent relative humidity .
test for chloride permeability at num days by measuring the total charge passed in coulombs over a specified period of time according to aashto t num .
the test result is the average of the measurements on three cylinders cast from the same load .
if pigment is used in the concrete mixture sample concrete at the batch plant before and after adding pigment .
test at least three specimens with and without pigment .
determine the average difference between the pigmented and nonpigmented test results .
adjust production test results by the average difference .
report both initial and adjusted test results .
num for hpco cast at least fifteen num by numinch num by nummillimeter compressive strength cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
test three cylinders each at num num num num and num days .
a single compressive strength test result is the average result from three cylinders cast from the same load .
num for lmc cast at least eighteen num by numinch num by nummillimeter compressive strength cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
test three cylinders each at num num num num num and num days .
a single compressive strength test result is the average result from three cylinders cast from the same load .
num drying shrinkage testing is not required if the concrete mixture contains num gallons per cubic yard num liters per cubic meter of an approved shrinkage reducing admixture .
num if testing is required use num by num by numinch num by num by nummillimeter prisms for drying shrinkage specimens .
cast at least three drying shrinkage prisms per set and carefully transport the prisms to the job site curing facility .
moist cure the prisms for the duration of the specified moist curing period for hpco elements .
measure for shrinkage in microstrains determined according to astm cnum .
the zero measurement is the initial measurement taken at demolding of the specimens at num½½ hours after introduction of mixing water to the concrete mixture .
determine percent drying shrinkage by measuring at the end of specified moist curing period for the structural elements num num num num num and num days after the end of the specified field moist curing period .
drying shrinkage num days after the termination of moist curing num days drying can not exceed num percent of the maximum specified value shown in table num .
the set drying shrinkage test result is the average result from three prisms cast from the same load .
num for lmc measure density slump and plastic air content num minutes after discharge from the mixer chute .
cover wheelbarrow or other receptacle used to hold sample with a sheet of plastic to prevent evaporation during the num minutes before sampling .
num if reinforcing fibers are used at an addition rate greater than num percent by volume measure slump at the batch plant before adding fibers .
num cast at least six num by numinch num by nummillimeter compressive strength cylinders per set and carefully transport the cylinders to the job site curing facility .
test three cylinders at num days .
remainder of cylinders to be used as designated by the co .
section num num table num continued sampling testing and acceptance requirements num at random locations determined by the co core numinch nummillimeter diameter specimens through the overlay and ½ inch num millimeters into the substrate concrete .
cure the specimens in situ for the same length of time as the overlay .
test the specimens in situ by attaching a loading disk with fast setting high strength epoxy .
measure the tensile pull off bond strength in pounds per square inch megapascals according to astm cnum .
the average bond strength is the average of the results from three test specimens adjusted as follows for tests where failure occurs in the substrate concrete at a depth of ¼ inch num millimeters or greater for more than num percent of the specimen use num pounds per square inch num megapascal for that specimen test result in the calculation of the average of the three test specimens .
when two of the three test results have been adjusted the average bond strength results shall be the greater of num pounds per square inch num megapascal or the calculated value .
num num division num incidental construction section num num section num .
minor concrete structures description num this work consists of constructing minor concrete structures .
material num conform to the following subsections airentraining admixtures num chemical admixtures num coarse aggregate for concrete num color coating num concrete coloring agents num curing material num fine aggregate for concrete num hydraulic cement num pozzolans num reinforcing fibers num reinforcing steel num sealants fillers and seals num water numa construction requirements num composition concrete mix design .
conform to table num .
before batching concrete submit the proposed concrete proportions for approval on fhwa form num minor concrete mix design trial batch summary or other approved form .
as a minimum submit the following at least num days before production a type and sources of material b material certification for material c saturated surface dry mass of the fine and coarse aggregate per cubic yard cubic meter of concrete d gradation of fine and coarse aggregate e mass of mixing water per cubic yard cubic meter of concrete f mass of cement per cubic yard cubic meter of concrete .
fly ash ground iron blastfurnace slag or silica fume microsilica may be substituted for cement according to table num g entrained air content of plastic concrete in percent by volume h maximum slump of plastic concrete in inches millimeters and section num num i when colored concrete is required submit preliminary samples of the colored concrete .
prepare a numfoot by numfoot by numinch nummeter by nummeter by nummillimeter panel for each acceptable mix that is to be colored .
finish and cure the panels in the same manner as the concrete will be finished and cured on the project .
table num composition of minor concrete property specification cement content num pounds per cubic yard num kilograms per cubic meter minimum watercementitious material num maximum slump num inches num millimeters maximum air content num minimum size of coarse aggregate aashto m num with num passing the num½inch nummillimeter sieve numday compressive strength num pounds per square inch num megapascal minimum num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
when concrete is cracked spalling or scaling remove concrete to the nearest joint .
design and construct forms that are free of bulge and warp and allow for removal without injuring the concrete .
design the forms for a lateral pressure equal to that exerted by a fluid weighing num pounds per cubic foot num kilograms per cubic meter .
use wood metal or other suitable material for forms .
keep forms clean and coat with a form release agent or form oil before placing concrete .
place and fasten reinforcing steel according to subsection num .
num placing concrete .
conform to subsection num .
moisten the forms and foundation immediately before placing concrete .
discharge concrete within the time limit shown in table num .
place concrete to avoid segregation of material .
consolidate with vibrators according to subsection numd .
do not use aluminum pipe for transporting or placing concrete .
do not exceed num minutes between deliveries of batches for a single pour on a structure .
do not apply water to plastic concrete surfaces during finishing operations .
section num num num curing concrete .
cure concrete at least num days .
if high early strength cement is used cure concrete at least num days .
cure according to subsection num .
finish exposed concrete surfaces according to subsection num as applicable .
num acceptance .
material for minor concrete structures including concrete reinforcing steel and structural steel for minor structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of minor concrete structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when concrete is measured by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the structure .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for concrete lump sum bid item will be prorated based on the progress of the work under this section .
section num num section num .
culverts and drains description num this work consists of furnishing and installing culverts drains and precast concrete box culverts .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections asphalt mastic num concrete pipe num gaskets for concrete pipe num gaskets for ductile iron pipe num gaskets for metal pipe num gaskets for plastic pipe num lean concrete backfill num metal pipe num mortar num plastic pipe num precast concrete units and accessories num precast reinforced concrete box sections num sealants fillers and seals num supplemental concrete pipe ties num construction requirements num general .
furnish culvert pipe with a wall thickness not less than that shown in the plans or determined from the fillheight tables included in the plans .
use the same material and coating on contiguous pipe sections and special sections such as elbows and branch connections .
for culvert extensions furnish the same material as the existing culvert .
plans show the size length and approximate location of culverts .
determine final location skew length elevations and grade according to section num .
do not order culvert material until the co has accepted the final structure size length and alignment .
construct castinplace concrete box culverts according to section num .
for precast concrete box culverts submit design drawings and details with supporting calculations according to subsection num .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
place elongated pipes with the minor axis within num degrees of vertical .
construct a piping plug unless the culvert inlet is protected with a fullheight headwall slope paving or an embankment consisting of aashto m num classification anum or anum material .
construct the piping plug with aashto m num classification anum anum or other approved material with a permeability not exceeding num inches num millimeters per second .
section num num num laying concrete pipe and precast concrete box culverts .
start at the lower end and lay the bell or groove end upgrade .
fully join sections with leakresistant seals using one of the following methods a mortared joints .
clean the lower portion of the receiving end of the pipe .
plaster the inside with sufficient joint mortar to bring the inner surfaces of the abutting pipe sections flush and even .
fit the sections as close as the construction of the culvert permits .
fill and seal joints with mortar inside and out .
use the mortar within num minutes after mixing .
clean excess mortar from the inside of the joint .
cure mortar outside of joints by covering with polyethylene sheeting or spraying with a curing compound .
backfill while mortar is plastic or if mortar sets before backfilling wait at least num hours before backfilling .
b gasket joints .
conform to astm cnum or astm cnum and the following num protect the joint ends from mud silt gravel or other foreign material .
lay the pipe sections with gaskets attached .
remove clean relubricate and reseat gaskets disturbed or contaminated .
num align the pipe sections .
force the joints home using the pipe manufacturers recommended procedure .
do not drive or ram by hand or machinery .
block the last section of each days run to prevent creep .
install supplemental concrete pipe ties on the last downstream pipetopipe joint and at the downstream pipetoend section joint if present .
num laying metal pipe .
position the pipe with a longitudinal joint so the joint is opposite the invert .
fully join pipe sections with leakresistant seals according to aashto m num or aashto m num .
use one of the following a gasket bell and spigot joints .
use on slopes of num percent or less and lay the pipe with the bell end up slope .
b coupling bands with gaskets .
limit the use of coupling bands with projections dimples to attaching prefabricated flared end sections .
when aluminum alloys come in contact with other metals coat the contacting surfaces with asphalt mastic or a preapproved impregnated caulking compound .
num laying plastic pipe .
lay plastic pipe according to the pipe manufacturers recommendation .
fully join pipe sections with leakresistant seals using gasket bell and spigot joints according to astm dnum .
num laying slotted drain pipe .
fully join pipe sections with leakresistant seals using coupling bands and gaskets .
cover the slots with roofing paper or other approved covering during backfilling and paving to keep material out of the pipe .
backfill with a lean concrete backfill .
section num num num acceptance .
material for culverts drains and precast concrete box culverts furnished will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of culverts drains and precast concrete box culverts will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring pipe and box culverts by the linear foot meter measure along the invert .
measure end sections elbows and branch connections by the each .
if there is no pay item for elbows or branch connections measure them as additional pipe length along the invert .
measure pipe anchor assemblies under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
structural plate structures description num this work consists of constructing structural plate pipes arches pipe arches boxes and underpasses .
material num conform to the following subsections aluminumalloy structural plate structures num asphaltcoated structural plate structures num steel structural plate structures num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
num erecting .
furnish steel aluminum alloy asphalt coated steel or asphaltcoated aluminum alloy structural plate structures .
submit a copy of manufacturers assembly instructions before assembly .
show the position of each plate and assembly order .
assemble the structural plates according to the manufacturers instructions .
exercise care in the use of drift pins and pry bars to prevent damage to the structural plate and its coating .
clear sand gravel and other foreign material from the corrugations within lapped sections of the plates .
ensure plates have a proper fitup .
where aluminum alloys come in contact with other types of metal coat the contacting surfaces according to subsection num .
torque steel bolts on steel plates to at least num footpounds num newtonmeters and a maximum of num footpounds num newtonmeters .
torque steel bolts and aluminum bolts on numinch nummillimeter thick aluminum plates to at least num footpounds num newtonmeters and a maximum of num footpounds num newtonmeters .
torque steel bolts and aluminum bolts on numinch nummillimeter thick and heavier aluminum plates to at least num footpounds num newtonmeters and a maximum of num footpounds num newtonmeters .
for longspan structures a tighten the longitudinal seams when the plates are assembled unless the plates are held in shape by cables struts or backfill .
properly align plates circumferentially to avoid permanent distortion from the design shape .
before backfilling do not exceed num percent variation from the design shape .
b do not distort the shape of the structure by operating equipment over or near it .
section num num c provide suitable survey control on the structure to check structure movement .
d check and control the deflection movements of the structure during the entire backfilling operation .
do not exceed the manufacturers recommended limits .
e provide a manufacturers representative to monitor the erecting and backfilling of the structure .
num acceptance .
material for structural plate structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of structural plate structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
manholes inlets and catch basins description num this work consists of constructing adjusting shifting or modifying manholes inlets and catch basins .
material num conform to the following section and subsections concrete building brick num concrete masonry units num corrugated metal units num frames grates covers and ladder rungs num gaskets for concrete pipe num gaskets for metal pipe num minor concrete num mortar num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum reinforced concrete manhole sections numa reinforcing steel num sealants fillers and seals num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
separate catch basins and inlets from adjacent concrete structures with at least ½inch nummillimeter thick preformed expansion joint .
construct minor concrete according to section num .
num concrete construction .
concrete units may be castinplace or precast .
finish surfaces according to subsection num as applicable .
finish the flow line in manholes inlets and catch basins to match the pipe flow line .
assemble precast concrete manhole sections with flexible gaskets or fillers in the tongue and groove joints .
handle the precast units carefully after the gasket has been attached to avoid damaging the gasket or contaminating the joint .
attain the proper alignment before the joints are forced home .
ensure gasket is uniformly seated .
apply mastic joint filler according to manufacturers recommendations if mastic is used .
set metal frames in a full mortar bed .
space ladder rungs uniformly on numinch nummillimeter centers and align vertically .
grout ladder rungs into precast concrete walls .
section num num num concrete masonry unit construction .
construct masonry block plumb .
stagger vertical joints and set block with the cells vertical .
moisten blocks before using in work .
butter bearing members and vertical joints full of mortar .
bond block with mortar on sides .
construct joints straight level plumb flush and ¼ to ½ inch num to num millimeters thick .
backfill the structure after the masonry block joints have moist cured for num days .
num metal construction .
fabricate metal drop inlets from the same material and thickness as adjoining metal pipes .
connect metal inlets to adjoining metal pipes according to subsection num .
num grade adjustment of structures .
adjust metal frames and grates to grade before placing the surface course .
remove and clean the frames covers and grates .
trim the walls down to solid material .
reconstruct the walls with the same material as existing and reset the cleaned frames at the required elevation .
when the existing casting and supporting walls are in good condition an approved device may be used to adjust the manhole casting cover to the correct grade .
clean each structure of foreign material .
num shifting and modifying structures .
shift structures using methods to ensure structural integrity .
reshape the channel flow line in manholes inlets and catch basins as necessary to match the pipe flow line .
set and reassemble structures according to the applicable requirements of subsections num through num .
furnish and install gaskets seals and other accessories according to the applicable requirements of subsections num through num .
grout or use a preformed joint seal to make joints and openings leak resistant .
finish mortar joints with a bead on the outside and a smooth finish on the inside .
when modifying a concrete structure do not cut the concrete and reinforcing steel in a manner that loosen the reinforcement in the wall .
cut the reinforcing steel flush with the opening wall face .
grout joints and openings cut in the wall .
seal openings no longer required in the structure .
when an existing structure is abandoned seal pipes entering the structure with a tight fitting plug of concrete at least num inches num millimeters thick or water tight masonry at least num inches num millimeters thick .
ensure the structure does not entrap water .
obliterate the top of the structure to an elevation at least num inches num millimeters below finished grade and backfill according to section num .
num acceptance .
material for metal concrete brick concrete masonry precast concrete units and castinplace concrete except concrete units will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete for castinplace concrete units will be evaluated under section num .
construction of metal concrete brick concrete masonry and castinplace concrete units will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of precast concrete units will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
shifting modifying and adjusting units will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when manholes are measured by the linear foot meter measure from finished grade to the flow line surface of the manhole .
do not measure metal frames and grates when included as part of the original inlet manhole or catch basin construction .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
underdrains sheet drains and pavement edge drains description num this work consists of furnishing and installing underdrains sheet drains and pavement edge drains .
geotextile filter is designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following section and subsections aluminumalloy corrugated pipe num asphaltcoated pipe num geocomposite drain num geotextile num granular backfill num metalliccoated corrugated steel pipe num perforated concrete pipe num plastic pipe num sand num structural backfill num construction requirements num general .
elevate and protect sheets panels or rolls of geotextile filter and geocomposite with a waterproof and ultraviolet resistant cover if stored outdoors .
limit geotextile filter and geocomposite exposure to less than num days when using for a permanent installation .
use the same material and coating on contiguous drain sections extensions elbows branch connections and other special sections .
drain material size and approximate location are shown in the plans .
determine the final location and length in the field .
do not install drain material until the co has accepted the final location and length .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
if geotextile filter or geocomposite is used smooth the trench surfaces by removing projections that may damage the geotextile filter or geocomposite .
replace geotextile filter or geocomposite damaged during installation .
do not allow soil or other foreign material to enter the drain systems .
plug the upgrade end of installations .
section num num furnish nonperforated pipe for outlet pipe .
install outlet pipe according to section num .
immediately place and secure a screen made of numinch nummillimeter diameter galvanized wire having approximately ½ by ½inch num by nummillimeter mesh openings over the outlet ends of exposed pipes and weep holes .
num placing underdrain .
join pipe sections securely with coupling fittings or bands .
join pvc and acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene abs pipe using either a flexible elastomeric seal or solvent cement .
join polyethylene pipe with snapon screwon or wrap around coupling bands as recommended by the manufacturer .
backfill and compact trenches within the limits of the roadbed according to section num except use granular backfill material .
trenches for geocomposite underdrains within the limits of the roadbed may also be backfilled with sand and compacted .
when underdrain is placed in ditch lines prevent infiltration of surface water by placing material conforming to aashto m num classification anum anum anum or anum in the top num inches num millimeter of the trench .
a standard underdrain .
place the long dimension of the geotextile filter parallel to the centerline of the trench .
position the geotextile filter without stretching in contact with the trench surface .
overlap the joints at least num inches num millimeter with the upstream geotextile filter placed over the downstream geotextile filter .
place collector pipe with the perforations facing downward .
place granular backfill to a height of num inches num millimeter above the top of the collector pipe and compact .
do not displace the collector pipe .
place and compact the remainder of the granular backfill material according to section num .
fold the geotextile filter over the top of the granular backfill with a minimum overlap of num inches num millimeter .
b geocomposite underdrain .
extend the geotextile filter from the bottom of the drainage core around the collector pipe .
construct splices and install outlet fittings according to the manufacturers recommendations .
prevent infiltration of soil into the geocomposite core .
place the assembled geocomposite in the trench with the face of the geocomposite against the inflow side of the trench .
if the trench wall is irregular smooth the trench wall or place a layer of granular backfill between the geocomposite and the trench wall .
temporarily support the drain against the trench wall while backfilling .
when the trench is less than num inches num millimeter wide backfill the trench using sand .
backfilling and compacting in layers is not required .
compact the sand by vibrating or tamping with a mechanical tamper .
when the trench is equal to or greater than num inches num millimeter wide place granular backfill or sand to a height of num inches num millimeter above the top of the collector pipe and compact .
place and compact the remainder of the granular backfill material or sand according to section num .
section num num for pipe drain installations draining directly to daylight cover the outlet end of the pipe with a removable screen made of numinch nummillimeter diameter galvanized wires having approximate ½ by ½inch num by nummillimeter mesh openings .
num placing geocomposite sheet drain .
do not place sheet drain against a mortar course less than num days old .
when a geocomposite is used in conjunction with a waterproof membrane install drainage panels compatible with the membrane using methods recommended by the membrane manufacturer .
assemble and place the geocomposite drain against the surface to be backfilled according to the manufacturers recommendations .
splice geocomposite drains so the flow across the edges is continuous .
overlap the geotextile filter at least num inches num millimeter in the direction of water flow .
for vertical splices overlap the geotextile filter in the direction backfill proceeds .
connect the drainage core to the collector pipe or weep holes so the flow is continuous through the system .
extend the geotextile filter from the bottom of the drainage core around the collector pipe .
backfill with structural backfill and compact according to subsections num and num .
num placing geocomposite pavement edge drain .
assemble the geocomposite pavement edge drain and outlet material according to the manufacturers recommendations and place it in the trench .
if the trench wall is irregular smooth the trench wall or place a layer of sand between the geocomposite and the trench wall .
temporarily support the drain against the trench wall while backfilling .
when the trench is less than num inches num millimeter wide backfill the trench using sand .
backfilling and compacting in layers is not required .
compact the sand by vibrating or tamping with a mechanical tamper .
when the trench is num inches num millimeter wide or more place and compact granular backfill or sand according to section num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material except granular backfill for underdrains sheet drains and edge drains will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
granular backfill will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
geocomposites will be evaluated under subsection num .
submit a production certification with each shipment of geocomposite that includes the name of the manufacturer product name style number chemical composition of the core and encapsulating geotextile filaments or yarns and other pertinent information to fully describe the geocomposite drain .
installation of underdrains sheet drains and edge drains will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under sections num and num .
geotextile filter will be evaluated under section num .
section num num outlet pipes will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measurement is for a system do not measure geotextile filters geocomposites collector pipes backfill and outlet pipes that are part of the system .
when measuring granular backfill and sand by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in place .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source granular backfill num measured and tested for conformance num num quality subsection num num per aggregate type and source of material source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source production granular backfill num measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum production output or stockpile yes num hours section num num section num .
corrugated metal spillways description num this work consists of furnishing and installing corrugated metal spillways .
material num conform to the following section culverts and drains num construction requirements num placing corrugated metal spillways .
spillway inlet outlet and connector dimensions and proportions may vary to permit the use of manufacturers standard jigs and templates .
install spillway inlet assemblies as shown in the plans and consolidate the earth backfill by tamping .
lay spillway outlet pipe according to section num .
anchor the spillway as shown in the plans .
num acceptance .
pipes anchor assemblies hardware and other material furnished to fabricate metal spillways will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of corrugated metal spillways will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure downdrain and outlet pipes under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
cleaning relaying and repairing existing drainage structures description num this work consists of cleaning relaying and repairing existing drainage and appurtenant structures .
construction requirements num cleaning drainage structures in place .
remove foreign material within the structure and accessories by approved methods .
remove debris vegetation and earthen material that impedes inlet and outlet channel flow to the structure .
obtain approval from the co before removing trees .
dispose of removed material according to subsection num .
regrade inlet and outlet channels at structures to provide positive drainage .
reshape inlet to direct flow into the structure entrance .
num relaying or stockpiling salvaged pipe .
relay removed and cleaned pipe according to section num .
salvage and stockpile pipe according to subsection num .
replace damaged pipe and install according to section num .
dispose of damaged pipe according to subsection numa .
num repairing drainage structures .
remove debris from structures designated to be repaired .
repair leaks and structural damage and replace missing or broken metalwork according to sections num and num .
num acceptance .
cleaning and repairing existing drainage structures will be evaluated under subsection num .
relaying pipe will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
paved waterways description num this work consists of constructing paved waterways not contiguous to the traveled way .
paved waterways are designated as follows type num grouted rubble type num mortared rubble type num concrete and rubble type num concrete type num asphalt material num conform to the following sections and subsections asphalt concrete num bedding material num minor concrete num mortar num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum reinforcing steel num rock for masonry structures rubble num sand num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
place and compact the bedding material with at least three passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system .
num grouted rubble paved waterway type num .
clean and wet the rubble to near saturation .
set rubble in a broken pattern with no continuous joint across the waterway or parallel to the flow line .
place rubble into the mortar bed with the flat faces up and the longest dimension at right angles to the flow line .
make the joints num to num inches num to num millimeters wide .
ram each piece of rubble until it is firm and true to the surface in grade alignment and crosssection .
remove and relay rubble having an irregular or uneven surface .
fill the joints with sand to within num inches num millimeters of the surface .
pour and broom grout into the joints until the grout is ½ inch num millimeters below the surface of the rubble .
clean excess grout from the rubble surface .
section num num num mortared rubble paved waterway type num .
clean and wet the rubble to near saturation .
set rubble in a broken pattern with no continuous joint across the waterway or parallel to the flow line .
place rubble into the mortar bed with the flat face up and the longest dimension parallel to the flow line .
make joints num to num inches num to num millimeters wide .
ram each piece of rubble until it is firm and true to the surface in grade alignment and crosssection .
remove and relay rubble having an irregular or uneven surface .
fill joints to within ½ inch num millimeters below the surface of the rubble .
clean excess mortar from the rubble surface .
num concrete and rubble paved waterway type num .
perform concrete work according to section num .
secure the reinforcing steel within the middle third of the depth of the concrete foundation when required .
clean and wet the rubble to near saturation .
embed rubble into the concrete foundation in a broken pattern with no continuous joint across the waterway or parallel to the flow line .
make the joints num to num inches num to num millimeters wide .
fill the joints with mortar to num inch num millimeters below the surface of the rubble .
clean excess mortar from the rubble surface .
num concrete paved waterway type num .
perform the work according to section num .
num asphalt paved waterway type num .
perform the work according to section num .
clean and seal the cracks according to section num before overlaying existing asphalt paved waterway .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
material for grout and mortar will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mortar will be evaluated under subsection num .
bedding material and sand will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of paved waterways will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
asphalt concrete will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
rubble will be evaluated under section num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring the area measure the width horizontally to include the total width .
measure the length parallel to the flow line .
when measuring paved waterway lengths measure from the front face of the curb along the flow line of the paved waterway .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num num gradation subsection num num per soil type and source of material source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source liquid limit aashto r num t num method a sand num gradation deleterious material aashto m num production bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum production output or stockpile yes num hours liquid limit aashto r num t num method a sand num gradation aashto t num t num section num num section num .
curb and gutter description num this work consists of constructing or resetting curb combination curb and gutter or wheelstops .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections asphalt concrete num bedding material num concrete coloring agents num minor concrete num mortar num reinforcing steel num rock for masonry structures stone curbing num sealants fillers and seals num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
place and compact the bedding material .
compact the bedding material with at least three passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system .
num stone and precast concrete curb .
do not use stone with visible drill marks on the exposed faces .
conform to the dimensions of stone curb specified and the following a type num .
saw or point the top surface of vertical stone curb to an approximate true plane with no depression or projection on that surface of over ¼ inch num millimeters .
pitch the front and back arris lines straight and true .
limit projections or depressions on the back surface to not exceed a batter of num inch num millimeters horizontal to num inches num millimeters vertical .
saw point or smooth quarry split the front exposed face of the vertical stone curb and form to an approximately true plane .
limit projections or depressions on the remaining face distance to num inch num millimeters or less from the plane of the exposed face .
square the ends of vertical stone curb with the top back and face and finish so when the sections are placed end to end shows no space more than ½ inch num millimeters in the joint for the full width of the top surface and for the entire exposed front face .
the remainder of the end may break back no more than num inches num millimeters from the plane of the joint .
cut the joints of circular or curved stone curb on radial lines .
make stone curb segments at least num inches num millimeters long but the length may vary where a depressed or modified section of curb is required for driveways crossings or closures .
section num num b type num .
conform to the requirements of type num stone curb for slope stone curb except as follows the maximum allowable projection or depression on a horizontal top surface is limited to ½ inch num millimeters .
on other exposed faces the maximum allowable projection or depression is limited to num inch num millimeters .
for unexposed surfaces the maximum allowable projection or depression from a true plane on a numinch nummillimeter length is num inches num millimeters .
the maximum allowable space showing on exposed faces between adjacent segments of slope stone curb is ¾ inch num millimeters .
make slope stone curb segments at least num inches num millimeters long .
clean the curb material thoroughly and wet it just before setting .
set the curb in bedding material so the face and top lines are to line and grade .
make the joints ½ to num inch num to num millimeters wide and fill the joints with mortar .
complete the first num feet num meters of curb to demonstrate the ability to build a curb conforming to these requirements .
do not continue construction until the numfoot nummeter test section is approved .
where a concrete pavement is constructed contiguous to the curb construct the joints in the curb directly in line with the pavement expansion joints .
make the curb joint ¾ inch num millimeters wide and fill it with expansion joint filler of the same nominal thickness as the pavement joint .
fill voids between the joint filler and the curb with mortar .
num concrete curb or curb and gutter .
perform work according to section num .
the curb or curb and gutter may be castinplace or slipformed .
a castinplace .
use forms that extend for the full depth of the concrete .
use curved forms for curb with a radius of num feet num meters or less .
num contraction joints .
construct curb in sections of uniform numfoot nummeter lengths .
construct contraction joints ⅛ inch num millimeters wide .
use metal divider plates .
when the curb is constructed adjacent to or on concrete pavement match the contraction joints in the pavement .
num expansion joints .
form expansion joints at intervals of num feet num meters using a ¾inch nummillimeter thick preformed expansion joint filler .
where the curb is constructed adjacent to or on rigid pavement match the expansion joints in the pavement .
finish the concrete smooth and even with a wood float .
broom finish parallel to the curb line according to subsection numcnum .
when an exposed aggregate finish is required finish according to subsection numcnum .
leave forms in place for num hours or until the concrete has set sufficiently so the forms can be removed without harming the curb .
b slipformed .
use a selfpropelled automatic curb machine or a paver with curb attachments .
use a machine that is heavy enough to obtain consolidation without the machine riding above the foundation .
section num num adjust the concrete aggregate gradation if necessary to produce a curb or curb and gutter that has well defined web marks of water on the surface .
remove and replace sections with craters larger than num inch num millimeters or other sections determined to be damaged or defective .
repairing surface craters and other defective sections by plastering is not permitted .
after the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without damage saw contraction joints according to subsection numanum .
construct expansion joints according to subsection numanum .
num asphalt concrete curb .
where curb is constructed on a pavement place a tack coat according to section num on the area under the curb .
construct asphalt concrete curb according to section num .
use a selfpropelled automatic curb machine or a paver with curb attachments that is heavy enough to compact a curb without riding above the foundation .
make the curb uniform in texture shape and density .
curb may be constructed by other means only in short sections or sections with short radii .
num resetting stone or precast concrete curb .
carefully remove clean and store the curb .
cut or fit the curb as necessary for installation .
replace lost damaged or destroyed curb .
reset the curb according to subsection num .
num wheelstops .
pin the wheelstops in place with two numinch nummillimeter sections of no .
num numm reinforcing steel or ¾inch nummillimeter steel rods .
reset wheelstops in the same manner .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing acceptance requirements .
material for mortar will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mortar will be evaluated under subsection num .
precast units curb and wheel stops will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
bedding material will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
stone for stone curbing will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of curb and gutter and wheelstops will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
asphalt concrete will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring for curb or curb and gutter make no deduction in length for drainage structures installed in the curb section or for driveway and handicap access ramp openings where the gutter is continuous across the opening .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num num gradation subsection num num per soil type and source of material source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source liquid limit aashto r num t num method a production bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum production output or stockpile yes num hours liquid limit aashto r num t num method a section num num section num .
horizontal drains description num this work consists of constructing horizontal drains including collector systems .
material num conform to the following subsection horizontal drains numd construction requirements num qualifications .
provide onsite supervisors and installation personnel with experience installing and testing horizontal drains .
submit the following for approval at least num days before starting work a names of personnel and b a résumé for each individual describing their experience on at least five horizontal drain projects of similar complexity over the past num years .
include project names locations and contact information for project owners .
num general .
verify location elevation spacing and orientation of the horizontal drains installation .
furnish pipe and fittings with a minimum outside diameter of num½ inches num millimeters or as specified .
furnish slotted pipe with three rows of slots cut circumferentially in the pipe num degrees apart .
make the width of the slots num inches num millimeters with the total slot opening area equal to num square inches per foot num square meters per meter of pipe .
material for couplings cleanouts elbows and other fixtures required for collection of water are to be compatible with the installed drain pipe .
the locations for installing horizontal drains as shown in the plans are approximate .
the exact locations will be determined by the co .
pipe drains that begin more than num inches num millimeters or end more than num feet per num foot num meter per num meter installed pipe from their planned locations damaged in construction or are improperly installed will be rejected by the co. num drilling holes .
drill holes with rotary equipment capable of drilling num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter holes up to num feet num meters to designated lines and grades through soil and rock formations .
keep a log of material types production rates and estimated water flows encountered during drilling .
install horizontal drains as shown in the plans .
during drilling operations determine the elevation of the drilled hole at numfoot nummeter intervals and at the upper end of the completed horizontal drain hole by inserting tubes or pipes and measuring liquid levels or by other approved means .
dispose of drilling water and water encountered during drilling according to federal state and local regulations .
section num num num installing horizontal drain .
tightly plug the entrance end of the slotted pipe with a rounded or pointed extension that does not extend more than num inches num millimeters beyond the end of the pipe .
insert the pipe inside the drill rod and then retract the drill rod so the drilled hole is cased with the slotted pipe for the full drilled depth .
connect additional pipe as necessary to form a continuous tube .
use unslotted pipe for the last num feet num meters at the outlet end .
seal the space between the drilled hole and the unslotted pipe for at least num feet num meters at the outlet end with an approved impermeable material .
do not seal the space between the drilled hole and the slotted pipe .
num installing outlet drains and collector systems .
attach outlet drain pipe to the ends of horizontal drains by a tee or street ell .
install a collector system of the type kind and size as shown in the plans .
for pipe drain installations draining directly to daylight cover the outlet end of the pipe with a removable screen made of numinch nummillimeter diameter galvanized wires having approximate ½ by ½inch num by nummillimeter mesh openings .
num acceptance .
material furnished for horizontal drains will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of horizontal drains will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
water systems description num this work consists of constructing or reconstructing water systems .
material num conform to the following subsections bedding material num seamless copper water tube and fittings num smooth wall polyethylene pe pipe num for water distribution systems smooth wall polyvinyl chloride pipe num for water distribution systems steel pipe num construction requirements num general .
conform to the standards of apwa the awwa international building code and localagency plumbing and safety codes .
submit at the preconstruction conference a certified cost breakdown by individual items when water systems are paid the lump sum item for use in making progress payments and price adjustments .
obtain permits arrange for inspections and pay fees necessary to obtain water service .
excavate according to section num .
bed the pipe according to subsection numb .
coordinate service interruptions with the user or owner of the waterline .
provide temporary waterlines to ensure a water supply is maintained .
connection work may be required during times other than normal working hours .
do not stop work on a connection until it is completed .
dispose of disinfectant for water lines according to subsection num .
do not dispose of disinfectant in a manner that could enter a body of water .
num backfilling .
backfill according to subsection num except handplace the backfill to a depth of num inches num millimeters above the top of the pipe .
remove rocks and hard lumps from the handplaced layer .
num acceptance .
material for water systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of water systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring waterlines and encasement pipes measure along the flow line including the length through tees bends valves or other fixtures .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for lump sum pay items will be prorated based on the total work completed .
section num num section num .
sanitary sewer systems description num this work consists of constructing sanitary sewer systems .
material num conform to the following section and subsections .
bedding material num cast iron soil pipe and fittings num concrete water and waste water structures nume plastic pipe num construction requirements num general .
furnish either cast iron or plastic sanitary sewer lines .
furnish material and workmanship conforming to the standards of the awwa international building code and localagency plumbing and safety codes .
submit at the preconstruction conference a certified cost breakdown by individual items when sanitary sewer systems are paid the lump sum item for use in making progress payments and price adjustments .
obtain permits arrange for inspections and pay fees necessary to obtain sewerage service .
excavate according to section num .
bed the pipe according to subsection numb .
coordinate service interruptions with the user or owner of the sewerline .
provide temporary sewerlines to ensure a sewer supply is maintained .
connection work may be required during times other than normal working hours .
do not stop work on a connection until it is completed .
dispose of disinfectant for sewer lines according to subsection num .
do not dispose of disinfectant in a manner that could enter a body of water .
num laying sewer lines .
inspect each joint and clean the pipe and bell before placing in the trench .
lay the sewer line from the lower end with the spigot ends pointing in the direction of flow .
fully support each length between joints and check for line and grade before placing the next length .
check the gasket for proper positioning and shove sewer pipe into proper position where premolded watertight gaskets are used .
position the pipe and fill the joint completely with joint sealer when poured joints are used .
allow the sealer to cool completely before removing the runner .
num backfilling .
backfill according to subsection num .
flush the lines with water to ensure they are unobstructed after backfilling .
section num num num acceptance .
material for sanitary sewer systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of sanitary sewer systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation will be evaluated under section num .
backfilling will be evaluated under subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring sewer lines measure along the flow line including the length through valves ells tees valve boxes reducers manholes or other fixtures .
where two different sizes enter or exit a manhole measure each size to the center of the manhole .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for lump sum pay items will be prorated based on the total work completed .
section num num section num .
simulated stone masonry surface description num this work consists of using concrete colorstain and grout to simulate the texture and color of native stone masonry in the stone pattern shown in the plans .
this work also consists of the following a designing and furnishing textured form liners b installing form liners c applying a surface finish colorstain application that duplicates the unique coloring and mottled appearance of stone masonry and d preparing a simulated stone masonry test wall and demonstrating the surface finish before beginning production work .
material num conform to the following subsections neat hydraulic cement grout numanum penetrating stain num preformed expansion joint filler numb construction requirements num form liner fabrication .
take an impression of the stone shape texture and mortar joints from a designated location .
design form liners from the impressions according to the stone pattern shown in the plans .
submit detailed drawings of the form liner for approval according to subsection num .
num test wall .
before production work on the simulated stone masonry construct a numinch nummillimeter high by numinch nummillimeter wide by numfoot nummeter long test wall according to section num and these specifications .
cast the test wall on site using the same forming methods procedures form liner texture configuration expansion joint concrete mixture and colorstain application proposed for the production work .
demonstrate the quality and consistency of joint treatment end treatment top embossing methods back treatment and colorstain application on the test wall .
if a test wall is unacceptable construct a new test wall .
begin production structural concrete work only after the test wall is approved .
begin production colorstain application only after the colorstain application on the test wall is approved .
dispose of the test wall after use .
section num num num form liner installation .
furnish a form liner that attaches easily to the forming system .
install the form liner so it does not compress more than ¼ inch num millimeters during the concrete pour .
attach the form liners to the form .
attach adjacent form liners to each other with less than a ⅛inch nummillimeter seam .
do not repeat the form liner pattern between expansion joints or within numfoot nummeter intervals whichever is greater .
form expansion joints at the intervals shown in the plans .
blend the butt joints into the pattern and the final concrete surface .
coordinate the forms with wall ties .
place form tie holes in the high point of rustication or in the mortar joint .
clean off buildup before reusing form liners .
visually inspect each liner for blemishes and tears .
repair the liner before installation .
num top surface .
emboss the plastic concrete in the exposed top surface by stamping tooling troweling hand shaping or a combination thereof to simulate the stone masonry texture and mortared joints .
match the side pattern of the formed mortared joints .
immediately after the free surface water evaporates and the finish embossing is complete cure the concrete for num days according to subsection numb .
do not use liquid membrane curing compounds .
num form liner removal .
within num hours after placing concrete remove or break free the form liners without causing concrete surface deterioration or weakness in the substratum .
remove form tie material to a depth of at least num inch num millimeters below the concrete face without spalling and damaging the concrete .
cure the concrete for num days according to subsection numb .
do not use liquid membrane curing compounds .
num preparation of concrete surface .
finish exposed formed concrete surfaces according to subsection numb .
finish so that vertical seams horizontal seams and butt joint marks are not visible .
minimize grinding and chipping to avoid exposing aggregate .
provide a completed surface free of blemishes discolorations surface voids and conspicuous form marks .
make the finished texture and patterns continuous without visual disruption .
num colorstain application .
age concrete including patches at least num days .
clean the surface of latency dirt dust grease and foreign material by approved methods .
remove efflorescence with a pressure water wash. use a fan nozzle held perpendicular to the surface at a distance between num and num inches num and num millimeters .
use a minimum num pounds per square inch nummegapascals pressure at a rate of num to num gallons num to num liters per minute .
do not sand blast surfaces that receive colorstain .
correct surface irregularities created by the surface cleaning .
maintain the concrete temperature between num and num f num and num c when applying colorstain and for num hours after applying colorstain .
section num num colorstain exposed concrete surfaces .
use a colorstain application suitable to obtain the appearance of the native stone masonry .
use at least num colorsstains .
when required at boundaries between two color tones or between surfaces receiving color at different times take care and provide protection to avoid overspray and color overlap .
apply grout of a natural cement color to each form joint .
use sufficient grout so the overspray of the colorstain is not visible .
give the form pattern grout joint the appearance of mortared joints in completed masonry .
recoat areas inconsistent with the approved test wall .
treat expansion joints with caulkgrout to blend with the appearance of the adjacent stone or mortar joint .
num acceptance .
material for simulated stone masonry surface treatment will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of form liners will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
application of colorstain to exposed concrete surfaces will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of the simulated stone masonry test wall will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of simulated stone masonry surfaces will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
lean concrete backfill description num this work consists of constructing lean concrete backfill or flowable fill .
material num conform to the following subsections aggregate for lean concrete backfill num fly ash numa hydraulic cement num water numa construction requirements num composition of mix .
design a wellgraded flowable selfleveling mix .
verify the mix design with trial batches prepared from the same sources proposed for the mix .
submit the following for approval at least num days before production a type and sources of aggregates b type and source of cement c mix proportions d type of cement and fly ash if used in the mix e commercial certifications for cement fly ash admixtures and aggregate f target values for watercementitious material ratio and slump and g compressive strength at num days of num to num pounds per square inch num to num megapascals maximum .
num general .
perform the work described under section num .
do not place lean concrete backfill in contact with aluminum or aluminumcoated structures .
do not use lean concrete backfill above the top of subgrade .
num mixing and placing lean concrete backfill .
mix lean concrete backfill by pugmill rotary drum or other approved mixer to obtain a uniform mix .
place lean concrete backfill in a uniform manner that prevents voids or segregation in the backfill .
when backfilling around culverts and other structures place lean concrete backfill in a manner that does not float or shift the structure .
bring the backfill up evenly on all sides of the structure .
section num num when placing lean concrete backfill at or below an atmospheric temperature of num f num c perform the work under subsection numa .
wait at least num hours before backfilling over lean concrete backfill .
num acceptance .
lean concrete backfill will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
backfilling with lean concrete will be evaluated under subsection num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring lean concrete backfill by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the hauling vehicle .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
sidewalks pads and paved medians description num this work consists of constructing sidewalks pads and paved medians .
sidewalks pads and paved medians are designated as concrete asphalt concrete paving unit or paving brick .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections asphalt concrete num bedding material num elastomeric joint sealant numanum minor concrete num paving brick num precast concrete units and accessories numc or f preformed expansion joint filler for concrete numbnum reinforcing steel num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
place bedding material in layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters in compacted thickness .
compact each layer with at least three passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system .
num concrete sidewalks pads and medians .
perform the work according to section num .
use forms extending the full depth of concrete .
a joints .
construct joints perpendicular to the outside slab edges and other joints .
match the joints in adjacent curb or pavement .
tool and remove free mortar and concrete from joints .
num expansion joints .
construct at intervals not exceeding num feet num meters .
use ¾inch nummillimeter thick preformed expansion joint filler for the full depth of the joints .
if joints are sealed use elastomeric joint sealant .
num contraction joints .
construct at intervals not exceeding num feet num meters .
form joints with a jointing tool or saw joints to a depth of ¼ to ⅓ the thickness of the concrete and about ⅛ inch num millimeters wide .
num construction joints .
form construction joints around appurtenances such as manholes utility poles buildings and bridges .
use ½inch nummillimeter thick preformed expansion joint filler to full depth of the joints .
if joints are sealed use elastomeric joint sealant .
section num num b finishes .
provide a sidewalk finish .
edge slab edges and joints with a ¼inch nummillimeter radius edging tool .
num sidewalk finish .
see subsection numcnum .
num exposed aggregate finish .
see subsection numcnum .
cure the concrete according to subsection num .
protect the work from pedestrian traffic for num hours .
num asphalt concrete sidewalks pads and medians .
perform the work according to section num .
num concrete paving unit and paving brick sidewalks drive pads and medians .
lay units or bricks in successive courses on a prepared surface .
lay each course to grade .
relay courses that deviate from a straight line by more than num inches in num feet num millimeters in num meters .
sweep and inspect the surface before the bed sets .
remove and replace imperfect units or bricks .
chock the joints flush with a dry mixture of num parts sand and num part cement by mass and carefully water the surface to saturate the joint filler .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
paving brick concrete paving units and joint filler and sealant will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
bedding material will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of sidewalks pads and medians will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
asphalt concrete will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num num gradation subsection num num per soil type and source of material source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source liquid limit aashto r num t num method a production bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum production output or stockpile yes num hours liquid limit aashto r num t num method a section num num section num .
slope paving description num this work consists of constructing concrete masonry block rubble or cellular concrete block slope paving .
reinforced geotextile is designated according to tables num and num .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections bedding material num concrete masonry units num minor concrete num mortar num nonshrink grout numb paving brick num reinforcement geotextile num solid concrete interlocking paving units numf stone masonry rubble num topsoil num welded deformed steel wire fabric numj construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
place and compact bedding material with at least three passes of a lightweight mechanical tamper roller or vibratory system .
num reinforcement geotextile .
when required place reinforcement geotextile according to subsection num .
bury the ends of the reinforcement geotextile for anchorage .
pin the strips at numfoot nummeter intervals to hold the reinforcement geotextile lap in place until slope paving is placed .
num concrete slope paving .
construct toe walls .
place welded deformed steel wire fabric at the center of the slab .
run the wire fabric continuously through the joints .
lap adjacent runs of wire fabric by at least num inches num millimeters .
perform concrete work according to section num .
place slabs starting at the bottom of the slope .
construct horizontal joints parallel to the bottom of the slope and the vertical joints perpendicular to the horizontal joints .
construct cold joints without filler .
finish the surface according to subsection numcnum .
use a ¼inch nummillimeter radius edging tool on slab edges and joints .
num masonry block or rubble slope paving .
begin placing masonry block or rubble at the bottom of the slope .
place paving material on the bedding material with the flat face up and the longest dimension parallel to the bottom of the slope .
ram the masonry block or rubble into place .
section num num apply sufficient mortar on the exposed side to produce masonry block joints up to ½ inch num millimeters wide and rubble joints up to num inch num millimeters wide .
ram the masonry block or rubble into place so the mortar is within ½ inch num millimeters of the surface .
do not allow mortar to protrude above the surface .
clean mortar stain from the surface .
num cellular concrete block slope paving .
begin placing blocks in a trench or against a suitable anchorage at the bottom of the slope .
lay each block on the slope and bed it firmly against adjoining blocks .
use grout to fill misaligned joints or breaks at slope changes .
do not grout individual blocks to each other .
spread topsoil loosely over the cellular block slope paving partially filling the cell openings .
when required establish turf according to section num .
num acceptance .
see table num for sampling testing and acceptance requirements .
cellular concrete blocks concrete masonry blocks mortar and welded steel wire fabric will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
bedding material will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
slope paving construction will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
reinforcement geotextile will be evaluated under section num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
rubble will be evaluated under section num .
topsoil will be evaluated under section num .
turf establishment will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num table num sampling testing and acceptance requirements material or product subsection type of acceptance subsection characteristic category test methods specifications sampling frequency point of sampling split sample reporting time remarks source bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num num gradation subsection num num per soil type and source of material source of material yes before using in work not required when using government provided source liquid limit aashto r num t num method a production bedding material num measured and tested for conformance num gradation aashto t num t num num per num ydnum num mnum production output or stockpile yes num hours liquid limit aashto r num t num method a section num num section num .
guardrail description num this work consists of installing guardrail systems and modifying removing and resetting and raising existing guardrail systems .
a guardrail systems are designated as follows crg curved radius wbeam guardrail gnum cable guardrail gnum wbeam weak post gnum box beam gnum blockedout wbeam standard barrier gnum blockedout thrie beam standard barrier mbnum blockedout wbeam median barrier sblg steelbacked log rail sbta steelbacked timber sbt guardrailtimber posts and blockout sbtb sbt guardrailtimber posts and no blockout b steel guardrail types are designated as follows i zinccoated num ounces per square foot num grams per square meter ii zinccoated num ounces per square foot num grams per square meter iii painted rails iv corrosion resistant weathering steel c steel guardrail classes are designated as follows a metal thickness num inches num millimeters numguage b metal thickness num inches num millimeters numguage d terminals consist of posts railing hardware and anchorage assembly necessary to construct the type of terminal specified .
terminal types are designated as follows flared straight or parabolic flared w beam terminal gnumbat back slope anchor terminal gnumcrt cable releasing terminal sbtbat back slope anchor terminal sbtfat flared sbt anchor terminal sbttangent tangent sbt terminal tangent tangent w beam terminal section num num material num conform to the following section and subsections guardrail blocks num guardrail hardware num guardrail nuts bolts and cables num guardrail posts num minor concrete num rail elements num construction requirements num general .
furnish guardrail systems and terminals that are crashworthy .
when flared or tangent terminals are required submit drawings from the manufacturer for the terminals according to subsection num .
place concrete according to section num .
perform welding according to subsection num .
num post installation .
treat field cuts for wood posts with two coats of preservative specified in subsection num .
do not place field cuts in contact with the ground .
install the posts plumb and at the location spacing and elevation specified or as directed by the co .
when the pavement surface is within num inches num millimeter of the guardrail face install posts before placing the pavement surface .
protect posts from traffic by attaching the rail elements or by a method approved by the co. posts may be installed by either drilling or driving .
ensure posts installed by drilling have sufficiently sized holes to permit thorough compaction of backfill material around the post .
backfill in compacted layers not exceeding num inches num millimeters .
replace posts damaged during driving operations .
when a post can not be placed at its normal location due to an impenetrable object an additional blockout may be added .
if the post can not be offset follow the post in rock detail or use the long span detail as shown in the plans or as approved by the co. do not change the post lengths or spacings in terminal sections .
when it is not possible to maintain a numinch nummillimeter minimum distance between the back of the guardrail post and the top of a numvnumh or steeper slope increase the standard post length by num inches num millimeters .
num rail element installation .
do not modify specified hole diameters or slot dimensions .
a steel rail .
shop bend curved guardrail with a radius of num feet num meters or less .
install rail elements in a smooth continuous line with the laps in the direction of traffic flow .
use bolts that extend at least ¼ inch num millimeters but not more than num inch num millimeters beyond the nuts .
section num num paint scrapes on galvanized surfaces that expose the base metal with two coats of zincoxide paint .
b steelbacked timber and log rail .
treat field cuts with two coats of preservative .
num terminal sections .
do not connect the guardrail to castinplace anchors until the concrete has cured num days .
install end anchor cables without slack .
num connection to structure .
install posts railing hardware and anchorage assembly necessary to construct the type of connection to structure specified .
num guardrail construction exposed to traffic .
when a roadway is open to traffic during construction complete guardrail installations within num days from the day the structure pavement shoulder or whichever is the controlling item of work is sufficiently completed to allow guardrail installation .
in areas where guardrail construction is not restricted by other construction complete removal of existing guardrail and construct new guardrail within num hours of starting work .
at the end of each day securely bolt a rounded end section to the exposed end of the guardrail .
schedule guardrail installation so work is finished before work suspension or other extended periods of time .
num removing and resetting guardrail .
remove and store the existing rail elements posts and appurtenances .
remove and dispose of posts that are set in concrete .
replace guardrail posts and hardware damaged during removal storage or resetting .
backfill holes resulting from the removal of guardrail posts and anchors with material approved by the co .
dispose of material not used in resetting guardrail according to section num .
num raising guardrail .
remove the existing rail elements and appurtenances .
replace and reset posts as needed .
replace rail elements posts and hardware damaged during the removal and raising .
dispose of damaged material according to section num .
num acceptance .
material for guardrail will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of guardrail will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
welding will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure transition sections from gnum rail to gnum rail as gnum rail .
measure removing and resetting guardrail and raising guardrail including reset terminal sections .
measure replacement posts except replacement posts for posts damaged by construction operations used in the removing and resetting or raising guardrail .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
concrete barriers and precast guardwalls description num this work consists of constructing and resetting concrete barrier and precast guardwall systems .
material num conform to the following section and subsections backer rod numf guardrail hardware num joint sealants numa precast concrete barrier numb preformed expansion joint filler numb reinforcing steel num structural concrete num construction requirements num general .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
construct barriers and guardwalls that are crashworthy .
furnish concrete class aae conforming to section num .
num concrete barriers .
concrete barriers may be castinplace slipformed or precast according to section num .
finish the sides and top according to subsection numa .
a castinplace .
tool or saw cut contraction joints ¼ inch num millimeters wide and num inches num millimeters deep at numfoot nummeter intervals .
saw cut after the concrete has set sufficiently but before shrinkage cracking occurs .
decrease the depth of the saw cut at the edge adjacent to the pavement to prevent pavement damage .
place ¾inch nummillimeter preformed expansion joint filler in construction joints .
cut the joint filler to fit the crosssectional area at structures and barrier construction joints .
tool construction joint edges .
seal joints according to subsection num. b slipformed .
do not contact extruded concrete surface as it leaves the slipform machine except to remove offsets and fins by light troweling .
make adjustments in the operation to correct conditions causing surface blemishes larger than ½ inch num millimeters .
do not use water on the completed barrier to correct imperfections .
c precast .
precast barriers in section lengths .
prepare the barrier foundation so it does not vary over ¼ inch num millimeters when a numfoot nummeter straightedge is laid along the centerline of the barrier .
align the joints and connect adjacent sections .
section num num use castinplace barrier where transitions split barriers or gaps shorter than num feet num meters require it .
at each joint between precast and castinplace barrier provide hardware in the castinplace section to tie its end to the abutting precast section .
num precast concrete guardwall .
a fabrication .
a fullsize sample of the guardwall will be provided at a specified location .
fabricate the guardwall to match the samples shape color texture and the following num fabricate in a facility certified by the national precast concrete association npca and according to the npca manual of quality control for precast and prestressed concrete plants num formulate the facing mixes backing mixes and structural concrete backup to produce concrete mix designs of similar aggregatecement ratios to minimize differences in shrinkage factors and coefficients of thermal expansion and contraction .
formulate a concrete mixture according to subsection num to match the approved sample num use epoxycoated reinforcing steel at locations where the reinforcing steel is less than num inches num millimeters from the exposed surface num cast the sections straight and true num cast the facing mixes at least num inch num millimeters thick .
ensure a good bond between facing and backup mixes and num provide lifting devices with removable caps for each precast segment .
b test section .
demonstrate the ability to match the sample by fabricating a numfoot nummeter full scale guardwall test section and delivering it to the location of the sample for comparison .
if the test section is not approved fabricate another test section according to subsection numa .
do not construct additional guardwall before the sample is approved .
approved test sections may be used in the guardwall construction .
c installation .
produce guardwall sections to match the approved test section .
repair or replace damaged sections .
prepare the foundation by compacting the bedding material with at least three passes of a vibratory roller until there is no visible evidence of further consolidation .
place the sections using backer rods and joint sealant in the section joints to match the false joints .
at numfoot nummeter intervals and at low points in the guardwall excavate outlet ditches and backfill with num inches num millimeters of aggregate conforming to subsection num .
num terminal sections .
where concrete barrier or precast guardwall is being constructed next to roadway lanes open to traffic connect an approved temporary terminal section crash cushion or impact attenuator to the barrier or guardwall at the end of each shift .
num resetting .
reset concrete barrier precast guardwall and terminal sections according to subsections num and num .
store concrete barrier and precast guardwall sections in an approved location if not reset immediately .
section num num num acceptance .
material for concrete barrier and precast guardwall except concrete and reinforcing steel will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete barrier and precast guardwall appearance will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction of concrete barriers and precast guardwalls will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
concrete will be evaluated under section num .
reinforcing steel will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure concrete barrier and precast guardwall excluding terminal sections .
measure reset concrete barrier and precast guardwall in their relocated position including terminal sections .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
fences gates cattle guards and bollard posts description num this work consists of constructing fences gates cattle guards and bollard posts and removing and resetting fence .
material num conform to the following section and subsections barbed wire num chain link fence num fence gates num fence posts and bollards num minor concrete num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum precast concrete units and accessories numg reinforcing steel num temporary plastic fence num woven wire num construction requirements num fences and gates .
a general .
clear along the fence line .
remove and dispose of trees brush logs upturned stumps roots of downed trees rubbish and debris according to subsection num .
clear a numfoot nummeter width for chain link fence and a numinch nummillimeter width for wire fence .
grubbing is not required except where short and abrupt changes in the ground contour require removal of stumps to properly grade the fence line .
remove or cut stumps according to subsection numb .
perform clearing and leveling with minimum disturbance to the terrain outside the fence line .
schedule the fence installation provide temporary fence or other adequate means to prevent livestock from entering the project rightofway easements or adjoining properties .
at bridges cattle underpasses and culverts connect new fence to structure to permit free passage of livestock under or through the structure .
b chain link fence and gates .
num posts .
space posts at not more than numfoot nummeter intervals .
measure the post spacing interval horizontally .
set posts vertically .
set posts in concrete according to section num .
section num num where solid rock is encountered without overburden drill line post holes at least num inches num millimeters deep .
drill end corner gate and pull posts at least num inches num millimeters deep in the solid rock .
make the hole width or diameter at least num inch num millimeters greater than the post width or diameter .
cut the post to the required length before installation or drill the hole deep enough to set the post at the required height .
set and plumb the post and fill the hole with grout .
thoroughly work the neat hydraulic cement grout into the hole to eliminate voids .
crown the grout to drain water away from the post .
where solid rock is covered with soil or loose rock overburden set posts to the plan depth or to the minimum depth into the solid rock as specified above whichever is less .
when solid rock is encountered before the plan depth grout the portion of the post in solid rock and backfill the post hole from the solid rock to the top of the ground with concrete .
provide end gate corner and pull posts with adjacent brace posts as shown in the plans .
a change in the fence alignment of num degrees or more is considered a corner .
num top rail .
install top rails through the loop caps of the line posts forming a continuous brace from endtoend of each stretch of fence .
join lengths of top rail with sleevetype couplings .
securely fasten top rails to terminal posts by pressed steel fittings or other appropriate means .
num tension wire .
attach tension wire to end gate corner or pull posts by bands and clamps .
either thread the top tension wire through the line post loop caps or hold in open slots in a manner to limit vertical movement .
tie or attach the bottom tension wire to the bottom of the line posts by ties or clamps in a manner that prevents vertical movement .
apply sufficient tension to avoid excess sag between posts .
on the top tension wire provide one turnbuckle or ratchet takeup in each run of fence .
num fence fabric .
for fences placed on the rightofway place fence fabric on the post face away from the highway .
on curved alignment place the fence fabric on the post face on the outside of the curve .
for residential fences and fences off the rightofway place fence fabric on the post face designated by the co. place the fabric approximately num inch num millimeters above the ground and on a straight line between posts .
excavate high points of the ground to maintain grade .
do not fill in depressions without prior approval .
stretch the fabric taut and securely fasten the fabric to the posts .
do not stretch using a motor vehicle .
use stretcher bars and fabric bands to fasten to end gate corner and pull posts or weave the fabric into the fastening loops of rollformed posts .
fasten fabric to line posts using wire ties metal bands or other approved method .
fasten the top and bottom edge of the fabric with tie wires or hog rings to the top rail or tension wires as applicable .
join rolls of fabric by weaving a single strand into the ends of the rolls to form a continuous mesh .
num gates .
fasten fabric to the end bars of the gate frame by stretcher bars and fabric bands .
fasten fabric to the top and bottom bars of the gate frame by tie wires similar to the method specified for fence fabric or by other approved standard methods .
section num num thoroughly clean welded connections on gate frames where the smelter coating has been burned with a wire brush .
remove traces of the welding flux and loose or cracked smelter .
paint the cleaned areas with two coats of zincoxide paint .
provide a concrete footing for the dropbar locking device on double metal gates .
make a hole to receive the locking bar to the depth specified by the manufacturer of the locking device .
hinge each single gate to prevent removal of the gate without tools .
set the gate in an approximately horizontal plane .
set the gate so it swings freely inward and outward and fastens securely in its latch holder or in the case of double gates in its latch holder and gate stops .
set double gates on their respective hinge pintles to provide a common horizontal plane in which each single gate swings .
set gates to swing open at least num degrees in each direction .
c wire fences and gates .
num posts .
excavate holes for posts footings and anchors as shown .
space posts at intervals shown for the type of fence being installed .
measure post spacing interval parallel to the existing ground slope .
set posts in a vertical position .
backfill post holes in numinch nummillimeter lifts .
tamp and compact each lift .
wood posts may be driven in place if the method of driving does not damage the post .
metal posts may be driven .
set metal corner gate end and pull posts in concrete .
where solid rock is encountered without overburden drill line post holes at least num inches num millimeters deep and end corner gate and pull posts at least num inches num millimeters deep in the solid rock .
make the hole width or diameter at least num inch num millimeters greater than the post width or diameter .
cut the post to the required length before installation or drill the hole deep enough to set the post at the required height .
set and plumb the post and fill the hole with grout .
thoroughly work the grout into the hole to eliminate voids .
crown the grout to drain water away from the post .
metal posts set in this manner do not require anchor plates and concrete footings .
where solid rock is covered with soil or loose rock overburden set posts to the plan depth or to the minimum depth into the solid rock as specified above whichever is less .
when the depth of overburden is greater than num inches num millimeters use an anchor plate on steel line posts and backfill steel end corner gate and pull posts with concrete from the solid rock to top of the ground .
when the depth of overburden is num inches num millimeters or less anchor plates and concrete backfill are not required .
grout the portion of the post in solid rock .
install corner posts at changes in alignment of num degrees or more .
where new fence joins an existing fence set end or corner posts as necessary and attach in a manner satisfactory to the co. num braces .
limit fence runs to no more than num feet num meters between adjacent corner braces gate braces end braces or line braces .
install line braces at uniform intervals so the distance between any two braces is num feet num meters or less .
construct braces before placing the fence fabric and wires on posts .
a metal braces .
provide corner posts and pull posts with two braces one each direction from the post in the main fence line .
provide end posts and gate posts with one brace in the line of the fence .
attach metal braces to the metal end corner pull and gate posts and set in concrete as shown in the plans .
section num num b wood braces .
tap the posts to receive the braces .
anchor the brace to the post with three numd nails or a ⅜ by numinch num by nummillimeter dowel .
install brace wires as shown and twist together until the entire assembly is taut and firm .
lightly notch the posts to position the brace wire .
drive three staples at each notch to secure wire .
num barbed wire and woven wire .
place barbed wire and woven wire on the side of the post facing away from the highway .
on curved alignment place the barbed wire and the woven wire on the post face on the outside of the curve .
tightly stretch and fasten barbed wire and woven wire to the posts .
apply tension according to the manufacturers recommendations using a mechanical stretcher or other device designed for such use .
evenly distribute the pull over the longitudinal wires in the woven wire so not more than num percent of the original depth of the tension curves is removed .
do not use a motor vehicle to stretch the wire .
splicing of barbed wire and woven wire between posts is permitted provided not more than two splices spaced at least num feet num meters apart occur in a run of fence .
use wrap or telephone type splices for the longitudinal woven wire and barbed wire with each end wrapped around the other wire for not less than six complete turns .
num fastening barbed wire and woven wire .
end the woven wire and barbed wire at each end corner gate and pull post .
wrap each line of barbed wire and each longitudinal wire of the woven wire around the post and then itself with at least four turns .
where wood posts are used staple the wires tightly to the posts .
at line posts fasten the woven wire to the post at top and bottom and at intermediate points not exceeding num inches num millimeters apart .
fasten each strand of barbed wire to each line post .
use wire ties or clamps to fasten the wires to metal posts .
securely splice tie wires to the fence on both sides of the post so there are two loops behind the post and one loop in front .
on wood line posts drive ushaped staples diagonally across the wood grain so that both points do not enter between the same grain .
in depressions where wire uplift occurs drive staples with points slightly upward .
on level ground and over knolls slope the points slightly downward .
drive the staples just short of actual contact with the wires to permit free longitudinal movement of those lines and to prevent damage to the protective coating .
at grade depressions alignment angles and other locations where stresses tending to pull posts from the ground or out of alignment are created snub or guy the wire fence .
attach the guy wire to each strand of barbed wire and to the top and bottom wires of woven wire in a manner to maintain the entire fence in its normal shape .
attach the guy wire to a deadman anchor buried not less than num inches num millimeters in the ground or to an approved anchor at a point that best serves to resist the pull of the wire fence .
if necessary to guy the fence in solid rock grout the guy wire in a hole num inches num millimeters in diameter and num inches num millimeters deep .
deadman may also be fastened to posts .
place the deadman anchors at locations as directed .
where required install vertical cinch stays as shown .
twist the wire to permit weaving into the horizontal fence wires to provide rigid spacing .
weave barbed wires and the top middle and bottom wire of the woven wire as applicable into the cinch stay .
where existing fence intersects the new fence cut the existing fence material or splice in kind new material as necessary and fasten each longitudinal wire of the woven wire and each strand of the barbed wire to a new end post in line with or immediately adjacent to the new fence line .
section num num num gates .
a wire gates .
construct wire gates of the same material as the fence and as shown .
provide a taut and wellaligned closure of the opening capable of being readily opened and closed by hand .
b metal gates .
install metal gates and fittings to gate posts previously set .
firmly attach the fittings to the posts and gates .
hinge each single gate to prevent removal of the gate without tools .
set the gate in a horizontal plane .
set the gate so it swings freely inward and outward and fastens securely in its latch holder or in the case of double gates in its latch holder and gate stops .
set double gates and their respective pintles to provide a common horizontal plane in which each single gate swings .
set gates to swing open at least num degrees in each direction .
for double gates provide a dropbar locking device with a concrete footing num inches num millimeters in diameter and num inches num millimeters deep .
crown the top of the footing and make a hole to receive the locking bar .
make the diameter and depth of the hole in the footing as specified by the manufacturer of the locking device .
c wood gates .
install wood gates similar to metal gates and as shown in the plans .
num grounding fences .
where an electric line crosses the fence line ground the fence .
drive an numfoot nummeter long ½inch nummillimeter minimum diameter galvanized or copper coated steel rod into the ground under the fence directly below the point of crossing .
drive the rod vertically until the top is num inches num millimeters below the ground surface .
connect the grounding rod to each fence element with a ¼inch nummillimeter diameter solid copper conductor or equivalent .
either braze the connections or fasten with noncorrosive clamps .
where an electric line runs parallel or nearly parallel to and above the fence ground the fence at each end or gate post or at intervals not exceeding num feet num meters .
where vertical penetration of the grounding rod can not be accomplished use an equivalent horizontal grounding system .
num remove and reset fence .
remove existing fence and reset to approximately the same condition as the original fence .
salvage material in the existing fence and incorporate the material into the reset fence .
when posts are set in concrete remove concrete from old post and reset in new concrete .
replace fence material damaged beyond reuse .
firmly reset posts on new alignment .
space posts and attach the horizontal members or wires to posts the same as the original fence .
furnish and use new material to fasten members or wires to posts .
num temporary fence .
when necessary construct temporary fence to keep traffic such as pedestrian livestock and vehicular off the project .
maintain the temporary fence during construction of the project or until the fence is directed to be removed .
dispose of temporary fence according to subsection numa .
num cattle guards .
a excavating and backfilling .
perform the work described under section num .
excavate foundation to depth with sufficient space for proper installation of formwork .
when the cattle guard is to be installed on new embankment complete and compact the embankment according to section num before excavating for footing .
section num num b concrete foundation .
concrete cattle guard foundations may be castinplace or precast .
construct castinplace concrete foundations according to section num .
set cattle guard units in the foundation concrete before it hardens .
finish stringer bearings to allow full bearing under each stringer .
firmly seat cattle guard on the concrete to prevent rocking .
c cattle guard .
fabricate cattle guard according to section num .
assemble and place guards as shown in the plans .
securely fasten the cattle guard to the foundation .
fasten the metal wings as shown in the plans .
connect fences and gates as shown in the plans .
weld according to aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum dnumm .
standard manufactured cattle guards may be used if approved .
furnish cattle guards with hsnum m num loading rating according to aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge design specifications .
provide suitable cleanouts .
submit drawings according to subsection num. d painting .
paint according to section num .
apply one shop coat to metal parts .
apply two additional coats in either the shop or in the field .
num bollards .
drill holes for bollards .
set posts plumb backfill with approved material and compact .
num acceptance .
material for fences gates cattle guards and bollards will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction and erection of fences gates cattle guards and bollards will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill for cattle guards will be evaluated under section num .
structural steel work for cattle guards will be evaluated under section num .
painting of cattle guards will be evaluated under section num .
concrete work for cattle guards will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
stone masonry description num this work consists of constructing or rehabilitating stone masonry structures and the stone masonry portions of composite structures .
masonry class is designated as follows a dimensioned masonry .
stones are cut in two or more dimensions and laid in a brokencourse pattern in mortar b class a masonry .
stones are shaped dressed to within ¼ inch num millimeters of true line and laid in mortar c class b masonry .
stones are shaped dressed to within ¾ inch num millimeters of true line and laid in mortar and d rubble masonry .
stones vary in size and shape are roughly dressed and laid in random courses in mortar .
material num conform to the following section and subsections minor concrete num mortar num neat hydraulic cement grout numanum preformed expansion joint fillers numb reinforcing steel num rock for masonry structures num construction requirements num general .
submit stone samples representing the range of colors and sizes to be used num days before beginning work .
keep an adequate inventory of stone on the site to provide a variety of stones .
mix new stone with existing stone to produce a uniform pattern and color .
perform excavation and embankment according to section num .
section num num num dressing rock .
remove thin or weak portions of rock .
dress face rock bed and joint lines to a maximum variation from true line as follows dimensioned masonry reasonably true class a masonry ¼ in num mm class b masonry ¾ in num mm rubble masonry num½ in num mm a bed surfaces .
dress face rock bed surfaces normal to the face to a depth of num inches num millimeters .
beyond that point do not exceed num inch num millimeters in num inches num millimeters the departure from normal for dimensioned masonry or num inches num millimeters in num inches num millimeters for other classes .
b joint surfaces .
for dimensioned masonry dress face rock joint surfaces normal to the bed surface .
for other classes of masonry dress face rock joint surfaces to form an angle with the bed surface of not less than num degrees .
dress face rock joint surfaces normal to the face to a depth of num inches num millimeters .
beyond that point do not exceed num inch in num inches num millimeters in num millimeters departure from normal .
do not round corners at the meeting of the bed and joint lines in excess of the following radii num dimensioned masonry no rounding num class a masonry no rounding num class b masonry num inch num millimeters num rubble masonry num½ inches num millimeters c arch ring rock joint surfaces .
dress ring rock joint surfaces radial to the arch or normal to the front face to a depth of num inches num millimeters .
beyond that point the departure from the radial or normal may not exceed ¾ inch in num inches num millimeters in num millimeters .
dress the back surface adjacent to the arch barrel concrete parallel to the front face and normal to the intrados to a depth of num inches num millimeters .
when concrete is placed after the masonry is constructed vary adjacent ring stones at least num inches num millimeters in depth .
d finish for exposed faces .
remove drill or quarry marks from exposed faces .
pitch face stones to the line along beds and joints .
finish the exposed faces as specified in the contract .
the following abbreviations are used to represent the type of surface or dressing specified num fine pointed f.p .. make point depressions approximately ⅜ inch num millimeters apart .
limit surface variations to ⅛ inch num millimeters or less from the pitch line .
num medium pointed m.p .. make point depressions approximately ⅝ inch num millimeters apart .
limit surface variations to ¼ inch num millimeters or less from the pitch line .
num coarse pointed c.p .. make point depressions approximately num⅛ inches num millimeters apart .
limit surface variations to ⅜ inch num millimeters or less from the pitch line .
section num num num split or seam face s ..
provide a smooth appearance without tool marks with no depressions below the pitch line and no projection exceeding ¾ inch num millimeters beyond the pitch line .
num rock faced r.f ..
provide an irregular projecting surface without tool marks concave surfaces below the pitch line and projections beyond the specified pitch line .
for example the specification num r.f .
num r.f means no projections num½ inches num millimeters beyond the pitch line .
where a variable rock face is specified uniformly distribute stones of the same height of projection .
num placing stone .
do not place stone masonry when the ambient temperature is below num f num c. clean stones and moisten before placing .
use hand tools to clean the exposed faces of the stones of mortar when removing and resetting stone masonry .
clean and moisten the bed .
clean the bearing surface and moisten before spreading the mortar bed on footings .
level the cross beds for vertical walls .
lay beds for battered walls from level to normal to the batter line of the face of the wall .
place stone to provide a consistent pattern and color .
lay stones with the longest face horizontal and the exposed face parallel to the masonry face .
construct masonry joints to the thicknesses shown in table num for face stones .
construct ring stone joints on the faces and soffits between ¼ inch num millimeters and num½ inches num millimeters thick but make the bed of each course of a uniform thickness throughout .
construct head joints vertically in dimensioned masonry .
construct head joints in other masonry classes at angles with the vertical from num to num degrees .
maintain completed masonry at a temperature above num f num c for num hours after construction .
remove stones loosened after the mortar has taken initial set clean off the mortar and relay the stone with fresh mortar .
table num masonry joint thicknesses class bed joint head joints dimensioned ⅜ num inches num num millimeters ¾ num inches num num millimeters class a ½ num inches num num millimeters ½ num½ inches num num millimeters class b ½ num inches num num millimeters ½ num inches num num millimeters rubble ½ num½ inches num num millimeters ½ num½ inches num num millimeters section num num num pointing .
a pointing new joints .
crown the joint mortar slightly on top surfaces to provide drainage .
where raked joints are required squarely rake mortar in exposed face joints and beds to the required depth .
slightly rake the mortar where weather joints are required .
do not leave the mortar flush with the stone faces .
clean stone faces of mortar stains while the mortar is fresh .
after the mortar sets clean stone faces again using wire brushes and acid .
protect masonry during hot or dry weather by keeping it moist for at least num days after the work is completed .
b repointing joints .
remove loose mortar from joints using a small masons chisel small pneumaticallypower chisel or other raking tool approved by the co. do not use power saws or grinders .
demonstrate proficiency if power equipment is used before removing mortar from the structure .
remove mortar to a depth of two and onehalf times the width of the joint .
remove dirt or vegetation with a wire brush or other approved tools .
clean joint of loose fragments and dust with pressurized air or water .
construct a numinch nummillimeter test section of joint along the structure for approval before continuing with work .
approved test section may be incorporated into the work .
moisten adjacent stone before filling the joint .
do not place mortar to a depth greater than two and onehalf times the joint width .
place mortar in layers of approximately ¼ inch num millimeters for joints deeper than ⅛ inch num millimeters .
add successive layers once mortar has reached thumbprint hardness .
tool the final layer to match the approved joint appearance .
clean excess mortar and stain from stone masonry using a bristle brush after the mortar has dried but before the initial set .
do not use chemicals for cleaning .
protect masonry during hot or dry weather by keeping it moist for at least num days after the work is completed .
num constructing walls .
construct an lshaped test section of wall at least num feet num meters high and num feet num meters long showing examples of face wall top wall method of turning corners and method of forming joints .
do not construct masonry other than the foundation masonry before the test section is approved .
set face stones to produce the effect demonstrated in the approved test section .
do not extend bed joints in an unbroken line through more than five stones and head joints through more than two stones .
bond each face stone with contiguous face stones at least num inches num millimeters longitudinally and num inches num millimeters vertically .
do not allow the corners of four stones to be adjacent to each other .
do not bunch small stones or stones of the same size color or texture .
construct walls using stones decrease in size from the bottom to the top .
use large stones in corners .
a headers .
distribute headers uniformly throughout the walls of structures to form at least num percent of the faces .
b backing .
construct the backing out of large stones .
bond the individual stones composing the backing and heart with the stones in the face wall and with each other .
fill openings and interstices in the backing with mortar or with spalls surrounded by mortar .
section num num c coping .
finish with coping when shown in the plans .
when copings are not required finish the top of the wall with stones wide enough to cover the top of the wall from num to num feet num to num meters in length and of random heights with a minimum height of num inches num millimeters .
lay stones in a manner that the cap course is an integral part of the wall .
pitch the top of the capstones to align in both vertical and horizontal planes .
d parapet walls .
use stones squared and pitched to line and with heads dressed in the ends of parapet walls and in exposed angles and corners .
interlock spreaders with as many headers as possible .
extend headers through the entire wall thickness .
interlock both the headers and stretchers in the two faces of the wall .
use headers and stretchers to comprise a majority of the wall volume .
fill openings and interstices with mortar or with spalls surrounded by mortar .
e weep holes .
place weep holes at the lowest points where free outlets can be obtained .
space holes no more than num feet num meters apart .
num facing for concrete .
a stone placed before concrete .
make the back of the masonry uneven .
pack voids in the back of the masonry with grout .
use no .
num numm reinforcing steel bent into an elongated letter s to anchor the stone .
embed each anchor in a mortar bed to within num inches num millimeters from the face of the stones .
project the other end about num inches num millimeters into the concrete backing .
space the anchors num inches num millimeter apart both horizontally and vertically .
clean the back masonry surface of dirt loose material and mortar drippings after the mortar has attained sufficient strength .
wash surfaces with pressurized water before placing concrete .
b concrete placed before stone .
set galvanized metal anchor slots flush with the projected face of concrete .
set the slots vertically at maximum horizontal spacings of num inches num millimeters .
use foam filled slots to prevent filling with concrete .
fit the metal anchors in the slots at a maximum vertical spacing of num inches num millimeters .
extend the anchors to within num inches num millimeters of the face of the stones .
if the shape of the concrete face is unsuitable for the use of metal slots use num gage nummillimeter galvanized iron wire ties at a rate of six ties for each square yard seven ties for each square meter of exposed surface .
keep the concrete face continuously wet for num hours preceding the placing of the stone and fill interstices with mortar or with spalls surrounded by mortar .
num constructing arches .
submit drawings for falsework according to section num .
stratify arch ring stones parallel to the radial joint and stratify other stones parallel to the beds .
lay out a fullsize template of the arch ring showing face dimensions of each ring stone and thickness of joints .
do not shape or dress ring stones until falsework drawings have been approved .
do not place ring stones until all ring stones have been shaped and dressed .
section num num construct arch centering according to the drawings .
provide suitable wedges for adjusting the elevation of the forms .
set arch ring stones and hold in place with wedges until the joints are packed with mortar .
if required support centering with jacks to prevent settlement during masonry placement .
lower the centering gradually and symmetrically to avoid overstresses in the arch .
ensure the arch is selfsupporting before installing coping or other features .
strike the centers of filled spandrel arches before constructing the spandrel walls to avoid jamming of the expansion joints .
place the backfill so the ring is uniformly and symmetrically loaded .
num guardwall .
use rubble masonry .
construct castinplace or precast concrete corewalls according to section num .
use concrete with a minimum numday compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
construct a numfoot nummeter test section of guardwall .
do not construct additional guardwall until the test section is approved .
construct the guardwall true and uniform along its length with no stone projecting more than num½ inches num millimeters beyond the face of the guardwall .
construct masonry beds and joints for face stones to the thicknesses shown in table num .
rake the joints and beds to a depth of num inches num millimeters on the front and top sides and to a depth of num½ inches num millimeters on the back .
use a onepiece capstone for the full width of the guardwall for at least num percent of the total length .
use a twopiece capstone with the joint within num inches num millimeters of the guardwall center for the remaining length .
place stones including the capstones randomly to avoid a pattern .
lay stones to reflect the width of the expansion joints .
do not leave a gap or a mortar edge at the expansion joint .
use various size stones to coin or key the corners of the guardwall .
num acceptance .
rock for masonry structures will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
material for mortar will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
mortar placement will be evaluated under subsection num .
construction or rehabilitation of stone masonry will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring stone masonry by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the structure .
when measuring stone masonry guardwall measure along the gutterline including terminal sections .
section num num when measuring remove and reset stone masonry by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the structure after resetting .
when measuring repointing of stone masonry measure along the centerline of joint .
do not measure test wall sections not incorporated in the work .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
monuments and markers description num this work consists of constructing and reestablishing monuments and markers .
material num conform to the following section and subsections minor concrete num reinforcing steel num construction requirements num monuments and markers .
reestablish or locate permanent points according to subsection num and section num .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
monuments may be castinplace or precast according to section num .
set each monument and marker vertically at the required location and elevation such that the monument remains stable horizontally and vertically .
unless otherwise shown in the plans install markers or monuments that are commercially available and typical for the area and application .
mark the monuments with durable markings that identify the monument uniquely and unambiguously .
num acceptance .
material except concrete for monuments and markers will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
construction of monuments and markers will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
location of permanent points will be evaluated under sections num and num .
structural excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
rental equipment description num this work consists of furnishing and operating equipment for construction work ordered by the co and not otherwise provided for under the contract .
construction requirements num rental equipment .
the co will order in writing rental equipment for use on the project .
submit the model number and serial number for each piece of equipment before use .
make equipment available for inspection and approval before use .
furnish and operate equipment with auxiliary attachments and oilers as are usually needed for efficient operation of the equipment .
keep the equipment in good repair and capable of operating num percent of the working time .
obtain approval of the length of workday and workweek before beginning work .
keep daily records of the number of unithours of operation .
submit the records along with certified copies of the payroll .
num acceptance .
rental equipment work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure time for moving equipment between project work sites .
do not measure nonoperable equipment or equipment dependent upon another piece of nonoperable equipment .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
general labor description num this work consists of furnishing workers and hand tools for construction work ordered by the co and not otherwise provided for under the contract .
construction requirements num workers and equipment .
furnish competent workers and appropriate hand tools for the work .
obtain approval of the length of workday and workweek before beginning work .
keep daily records of the number of hours worked .
submit the records along with certified copies of the payroll .
num acceptance .
general labor work will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable do not measure time for workers transportation to and from the project site .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
topsoil description num this work consists of furnishing and placing topsoil and placing conserved topsoil .
material num conform to the following subsection topsoil num construction requirements num preparing areas .
shape slopes and disturbed areas to be covered with topsoil .
disk or scarify slopes numvnumh or flatter to a depth of num inches num millimeters perpendicular to the natural flow of water .
num placing topsoil .
provide at least num days notice before the start of topsoil placement .
do not place topsoil when the ground or topsoil is frozen excessively wet or otherwise in a condition detrimental to the work .
use conserved topsoil before furnishing topsoil .
keep the roadway surfaces clean during hauling and spreading operations .
spread topsoil to a depth that after settlement provides the required depth .
break clods and lumps with harrows disks or other appropriate equipment to provide a uniform textured soil .
remove and dispose of clods and stones larger than num inches num millimeters stumps roots and other litter according to subsection num .
construct longitudinal depressions at least num inches num millimeters deep perpendicular to the natural flow of water without overly compacting the topsoil surface .
num acceptance .
material for furnished topsoil will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
material for conserved topsoil will be evaluated under subsection num .
placing topsoil will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring furnishing and placing topsoil by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the hauling vehicle or by the acre hectare on the ground surface .
when measuring placing conserved topsoil by the cubic yard cubic meter measure in the hauling vehicle or by the acre hectare on the ground surface .
section num num payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
turf establishment description num this work consists of soil preparation watering fertilizing seeding and mulching .
seeding and mulching methods are designated as dry or hydraulic .
material num conform to the following subsections agricultural limestone num fertilizer num mulch num seed num tackifiers num water numb construction requirements num general .
apply turf establishment to finished slopes and ditches within num days after completion of construction on a portion of the site when approved by the co. do not seed during windy weather or when the ground is excessively wet frozen snow covered extremely dry cloddy hard pan or not friable .
num preparing seedbed .
grade the seeding area to line and grade .
remove weeds sticks stones num inches num millimeters in diameter and larger and other debris detrimental to application growth or maintenance of the turf .
apply limestone and grub proofing if specified .
cultivate the seeding area to a minimum depth of num inches num millimeters and prepare a firm but friable seedbed before seeding .
do not cultivate aggregatetopsoil courses that were previously dry seeded under section num .
num watering .
moisten seeding areas before seeding and maintain the moisture until turf is established or until final acceptance .
num fertilizing .
apply fertilizer by the following methods a dry method .
incorporate the fertilizer into the upper portion of the seedbed before seeding or b hydraulic method .
add fertilizer to the slurry and mix before adding seed .
apply the seed and fertilizer in one application .
section num num num seeding .
apply seed by the following methods a dry method .
apply the seed with approved power driven seeders drills or other mechanical equipment .
handoperated seeding methods are satisfactory on areas inaccessible to mechanical equipment or b hydraulic method .
use hydraulictype equipment capable of providing a uniform application using water as the carrying agent .
add a tracer material consisting of either wood or grass cellulose fiber mulch to the water .
apply the tracer material at a rate of num pounds per acre num kilograms per hectare to provide visible evidence of uniform application .
add the seed to the water slurry no more than num minutes before application .
seed by hand areas inaccessible to seeding equipment .
num mulching .
if wood chips are used do not import without approval from the co .
apply mulch within num hours after seeding by the following methods a dry method .
spread mulch material except wood and grass cellulose fibers by a mulch spreader utilizing forced air to blow the mulch material onto the seeded area .
apply straw mulch at a rate of num pounds per acre num kilograms per hectare .
anchor the mulch material with an approved tackifier or approved mechanical method .
do not mark or deface structures pavements utilities or plant growth with tackifier or b hydraulic method .
apply mulch in a separate application from the seed using hydraulictype equipment according to subsection numb .
apply wood fiber or grass straw cellulose fiber mulch at a rate of num pounds per acre num kilograms per hectare .
apply bonded fiber matrix hydraulic mulch at a minimum rate of num pounds per acre num kilograms per hectare .
apply so no hole in the matrix is greater than num inches num millimeter .
apply so that no gaps exist between the matrix and the soil .
mulch by hand areas inaccessible to mulching equipment .
num protecting and caring for seeded areas .
protect and care for seeded areas including watering when needed .
repair or apply supplemental applications of seed mulch fertilizer and water as many times as needed until turf is established or final acceptance .
num acceptance .
material for turf establishment will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
placing of turf establishment will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring turf establishment and supplemental applications by the acre hectare measure on the ground surface .
when measuring water by volume or mass measure in the hauling vehicle or by metering .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
plants trees shrubs vines and groundcovers description num this work consists of furnishing and planting trees shrubs vines groundcovers and other plants .
material num conform to the following subsections fertilizer num miscellaneous planting material num mulch num plant material num topsoil num water numb construction requirements num general .
do not plant in frozen ground when snow covers the ground or when the soil is saturated extremely dry cloddy hard pan not friable or is otherwise unsatisfactory for planting .
furnish stock with a live and fibrous root system .
do not provide containergrown stock that is potbound has a top system out of proportion larger than the size of the container has rooting media that does not hold together when plant is removed from the container or has roots growing out of the container .
tag each plant or groups of plants with a weatherproof tag showing species name and date of delivery .
install plants received on site within num days .
num delivery .
notify the co num days before delivery of material to permit the co the opportunity to select material at the source .
submit commercial certifications and complete written information concerning the source of supply for plant material at least num days before delivery of plants to the project .
num protection and temporary storage .
package plants to provide protection against weather and breakage during transit .
tie and cover plants to prevent wind damage and dehydration when transporting by open vehicle .
pack and ventilate plants to prevent sweating when transporting by closed vehicle .
keep bare root plants below num f num c during transport .
keep growing media moist .
protect bark branches and root systems from damage .
replace damaged plants including plants with cracked or crushed root balls .
section num num protect plants not scheduled for immediate planting as follows a keep bare root plants below num f num c b cover the earth balls of balled and burlapped plants with mulch or other suitable material and keep moist c protect containergrown plants from overexposure to sunlight and keep moist and d protect plants from animals and insects .
num excavation for plant pits and beds .
at least num days before planting submit planting locations and methods of planting for approval .
mark planting locations with stakes or flagging .
remove sod weeds roots and other unsuitable material from the planting site .
excavate plant pits as follows a width of excavation .
num for root spread or ball diameters up to num inches num millimeter dig the pits circular in outline to the root spread plus num inches num millimeter .
num for root spreads or ball diameters over num inches num millimeter excavate one and one half times the root spread .
b depth of excavation .
dig the pits to a depth that permits at least num inches num millimeters of backfill under the roots or balls or dig the pits to the following depths whichever is deeper num deciduous trees .
a under num½inch num millimeters caliper num inches num millimeters deep b overnum½inch num millimeters caliper num inches num millimeters deep num deciduous and evergreen shrubs .
a under num feet num meters height num inches num millimeters deep b over num feet num meters height num inches num millimeters deep num evergreen trees .
a under num feet num meters height num inches num millimeters plus ball height b over num feet num meters height num inches num millimeters plus ball height num vines and groundcovers .
double the size of the pot .
loosen soil at the sidewalls and bottom of the plant pit to a depth of num inches num millimeters before setting the plant .
do not leave planting holes open overnight .
num setting plants .
do not plant material until inspected and approved by the co. plants not conforming to specifications arriving on site in an unsatisfactory condition or showing sign of improper handling will be rejected .
immediately remove and dispose of rejected plants off site and replace with approved nursery stock .
section num num prepare a backfill mixture of num parts topsoil loam or selected soil to one part peat moss .
place backfill mixture in the bottom of the plant pit .
set plants approximately plumb and at the same level or slightly lower than the depth at which they were grown in the nursery or collected in the field .
set plants as follows a bare root stock .
place bare rooted plants in the center of the plant pit with the roots properly spread in a natural position .
work backfill mixture around and over the roots tamp as hole is being filled and water thoroughly .
b balled and burlapped stock .
handle and move plants by the ball .
place balled and burlapped plants in the prepared pits on tamped backfill mixture .
score the root ball to a depth of num inch num millimeters along the entire side equally on num sides .
backfill around the plant ball to half the depth of the ball .
tamp and thoroughly water .
cut the burlap and remove it from the upper half of the ball or loosen the burlap and fold it back .
if wire baskets are used cut the wire from the upper half of the basket .
backfill the remainder of the plant with backfill mixture .
c containergrown stock .
remove the container just before planting .
place plants in the prepared pits on tamped backfill mixture .
backfill the remainder of the plant with backfill mixture and tamp .
num fertilizing .
fertilize using either of the following methods a mix the fertilizer with the backfill mixture when it is prepared or b spread the fertilizer uniformly around the pit area of individual plants or over shrub beds .
cultivate the fertilizer into the top num inches num millimeters of the backfill mixture .
num watering .
construct numinch nummillimeter deep water basins around trees and numinch nummillimeter deep water basins around shrubs .
make the diameter of the basin equal to that of the plant pit .
water plants during and immediately after planting and throughout the plant establishment period .
saturate the soil around each plant at each watering .
num guying and staking .
when guying and staking is specified guy deciduous trees just below the first lateral branch and guy evergreen trees half way up the height of the tree .
do not leave the guys and stakes on a tree for more than one growing season .
num pruning .
prune before or immediately after planting to preserve the natural character of each plant .
use experienced personnel to perform the pruning .
use accepted horticultural practice .
paint cuts over ¾ inch num millimeters in diameter with tree wound dressing .
num mulching .
remove weeds and other live vegetation from pit and water basin areas around individual plants and from entire shrub beds .
if wood chips are used do not import without approval from the co. place mulch within num hours after planting .
num plant establishment period .
the plant establishment period is a numyear period beginning at the completion of the project .
employ necessary means to preserve the plants in a healthy growing condition during the plant establishment period .
water weed prune adjust guys and stakes and protect from animals insects and disease during the plant establishment period .
at the end of the plant establishment period remove guys and stakes .
section num num num acceptance .
material for plants trees shrubs vines and groundcovers including fertilizer mulch and topsoil will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
planting of plants trees shrubs vines and groundcovers will be evaluated under subsections num and num and as follows an inspection of the plant material will be made about num days before the end of the plant establishment period to identify dead dying or diseased plants for removal and replacement .
during the following planting season remove and replace identified plants according to this section .
a final inspection of all plant material within num days after completion of all replacement planting will be the basis for final acceptance .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for plants will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount will be paid following initial planting .
b the remaining num percent of the pay item amount price will be paid after the final inspection .
section num num section num .
sod description num this work consists of furnishing and placing living sod of perennial turfforming grasses .
material num conform to the following subsections agricultural limestone num fertilizer num pegs for sod num sod num water numb construction requirements num general .
move and lay sod during dry weather and on dry unfrozen ground .
avoid erosion when watering .
num delivery .
provide at least num days notice before cutting sod .
the co will approve the sod in its original position before cutting .
do not deliver sod until the soil is prepared .
num preparing the soil .
clear and grade the surface .
cultivate disk harrow or otherwise loosen the grade to a depth of at least num inches num millimeters .
finish the surface to a smoothness comparable to hand raking .
remove surface stones not passing a numinch nummillimeter sieve sticks stumps and other surface debris interferes with sod placement or subsequent growth .
place topsoil according to section num .
apply fertilizer and agricultural limestone uniformly over the sodding area .
mechanical spreaders or blower equipment may be used .
disk or till the fertilizer and limestone into the soil to a depth of num inches num millimeters .
moisten the prepared soil .
num placing sod .
place sod within num hours after cutting or within num days after cutting when the sod is stored in moist stacks grasstograss and rootstoroots .
protect sod against drying and from freezing .
a solid sod .
place sod perpendicular to drainage flows .
place sections of solid sod edge to edge with staggered joints .
plug openings with sod or fill openings with acceptable loamy seeded topsoil .
roll or tamp sod to eliminate air pockets and provide an even surface .
on slopes numvnumh or steeper and in channels peg sod on numinch nummillimeter centers after rolling or tamping .
drive pegs flush with the sod bed surface .
b strip sod .
lay strip sod in shallow trenches in parallel rows .
firmly roll or tamp until the surface of the sod is level with or below the adjacent soil .
seed the soil between the strips of sod according to section num .
rake or drag the seeded areas to cover the seed .
section num num c spot sod .
place sod blocks .
roll or tamp the blocks into the soil until the sod surfaces are slightly below the surrounding ground surface .
blend final grades with existing adjacent areas .
leave the entire area drainable and without abrupt changes in slope .
num maintaining sodded areas .
water sod to a depth of num inches num millimeters after placing and keep moist .
protect newly sodded areas using methods approved by the co. do not allow wheeled vehicles on newly sodded areas .
mow sodded areas and repair or replace sodded areas that are damaged or fail to show a uniform growth of grass .
maintain sodded areas and replace nonliving sod until final acceptance of the project .
num acceptance .
material for sod including lime and fertilizer will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
placing sod will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
topsoil will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable do not measure nonsodded areas adjacent to strip and spot sodding .
measure topsoil under section num .
measure water and seeding under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num section num .
reserved section num num section num .
rolled erosion control products and cellular confinement systems description num this work consists of constructing temporary and permanent installations to control erosion and enhance vegetation establishment and survivability on slopes and channels .
this work also includes installing rolled erosion control products recp and cellular confinement systems .
recp are designated according to subsections num num and the following a mulch control netting .
a planar woven natural fiber or extruded geosynthetic mesh used as a temporary degradable recp to anchor loose fiber mulches .
b open weave textile .
a temporary degradable recp composed of processed natural or polymer yarns woven into a matrix used to provide erosion control and facilitate vegetation establishment .
c erosion control blanket .
a temporary degradable recp composed of processed natural or polymer fibers mechanically structurally or chemically bound together to form a continuous matrix to provide erosion control and facilitate vegetation establishment .
d turf reinforcement mat .
a permanent nondegradable recp designed for critical hydraulic applications where design discharges exert velocities and shear stresses that exceed the limits of mature natural vegetation .
turf reinforcement mats provide sufficient thickness strength and void space to permit soil filling and retention and the development of vegetation within the matrix .
turf reinforcement mats are typically used in hydraulic application such as high flow ditches and channels steep slopes stream banks and shorelines where erosive forces may exceed the limits of natural unreinforced vegetation or in areas where limited vegetation establishment is anticipated .
turf reinforcement mats may be supplemented with degradable components to provide immediate and permanent erosion protection and vegetation reinforcement on geotechnically stable slopes .
cellular confinement system cell depths are designated according to table num .
material num conform to the following sections and subsections cellular confinement systems num temporary rolled erosion control products num topsoil num turf establishment num turf reinforcement mat num section num num construction requirements num general .
make the soil surface stable firm and free of rocks and other obstructions .
install recp and cellular confinement systems according to the manufacturers recommendations and to the following minimum guidelines .
apply turf establishment according to section num .
in areas to be mowed soon after installation use temporary recp consisting of rapidly degrading netting with a functional longevity of num months or less .
num mulch control netting recp types num.a num.a and num.a .
apply mulch according to subsection numa .
immediately after mulching install mulch control netting according to subsection num .
num erosion control blanket open weave textile and turf reinforcement mat recp types num.b num.c num.d num.b num.c num.d num.b num num.a num.b and num.c .
unless soil in filling is required complete turf establishment work before installing recp .
if soil infilling is required first install recp .
then apply seed and lightly brush or rake ¼ to ¾ inches num to num millimeters of topsoil into the voids in the recp filling the full product thickness .
use staples that are at least num inches num millimeters long to secure the recp .
longer staples may be necessary in sandy loose or wet soils .
unroll the recp parallel to the primary direction of flow and place it in direct contact with soil surface .
do not stretch or allow recp to bridge over surface inconsistencies .
overlap edges of adjacent recp by num to num inches num to num millimeters .
use a sufficient number of staples to prevent seam separation .
overlap roll ends of joining recp num to num inches num to num millimeters in the direction of flow .
a slope installations .
at the top of slope anchor the recp by one of the following methods num staples .
install the recp num inches num millimeters over the shoulder of the slope onto flat final grade .
secure with a single row of staples on numinch nummillimeter centers num anchor trench .
construct a num by numinch num by nummillimeter trench .
extend the upslope terminal end of the recp num inches num millimeters past the trench .
use staples on numinch nummillimeter centers to fasten the recp into the trench .
backfill the trench and compact the soil .
secure the terminal end with a single row of staples on numinch nummillimeter centers and cover the end with soil .
apply turf establishment or num check slot .
install two rows of staples num inches num millimeters apart on numinch nummillimeter centers across the top edge of the recp .
drive staple heads flush with soil surface .
securely fasten recp to the soil by installing staples at a minimum rate of num per square yard num per square meter .
b channel installations .
at the beginning of the channel construct a full width anchor trench according to subsection numanum .
construct additional anchor trenches or check slots at intervals along the channel reach and at the channel end according to subsection numanum or anum and the manufacturers installation guidelines .
section num num securely fasten recp to the soil by installing staples at a minimum rate of num per square yard num per square meter .
significantly higher anchor rates may be necessary in sandy loose or wet soils and in severe applications .
repair damaged areas immediately by restoring soil to finished grade reapplying turf establishment and replacing the recp .
num cellular confinement systems .
excavate to the depth of the cellular confinement system and smooth and compact the slope .
install the top of the system flush or lower than the adjacent slope .
expand the geocell down the slope .
connect adjacent geocell sections with hog rings or staples in every other cell .
anchor the system with wooden stakes across the top at every other cell .
repeat the anchoring pattern in every tenth row and in the bottom row .
drive stakes to a minimum embedment of num inches num millimeters below the base of the cellular confinement layer .
backfill the system with topsoil .
handcompact the topsoil within each cell and apply turf establishment .
num acceptance .
material for recp and cellular confinement system will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of recp and cellular confinement systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
topsoil will be evaluated under section num .
turf establishment will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable measure topsoil under section num .
measure turf establishment under section num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
num section num .
reserved section num .
reserved section num .
reserved section num num section num .
permanent traffic control description num this work consists of installing and removing and resetting permanent traffic control devices .
sign panels are designated as plywood steel aluminum plastic fiberglass reinforced plastic or extruded aluminum .
sign posts are designated as wood aluminum galvanized steel or corrosion resistant steel .
material num conform to the mutcd and the following section and subsections delineator and object marker retroreflectors num hardware num legends and borders num minor concrete num object marker and delineator posts num panels num retroreflective sheeting num sign posts num construction requirements num general .
furnish and install permanent traffic control devices according to the mutcd and permanent traffic control plans .
provide traffic control devices that are crashworthy .
sign locations may be changed to fit field conditions as approved by the co .
determine sign support lengths at time of staking .
num sign posts .
install sign posts plumb and according to the manufacturers recommendations .
drive sign posts with a suitable driving head or set posts in drilled or punched holes .
excavate construct and backfill concrete footings according to section num .
num sign panels .
a fabrication .
num panels .
cut panels to dimension shown and place holes before applying retroreflective material .
do not field drill holes in panels .
clean and degrease the face of the metal panels using methods recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer before applying retroreflective sheeting .
wipe plastic panels clean with a slightly dampened cloth before applying retroreflective sheeting .
section num num abrade clean and degrease the face of the plywood panels using methods recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer before applying reflective sheeting .
treat plywood panel edges with sealant .
join extruded aluminum panel sections with panel nuts bolts and washers to achieve the desired sign size .
use num and numinch num and nummillimeter plate heights to achieve the sign panel vertical dimensions in increments of num inches num millimeters .
do not include more than one numinch nummillimeter plate per sign .
use retroreflective sheeting as specified and according to astm dnum .
for roadside signs use type iii iv viii ix or xi prismatic retroreflective sheeting .
use fluorescent yellow sheeting for warning signs .
use fluorescent yellowgreen sheeting for pedestrian bicycle and school crossing signs .
for multilane or overhead guide signs use type iii or type iv prismatic retroreflective sheeting for the background and type ix or type xi retroreflective sheeting for the legend .
for parking lot and nonroadway signs types i and type ii retroreflective sheeting may be used .
num legends and borders .
form letters numerals and other units to provide a continuous stroke width with smooth edges .
make the surface flat and free of warp blisters wrinkles burrs and splinters .
do not fabricate letters numerals arrows symbols or borders using a red screen ink process .
conform to one of the following techniques a type lnum screen process .
apply letters numerals arrows symbols borders and other features on the sign background by direct or reverse screen process .
apply messages and borders of a color darker than the sign background by the direct process .
apply messages and borders of a color lighter than the sign background by the reverse screen process .
apply screen inks recommended by the ink manufacturer for use on the various types of retroreflective sheeting .
apply ink that has the same durability and color as specified for that type of retroreflective sheeting .
apply black screen ink until opaque on retroreflective sheeting .
perform the screening in a manner to ensure a uniform color and tone with sharply defined edges of legends and borders .
do not allow running streaking or sagging .
air dry or bake the signs after screening according to manufacturers recommendations to provide a smooth hard finish .
b type lnum transparent films .
apply letters numerals arrows symbols borders and other features on the sign background with colored transparent films .
select durable electronically cuttable films coated with a transparent pressuresensitive adhesive protected by a removable liner .
use transparent films recommended by the manufacturer within the color requirements specified for the retroreflective sheeting .
c type lnum direct applied characters .
cut letters numerals arrows symbols borders and other features from black opaque or retroreflective sheeting of the color specified .
apply characters to the sign background according to the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions .
use the same sheeting manufacturer for both the sign legend border and background .
package sign panels in protective material and transport in a vertical position .
section num num b installation .
mount sign panels with the legend horizontal .
use oversized bolt heads and neoprene or nylon washers for fastening plastic sign panels .
use antitheft fasteners where possible .
paint bolt heads screw heads and washers that are exposed on the sign face .
match the color of the paint to the color of the sheeting at the point where the fitting is exposed .
turn sign panels num degrees away from the road in the direction of travel to reduce specular glare mirror reflection .
cover the sign face with an opaque material if a sign message is not applicable .
maintain the covering in good condition until the message becomes applicable .
do not use adhesive tape on the sign face .
num delineators and object markers .
attach delineators and object markers to posts according to the manufacturers recommendation or as specified .
num removing and resetting permanent traffic control devices .
remove and store existing traffic control devices to be reset as necessary .
replace traffic control devices damaged during removal storage and resetting .
num acceptance .
material for permanent traffic control devices will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
installation of permanent traffic control devices will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
minor concrete will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when measuring sign panels by the square foot square meter measure front face .
measure each sign panel in a multiple configuration .
when measuring sign systems by the square foot square meter measure front face of each sign panel .
when measuring sign systems by the each measure each system as one regardless of the number of sign panels .
a sign system includes the supports .
when measuring removing and resetting permanent traffic control device measures after they are reset .
measure removing and resetting of sign systems as described above .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
permanent pavement markings description num this work consists of applying paint markings and markers on finished pavement .
pavement markings are designated as follows type a solventborne traffic paint with type num glass beads type b waterborne traffic paint with type num glass beads type c highbuild waterborne traffic paint with type num and type num glass beads type d epoxy markings with type num glass beads type e epoxy markings with type num and type num glass beads type h thermoplastic markings with type num glass beads type i thermoplastic markings with type num and type num glass beads type j preformed pavement marking tape or type k nonreflectorized markings .
material num conform to the mutcd and the following subsections epoxy markings num epoxy resin adhesives num glass beads num pavement markers num preformed pavement marking tape num solventborne traffic paint num thermoplastic markings num waterborne traffic paint num construction requirements num general .
where existing and final pavement marking locations are identical stake the limits of existing pavement markings before beginning pavement work .
submit manufacturers msds and product data sheets at least num days before applying pavement markings .
a field demonstration may be required to verify the adequacy of the material .
ship marking material in suitable containers plainly marked with the following information as appropriate for the material being furnished a manufacturers name and address b name of product section num num c lot and batch numbers d color e net mass and volume of contents f date of manufacture g date of expiration h statement of contents if mixing of components is required i mixing proportions and instructions and j safety information .
establish marking patterns or locations according to the mutcd plans or state requirements .
in curve widening areas establish the edge line markings at the limits of the traveled way and the centerline markings equal distance between the edge lines .
remove loose particles dirt tar grease and other deleterious material from the surface to be marked .
where markings are placed on rigid pavement less than numyear old clean the pavement of laitance and curing compounds .
remove temporary pavement markings the same day permanent pavement markings are applied .
remove temporary and conflicting pavement makings according to subsection num before applying permanent pavement markings .
obtain approval before applying markings .
apply markings to a clean dry surface and according to the manufacturers recommendations .
produce markings that are cleancut and uniform in appearance by day and night .
current state approved pavement marking material may be used when approved by the co .
submit proof of compliance with state specifications .
apply glass beads immediately following paint or markings application to ensure adhesion .
protect markings from traffic until dried to a notracking condition .
remove tracking marks spilled marking material markings in unauthorized areas and defective markings .
num solventborne traffic paint type a .
apply paint when pavement and air temperatures are at num f num c and rising .
do not heat the paint above num f num c. spray paint at a num mil num millimeters minimum wet film thickness or at a rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
apply type num glass beads on the paint at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter of paint .
on new asphalt pavements or new asphalt surface treatments apply two applications of paint and glass beads .
apply second application after first application is track free .
section num num num waterborne traffic paint type b and type c. apply paint when pavement and air temperatures are num f num c and rising .
a type b .
do not heat the paint above num f num c. spray paint at a num mil num millimeters minimum wet film thickness or at a rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
apply type num glass beads on the paint at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter of paint .
on new asphalt pavements or new asphalt surface treatments apply two coats .
b type c. spray paint at num mil num millimeters minimum wet film thickness or at a rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
use two bead dispensers .
apply type num glass beads on the paint at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter followed by type num glass beads on the paint at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter of paint .
num epoxy markings types d and type e. apply epoxy when pavement and air temperatures are num f num c and rising .
heat components as specified by the manufacturer .
apply at a num mil num millimeters minimum dry film thickness or at a rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
a type d. apply type num glass beads on the epoxy at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter of epoxy .
b type e. use two bead dispensers .
apply type num glass beads on the epoxy at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter of epoxy followed by type num glass beads on the epoxy at a rate of num to num pounds per gallon num to num kilograms per liter of epoxy .
num thermoplastic markings type h and type i .
apply thermoplastic when pavement and air temperatures are num f num c and rising .
heat thermoplastic as specified by the manufacturer .
apply an epoxy resin primersealer according to the thermoplastic manufacturers recommendations when placing markings on rigid pavements or asphalt pavements more than numyears old oxidized or having exposed aggregates .
allow the primersealer to dry .
for edge lines apply thermoplastic at num mil num millimeters dry film thickness .
for other lines apply thermoplastic at num mil num millimeters dry film thickness .
a type h. apply type num glass beads on the thermoplastic at a rate recommended by the manufacturer .
b type i .
use two bead dispensers .
apply type num glass beads on the thermoplastic followed by type num glass beads on the thermoplastic at rates recommended by the manufacturer .
num preformed pavement marking tape type j .
install to form a durable weather resistant bond to the pavement .
apply preformed markings according to the manufacturers recommendations .
use preformed marking tape containing retroreflective beads .
section num num num nonreflectorized markings type k. apply solvent borne or waterborne traffic paint without glass beads .
num pavement markers .
install raised or recessed pavement markers when the pavement and air temperatures are num f num c and rising .
apply pavement markers with an epoxy resin adhesive as recommended by the manufacturer when the pavement is dry .
space the markers according to the mutcd and plans .
num acceptance .
material for permanent pavement markings will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
placing of permanent pavement markings will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when pavement markings are measured by the linear foot meter measure the length of line applied along the centerline of each line applied regardless of color .
measure broken or dotted pavement lines from end to end of the line including gaps .
measure solid pavement lines from end to end of each continuous line .
measure line quantities based on a numinch nummillimeter wide line .
for line widths greater than num inches num millimeters adjust the measured length of line in the ratio of the required width to num inches num millimeters .
when pavement markings are measured by the square foot square meter measure the number of square feet square meter of line symbol or letter marking based on the marking area shown in the plans .
if not shown measure the area of each marking in place to the nearest square foot square meter .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
section num num section num .
temporary traffic control description num this work consists of furnishing installing maintaining relocating and removing temporary traffic control devices and services as ordered for the control and protection of public traffic through the project .
advance warning arrow board barricade and warning light types are designated in the mutcd .
material num conform to the mutcd and the following sections and subsections concrete barrier temporary num delineator and object marker retroreflectors numb guardrail temporary num retroreflective sheeting num sign panels num sign posts num temporary plastic fence num temporary pavement markings num construction requirements num qualifications .
provide flaggers certified by atssa the national safety council a state department of transportation or other acceptable organization .
use pilot car operators conforming to the qualifications of a flagger .
num general .
furnish install and maintain temporary traffic control devices adjacent to and within the project as required by the mutcd traffic control plan and section num .
install and maintain traffic control devices as follows a furnish and install traffic control devices before the start of construction operations b install only those traffic control devices needed for each stage or phase c relocate temporary traffic control devices as necessary d remove devices that no longer apply to the existing conditions e immediately replace devices that are lost stolen destroyed or inoperative f keep temporary traffic control devices clean g furnish and maintain traffic control devices that meet the acceptable standard described in atssa quality standards for work zone traffic control devices .
amend the atssa standards as follows num repair or remove and replace marginal devices within num hours and section num num num repair or remove and replace unacceptable devices immediately h remove temporary traffic control devices upon contract completion or when approved and i furnish crashworthy temporary traffic control devices .
num barricades .
use barricades of the type and size specified or according to the mutcd .
use type iii iv ix or xi retroreflective sheeting .
num cones and tubular markers .
use cones or tubular markers of the height specified or according to the mutcd .
use type iii or type vi retroreflective sheeting .
num construction signs .
use type iii iv viii ix or xi prismatic retroreflective sheeting .
use fluorescent sheeting for orange signs .
for rollup signs use florescent type vi retroreflective sheeting .
install posts according to section num .
portable sign supports may be used instead of sign posts when approved by the co .
remove or completely cover unnecessary signs .
use metal plywood or other acceptable material to cover signs .
do not use adhesives glues tapes or mechanical fasteners that mar the face of the panel of the sign to be covered .
num drums .
use plastic drums that are at least num inches num millimeters high and at least num inches num millimeters in diameter .
use type iii or type vi retroreflective sheeting .
num flaggers .
use flaggers certified according to subsection num .
use type iii iv viii ix or xi retroreflective sheeting on flagger paddles .
do not use flags .
num pilot cars .
use pilot car operators certified according to subsection num .
mount a pilot car follow me sign on the rear and a highintensity rotating flashing oscillating or strobe light on the roof of the pilot car .
num temporary barriers .
use temporary barriers that are crashworthy and are new or used provided they are not badly damaged .
lifting holes no larger than num inches num millimeters or lifting loops are permitted .
mount white or yellow retroreflectors as applicable to the top or side of the barrier on numfoot nummeter centers .
mount the retroreflectors at a uniform height at least num inches num millimeters above the road surface .
flexible barrier delineators or barrier delineation tape may be used instead of retroreflectors when approved by the co. num temporary guardrail .
construct temporary guardrail according to section num .
mount white or yellow retroreflectors as applicable to the top or side of the guardrail on numfoot nummeter centers .
mount the retroreflectors at a uniform height at least num inches num millimeters above the road surface .
num temporary pavement markings and delineation .
before opening a pavement surface to traffic remove conflicting pavement markings by sandblasting or other methods that do not damage the surface or texture of the pavement .
make the removal pattern uneven to not perpetuate the outline of the removed pavement markings .
lightly coat sandblasted or removal areas on asphalt surfaces with emulsified asphalt .
section num num place and maintain temporary pavement markings that are neat crack free true straight and unbroken .
if temporary signs and pavement markers are substituted for temporary pavement markings install temporary signs and pavement markers according to the mutcd and plans .
for temporary pavement markings use preformed retroreflective tape traffic paint or pavement markers as follows a preformed retroreflective tape .
apply according to the manufacturers instructions .
remove loose preformed retroreflective tape before placing additional pavement layers .
b pavement markers .
do not use pavement markers during seasonal suspensions .
when chip seals slurry seals or tack coats are used after marker placement protect the markers with an approved protective cover and remove it after the asphalt material is sprayed .
c traffic paint .
do not apply traffic paint to the final surface .
apply traffic paint as the temporary pavement marking if no work will be performed on the project for at least num consecutive days .
apply traffic paint at a num mil nummillimeter minimum wet film thickness or at a rate of num square feet per gallon num square meters per liter .
immediately apply type num glass beads on the paint at a minimum rate of num pounds per gallon num kilograms per liter of paint .
remove temporary pavement markers before placing additional pavement layers or permanent pavement markings .
remove temporary markings after num days and apply permanent pavement markings unless approved by the co. num vertical panels .
use vertical panels that are at least num inches num millimeters in height and num to num inches num to num millimeters wide .
use type iii iv viii ix or xi retroreflective sheeting .
num warning lights .
use warning lights of the types shown in the plans or according to the mutcd .
install warning lights with a minimum mounting height of num inches num millimeter to the bottom of the lens .
secure lights to the top of the traffic control device they are supplementing .
use batteries recommended by the light manufacturer .
mount large batteries below windshield height and preferably on the ground .
replace batteries when they no longer provide satisfactory performance .
use type c steadyburn warning lights for delineation on barricades or drums .
use type a lowintensity flashing warning lights on the first num barricades or drums in the merging or shifting taper series .
use type b highintensity flashing warning lights on the first two advance warning signs .
type a and type c warning lights are intended to warn road users during nighttime hours while type b warning lights are intended to warn road users during both daylight and nighttime hours .
num shadow vehicle .
use a num pound numkilogram num pound num kilogram shadow vehicle equipped with a truckmounted attenuator crash cushion attached to the rear of the vehicle exterior flashing yellow dome light and an arrow board .
use the shadow vehicle to provide physical protection to workers from traffic approaching from the rear during moving operations .
section num num use the following procedures to close a lane of traffic a move the shadow vehicle to a point approximately num feet num meters from the first advance warning sign for the lane closure and stop on the shoulder b activate the flashing lights and flashing arrow board .
begin the arrow board in the caution mode and after approximately num minutes display the correct flashing pass arrow c move the shadow vehicle now acting as a protection vehicle along the shoulder to the first sign location stopping approximately num feet num meters before the sign location in a blocking position d place the first sign then proceed to the next advance sign location .
repeat step c for the second sign and install that sign .
repeat this procedure until advance warning signs are installed e after installing the advanced warning signs for the lane closure move the shadow vehicle into the lane that is to be closed to a position num feet num meters before the closing taper location .
install the channelizing devices for the taper in the shielded lane then f move the shadow vehicle off the roadway and past the taper on the shoulder and remain in position until the flashing arrow board for the closure if one is to be provided is placed and operating .
move the shadow vehicle with the workers as they proceed to set up the remaining devices as additional protection .
alternate lane closure procedures may be used if approved by the co. num pavement patch .
use an asphalt mix according to section num or commercial available cold asphalt mix to repair potholes and rough spots in the traveled way before reopening travel lanes to traffic .
if cold asphalt mix is used remove and replace with hot asphalt mix before placing succeeding hot asphalt lifts .
num temporary crash cushions .
use a crashworthy temporary crash cushion according to manufacturers recommendations .
num temporary signal system .
use a temporary signal system according to mutcd parts num and num .
provide the names and telephone numbers of at least two emergency contacts who can be reached num hours a day and who are available to arrive on site within num hours of notification to repair or replace malfunctioning temporary signal equipment .
in addition provide for emergency flaggers who can be reached num hours a day and who are available to perform traffic control operations within the timeframes specified below until the temporary signal system is operable .
if the traffic signal malfunctions during construction operations immediately begin traffic control operations using flaggers until the system is returned to normal signal operation .
complete traffic signal repairs within num hours of the malfunction .
if the traffic signal malfunctions during a period when no construction activity is taking place begin traffic control operations using flaggers as soon as possible but no later than num hours after the initial notification .
continue temporary flagging operations until the system is returned to normal signal operation .
complete traffic signal repairs within num hours of notification .
section num num no payment will be made for the use of flaggers in place of a malfunctioning or inoperable temporary signal system .
num temporary fence .
use temporary fence according to section num .
num temporary rumble strip .
use transverse or longitudinal rumble strips according to the mutcd part num to alert drivers of an approaching flagger station or work area .
num steel plates .
use numinch nummillimeter or thicker steel plates capable of safely carrying traffic .
secure the plates to the pavement to prevent movement .
num acceptance .
material for temporary traffic control devices will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
vehicles for pilot cars and shadow vehicles will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
placement of temporary traffic control devices will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
temporary traffic control services will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable when ordered by the co and installed .
when measuring temporary traffic control pay items measure only one time even if relocated or replaced except for pay items paid by the hour .
measure barricades by the linear foot meter of width .
when measuring construction signs by the square foot square meter measure front face sign panel .
do not measure posts and temporary supports .
when there is a pay item for moving temporary barriers do not measure movement of temporary barriers for work access or the convenience of the contractor .
when measuring temporary pavement markings measure only one application of pavement markings per lift .
when temporary pavement markings are measured by the linear foot or mile meter or kilometer measure the number of linear feet or miles meters or kilometers of lines applied along the centerline of each numinch nummillimeter wide line applied regardless of color .
measure solid lines from end to end of each continuous line .
measure broken lines from end to end including gaps .
for line widths greater than num inches num millimeters adjust the measured length of line in the ratio of the required width to num inches num millimeters .
when temporary pavement markings are measured by the square foot square meter measure the number of square feet square meters of symbols or letter markings based on the marking area shown in the plans or if not shown the area of each marking measured in place to the nearest square foot square meter .
when measuring temporary pavement markers measure only one application of pavement markings per lift even if replaced .
measure temporary pavement markers used at the option of the contractor instead of temporary pavement markings as equivalent temporary pavement markings and not as temporary pavement markers .
section num num when measuring pavement marking removal measure the actual line removed .
do not measure gaps .
when measuring temporary crash cushions measure each entire crash cushion configuration .
when there is a pay item for moving temporary crash cushion do not measure movement of temporary crash cushion for work access or the convenience of the contractor .
measure replacement barrels or cartridges for crash cushions for the barrels or cartridges damaged by public traffic .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for temporary traffic control devices will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount will be paid upon installation .
b an additional num percent of the pay item amount will be paid following completion of num percent of the contract amount .
c payment of the remaining portion of the pay item amount will be paid when the temporary traffic control devices are removed from the project .
progress payments for pay items paid for by the hour will be paid at num percent of the pay item amount when ordered by the co and furnished .
section num num section num .
traffic signal traffic counter lighting and electrical systems description num this work consists of installing modifying relocating or removing traffic signals traffic counter flashing beacons highway lighting sign illumination communication conduits and electrical systems or provisions for future systems .
material num conform to the following subsections backer rod numf electrical material num joint sealant and crack fillers numa lighting material num underground concrete utility structures numd construction requirements num regulations and codes .
furnish material and workmanship conforming to the standards of the national electrical code local safety code ul and the national electrical manufacturers association nema .
obtain permits arrange for inspections and pay fees necessary to obtain electrical service .
furnish luminaires with crashworthy supports .
notify the co local traffic enforcement agency utility companies or railroad company at least num days before operational shutdown to coordinate connections or disconnections to an existing utility or system .
num general .
at the preconstruction conference submit a certified cost breakdown for all lump sum items for use in making progress payments and price adjustments .
submit a list of proposed equipment and material num days before installation .
include the manufacturers name size and identification number of each item .
supplement the list with scale drawings catalog cuts and wiring diagrams showing locations and details of equipment and wiring .
the co will approve the exact locations of the systems .
remove structures and obstructions according to section num .
salvage material acceptable for reuse in the work .
excavate and backfill according to section num .
construct concrete according to section num .
where roadways are to remain open to traffic and existing systems will be modified maintain the existing systems in operation until final connection to the modified circuit to minimize traffic disruptions .
section num num num conduit .
cut conduit so the ends are smooth .
connect conduit sections with couplings to butt the ends of both conduits squarely against each other inside the couplings .
provide a metal expansion and deflection fitting where conduit crosses a structural expansion joint .
install conduits continuous between outlets with at least couplings to permit pulling conductors .
end conduit with bell fittings or bushings .
furnish pull wires for conduits designated for future cable installation .
remove and replace crushed deformed or damaged conduit .
maintain conduits clean and dry and protect ends of conduit with plugs caps or fittings .
size pull boxes to provide for termination of the conduit and connection of the conductors .
num traffic signal and lighting systems .
furnish systems according to the mutcd or state adopted supplements to the mutcd for the state in which the system is located .
design systems to operate according to nema .
design the control unit to energize the lighting circuit upon failure of any component of its circuit .
furnish a control with an on level adjustable between num and num foot candles num and num lux .
operate luminaires with a series circuit distribution system at a potential not exceeding num volts .
control lights and luminaires by photocell controls .
for current less than or equal to num amperes furnish a photocell switch .
for current greater than num amperes furnish a photocell switch operating a magnetic relay for switching the lighting circuit .
num traffic counter .
locate and install traffic counters as shown in the plans .
mount and orient the cabinet to provide an unobstructed direct line of sight to the roadways that contain count station and vehicle detection equipment when cabinet door is opened .
install traffic counter and communications devices inside cabinet .
identify and label loop wires inside each pull box in which the loop wires enter .
maintain consistent wiring identification and labeling when entering the cabinet and with connection to the traffic counter .
use water resistant material for wiring identification and labeling .
obtain approval for loop wire assignments at all locations .
before poweringon equipment within the cabinet provide a copy of the following a voltages for power supplies to include but not limited to electrical meter solar panel batteries and communications devices and b telephone number andor ip address for all communication devices .
num traffic loop .
do not install loops when the pavement is wet .
saw cut wire and seal for loop wires on the same day .
do not allow vehicular traffic to pass over an open saw cut unless protected .
section num num saw clean smooth welldefined numinch nummillimeter wide and num¾inch nummillimeter deep cuts without damaging the adjacent pavement .
overlap saw cuts to provide full depth at corners .
saw cut the leadin to the pull box as close as possible to the edge of pavement .
thoroughly clean the saw cut of foreign material by sandblasting waterblasting or mechanical wire brushing .
repeat the process until a new clean concrete face is exposed .
dry the joint with compressed air .
install the loop wire in one continuous length at the bottom of the cut .
install without kinks curls or other damage to the wire or its insulation .
replace damaged wires .
hold the loop wire in place with numinch nummillimeter long backer rods .
where the loop wire crosses a crack or joint use a plastic sleeve that extends num inches num millimeters on each side of the crack or joint .
provide extra loop wire in the sleeve for joint expansion and contraction .
twist the loop leadin wires num turns per foot num turns per meter from the loop to the pull box .
color code the wires of each loop for identification of separate loops .
coil num inches num millimeters of leadin pair slack in the pull box for each loop .
before applying sealant test the loop and leadin for continuity and resistance by applying a numvolt megohmmeter between each end of the loop leadin and the nearest reliable electrical ground .
if no available ground exists establish a ground for the measurement .
record the location and megohmmeter readings and submit readings and test equipment data .
replace the loop if the megohmmeter reading is less than num megohms or the inductance is less than num microhenries or more than num microhenries .
apply sealant to the saw cuts with the backer rods in place .
apply the sealant in a manner that does not produce air bubbles .
remove excess sealant and finish level with the pavement .
follow the manufacturers instructions for sufficient time for the sealant to harden before allowing traffic to cross the loops .
repeat the resistance and continuity test after sealant is applied .
report the second test for comparison with the first test report .
num testing and demonstration period .
before energizing portions of the system demonstrate that the conductor system is clear and free of short circuits open circuits and unintentional grounds .
repair or replace faulty circuits .
after energizing the system demonstrate that all electrical components work properly .
repair or replace faulty electrical components .
after completing electrical component tests conduct a demonstration test for num continuous days .
adjust and correct deficiencies in the system during the numday demonstration period .
if part of the system is replaced or repaired retest that part of the system for an additional num days .
num warranties guarantees and instruction sheets .
when installations are permanent deliver manufacturers warranties guarantees instruction sheets and parts lists at the final inspection .
num relocations .
use material equivalent to existing material unless present codes require different or improved material .
existing material may be salvaged and reused provided material and installation methods used meet the requirements of applicable codes and ordinances .
num acceptance .
material for traffic signal traffic counter lighting and electrical systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num installation of traffic signal traffic counter lighting and electrical systems will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
structural excavation and backfill will be evaluated under section num .
concrete will be evaluated under section num .
measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num and the following as applicable for relocations do not measure additional line or connections necessary to place the fixture at the new location .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
payment for lump sum pay items will be prorated based on the total work completed .
section num num section num .
facilities and services description num this work consists of furnishing installing maintaining and removing facilities and services .
construction requirements num general .
provide the facilities and services beginning num days before project work begins and ending num days after final acceptance .
facilities and services are for the exclusive use of government personnel and are subject to approval .
conform to applicable ordinances safety codes and regulations .
if facilities or services become defective are stolen or for other reasons do not function as intended repair or provide a replacement .
repair or replace facilities and services within num hours after being notified by the co .
repairs and replacements are subject to approval .
remove facilities and services when directed by the co. num facilities .
perform site work to accommodate facilities and restore to its original condition upon removal .
furnish safe sanitary weatherproof buildings or trailers in good condition .
suitable commercial or private facilities located near the project may be provided .
a field office .
furnish and maintain a field office according to tables num and num. b residential housing .
furnish and maintain residential housing according to tables num and num .
when the unit is part of a larger building separate units with partitions and furnish separate outside doors with locks .
section num num table num minimum requirements for field facilities and associated services property field office residential housing floor space square feet square meter num num num num locking outside door deadbolt with keys num num steps with slipproof tread and handrails num num windows with locks num num total window area square feet square meter num num num num ceiling height num feet num meters rooms including toilet room num num room size except toilet room square feet square meter num num num num closet numcubic foot num cubic meter num shelves numinch nummillimeter depth square feet square meter num num num num electrical lighting heat and air conditioning maintain temperature of num f num c adequate electrical outlets surge protectors adequate electricity num and num v num cycle as applicable adequate potable water supply drinking water cooler with water supply sink with faucets for both hot and cold water adequate hot and cold water supply showerbath facilities parking for three vehicles on gravel surface numfoot num millimeter high chain link fence with gate around building and parking area num as required by local code .
num includes two bedrooms .
section num num table num minimum facility furnishings property field office residential housing table numinch wide numfoot long numinch high num mm wide num m long num mm high num file cabinet numdrawer fire resistant metal with lock and keys num file cabinet numdrawer metal num desk numsquare foot num square meternum num desk lampnum num office chairnum num storage cabinet numfeet wide numinch wide numinch high num m wide num mm wide num mm high num fire extinguisher num num refrigerator numcubic foot num cubic meter num range and oven standard numinch nummillimeter num microwave oven num cubic foot num cubic meter num watt num kitchen table with num chairs num set sofa numfoot nummeter num coffee table num recliner chair num end table num table lamp num queen bed num night stand num night stand lamp num dresser fourdrawer numinch nummillimeter num num meet accepted industry standards for ergonomics .
num services .
a facilities .
furnish electrical service potable water supply toilet accommodations and waste disposal services .
remove snow and provide landscaping services as directed by the co. pay bills associated with facilities by the payment due date .
b communications .
provide internet wireless phone or landline telephone services of the latest available technology .
pay bills from the service provider by the payment due date .
the government will pay the cost of long distance telephone calls .
num acceptance .
facilities and services will be evaluated under subsections num and num .
section num num measurement num measure the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule according to subsection num .
payment num the accepted quantities will be paid at the contract price per unit of measurement for the section num pay items listed in the bid schedule .
payment will be full compensation for the work prescribed in this section .
see subsection num .
progress payments for facilities and services will be paid as follows a num percent of the pay item amount will be paid upon installation and acceptance for occupancy .
b payment of the remaining num percent of the pay item amount will be paid after final acceptance or when the co orders the removal of the facilities and services .
num num division num material section num num section num .
cement num hydraulic cement .
do not mix cement brands or types .
a portland cement .
conform to aashto m num. b blended hydraulic cement .
conform to aashto m num .
num masonry and mortar cement .
a masonry cement .
conform to astm cnum type n type s or type m. b mortar cement .
conform to astm cnum type n type s or type m. section num num section num .
asphalt material num asphalt binder .
conform to aashto m num or aashto mnum .
num emulsified asphalt .
conform to aashto m num or aashto m num. a polymer modified cationic emulsified asphalt for chip seals .
use a solid or latex polymer added either to the asphalt binder or during the emulsification process .
conform to aashto m num except as follows num force ratio fnumfnum num f num c num cmmin aashto t num num min .
num elastic recovery num f num c num cmmin aashto t num num min .
num crsnump penetration num f num c num g num sec num to num aashto t num num crsnumhp penetration num f num c num g num sec num to num aashto t num b polymermodified emulsified asphalt for microsurfacing .
conform to issa anum except use section num emulsified asphalt residue by evaporation of aashto t num to determine percent residue .
c penetrating emulsified asphalt for prime coat .
conform aashto t num except as modified by table num .
table num penetrating emulsion for prime coat minimum maximum requirements for emulsion viscosity saybolt furol at num f num c sec num num settlement numhours num residue by evaporation num requirements for residue penetration num f num c num g num sec aashto t num num num solubility in trichloroethylene aashto t num num num material for dampproofing and waterproofing concrete and masonry surfaces .
a primer .
conform to astm dnum for asphalt membranes .
furnish a neoprenebased primer for use with rubberized asphalt membrane .
furnish a resin or solventbased primer for use with the modified bitumen membrane .
if preformed membrane sheets are used furnish primers of a type recommended by the manufacturer .
b asphalt .
for mop coat conform to astm dnum type i or type ii .
c waterproofing fabric .
furnish asphalt saturated fabric conforming to astm dnum .
section num num if preformed membrane sheet is used furnish either the rubberized asphalt type or the modified bitumen type .
the rubberized asphalt type consists of a rubberized asphalt sheet reinforced with a polyethylene film or mesh .
the modified bitumen sheet type consists of a polymer modified bitumen sheet reinforced with a stitchbonded polyester fabric or fiberglass mesh .
conform to table num or num .
table num preformed membrane sheet for surfaces other than bridge decks property test value rubberized asphalt type modified bitumen type tensile strength in machine direction astm dnum num lbin num knm num lbin num knm elongation at break in machine direction astm dnum num at num f num c num at num f num c pliability astm dnum no cracks no cracks thickness minimum num mil num mm num mil num mm softening point minimum astm dnum num f num c num f num c num base astm dnum on a numdegree bend over a numinch nummm mandrel at num f num c. table num preformed membrane sheet for bridge decks property test value rubberized asphalt type modified bitumen type tensile strength in machine direction astm dnum num lbin num knm num lbin num knm elongation at break in machine direction astm dnum num at num f num c num at num f num c pliability astm dnum no cracks no cracks thickness minimum num mils num mm num mils num mm softening point minimum astm dnum num f num c num f num c num base astm dnum on a numdegree bend over a numinch nummm mandrel at num f num c. d mastic .
furnish mastic consisting of a rubberized asphalt coldapplied joint sealant for use with preformed rubberized sheets .
furnish mastic consisting of a blend of bituminous and synthetic resins for use with modified bitumen sheet .
e asphalt roll roofing .
conform to astm dnum class m type ii .
section num num num asphalt mastic .
conform to aashto m num .
num antistrip additive .
conform to the following a type num .
furnish commercially produced heat stable liquid products that when added to an asphalt have the chemical and physical properties to prevent separation of the asphalt from aggregates .
b type num .
furnish cement conforming to subsection num or fly ash conforming to subsection numa .
c type num .
furnish lime conforming to aashto m num .
num mineral fiber .
conform to the following a fiber length ¼in nummm max .
mean test value the fiber length is determined according to the bauer mcnett fractionation .
b fiber thickness numin numµm max .
mean test value the fiber diameter is determined by measuring at least num fibers in a phase contrast microscope .
c shot content table num table num mineral fiber shot contentnum sieve size nominal maximum size percent passing no .
num num µm num no .
num num µm num num shot content is a measure of nonfibrous material .
the shot content is determined on vibrating sieves .
see astm cnum for additional information .
section num num section num .
aggregate num fine aggregate for concrete .
furnish sand conforming to aashto m num class b except as amended or supplemented by the following a material passing no .
num numµm sieve num percent max .
aashto t num b alkalisilica reactivity .
test the aggregate for alkali silica reaction and conform to one of the following num through num num alkalisilica reactivity astm cnum num percent at num days after casting num alkalisilica reactivity astm cnum num percent to num percent at num days after casting and one of the following examinations a petrographic examination of aggregates favorable report for use astm cnum performed within num year from time of submittal b petrographic examination of hardened favorable report for use concrete astm cnum performed on astm cnum specimens after test num alkalisilica reactivity with cementitious num percent at num days after casting material astm cnum performed on approved mix design mass percent combinations .
do not use lithium compounds as mitigation measures num alkali silica reaction astm cnum num percent at num months num alkalisilica reaction with cementitious material num percent at num months astm cnum performed on approved mix design mass percent combinations for lightweight fine aggregate conform to aashto m num .
num coarse aggregate for concrete .
conform to aashto m num class a except as amended or supplemented by the following a los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
b grading aashto m num all sizes except size numbers num num num or num c alkalisilica reactivity see subsection numb section num num for bridge decks or surface courses do not use aggregates known to polish or carbonate aggregates containing less than num percent by mass of insoluble residue as determined by astm dnum .
for lightweight coarse aggregate conform to aashto m num .
num granular backfill .
furnish aggregate for the following installations .
a underdrain pipe with geotextile .
furnish granular backfill conforming to aashto m num class e and aashto m num size number num num num num num or num. b underdrain pipe without geotextile .
furnish granular backfill conforming to aashto m num except the soundness test is not required .
num reserved .
num subbase base and surface course aggregate .
a general .
furnish hard durable particles or fragments of crushed stone crushed slag or crushed gravel conforming the following num los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
num soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles num durability index coarse aashto t num num min .
num durability index fine aashto t num num min .
num fractured faces astm dnum num percent min .
num without organic matter and lumps or balls of clay .
b subbase or base aggregate .
in addition to subsection numa conform to the following num gradation table num num liquid limit aashto t num num max .
section num num table num target value ranges for subbase and base gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num and t num grading designation a subbase b subbase c base d base e base num½ inch num mm num num inch num mm num num num num num½ inch num mm num num num inch num mm num num num num num num num ¾ inch num mm num num num num num num num ½ inch num mm num num num ⅜ inch num mm num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num statistical procedures do not apply .
the value in the parentheses is the allowable deviation from the target values .
c surface course aggregate .
in addition to subsection numa conform to the following num gradation table num num liquid limit aashto t num method a num max .
num plasticity index aashto t num num do not furnish material that contains asbestos fibers .
table num target value ranges for surface course gradations sieve size percent by mass passing designate sieve aashto t num aashto t num num inch num mm num ½ inch num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num µm num num num no .
num num µm num num num num statistical procedures do not apply .
the value in the parentheses is the allowable deviation from the target values .
section num num num crushed aggregate .
furnish hard durable particles or fragments of crushed stone or gravel conforming to the size and quality requirements for crushed aggregate material normally used locally in the construction and maintenance of highways by federal or state agencies .
furnish crushed aggregate with a maximum size of num inch num millimeters as determined by aashto t num and aashto t num .
furnish crushed aggregate uniformly graded from coarse to fine and free of organic matter lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious material .
num asphalt concrete aggregate .
furnish hard durable particles or fragments of crushed stone crushed slag or crushed gravel conforming to the following a los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
b soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate aashto t num num cycles num coarse aggregate num percent loss max .
num fine aggregate num percent loss max .
c fractured faces astm dnum num percent min .
d fine aggregate angularity aashto t num num percent min .
method a e flat and elongated particles astm dnum num percent max .
num ratio plus ⅜inch nummm sieve calculated by mass weighted average f sand equivalent aashto t num num min .
alternative method no .
num reference method g gradation .
size grade and combine the aggregate fractions in mix proportions that result in a composite blend conforming to the specified gradation .
nominal maximum size is one sieve size greater than the first sieve to retain more than num percent of the combined aggregate .
test according to aashto t num and aashto t num .
volumetric asphalt concrete aggregate gradation .
see table num .
for the surface course do not use aggregates known to polish or carbonate aggregates containing less than num percent by mass of insoluble residue when tested according to astm dnum .
section num num table num asphalt concrete aggregate gradation sieve size nominal maximum aggregate size percent passing grading designation num inch num mm ¾ inch num mm ½ inch num mm ⅜ inch num mm no .
num num mm min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
num inch num mm num½ inch num mm num num inch num mm num num num ¾ inch num mm num num num num ½ inch num mm num num num num ⅜ inch num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm num num num num num num num num num num contractor specified target values .
see table num for allowable deviations .
section num num table num allowable deviation based on target value percent by mass passing allowable deviation minimum maximum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num opengraded asphalt friction course aggregate .
furnish hard durable particles or fragments of crushed stone crushed slag or crushed gravel conforming to the following a los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
b soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles coarse aggregate c fractured faces astm dnum two or more num percent min .
d gradation table num table num target value ranges for open graded friction course aggregate gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num t num grading designation a b ½ inch num mm num ⅜ inch num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num contractor specified target values .
see table num for allowable deviations .
section num num num chip seal aggregate .
furnish hard durable particles or fragments of crushed gravel crushed stone crushed slag or lightweight aggregates .
use only one type of aggregate on the surface treatment .
conform to the following a gradation table num b clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num num percent max .
c flat and elongated particles astm dnum num percent max .
num ratio plus ⅜inch nummm sieve calculated by mass weighted average d fractured faces astm dnum num percent min .
e los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
f soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles table num target value ranges for single and double course chip seal aggregate gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num aashto t num grading designation a b c d num½ inch num mm num inch num mm num num ¾ inch num mm num num num num num ½ inch num mm num num num num num num num num ⅜ inch num mm num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num num num num num num num num statistical procedures do not apply .
the value in the parentheses is the allowable deviation from the target values .
num slurry seal and micro surfacing aggregate .
furnish hard durable particles or fragments of crushed gravel or crushed stone .
a slurry seal aggregate .
conform to issa anum and the following num gradation table num num los angeles abrasion aashto t num grading d num percent max .
section num num num sand equivalent aashto t num num min .
alternate method no .
num reference method num soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles b micro surfacing aggregate .
conform to issa anum and the following num gradation table num num los angeles abrasion aashto t num grading d num percent max .
num sand equivalent aashto t num num min .
alternate method no .
num reference method num soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles table num micro surfacing and slurry seal aggregate gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num aashto t num grading designation i ii iii ⅜ inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no.num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num num num num reserved .
num blotter .
furnish sound durable particles of gravel or crushed stone conforming to the following a material passing ⅜inch nummm sieve num percent aashto t num b liquid limit aashto t num method a num max .
c without organic matter and clay balls .
num aggregate for aggregatetopsoil course .
conform to aashto m num class e and aashto m num size number num .
section num num num sand .
furnish clean material conforming to the following a gradation aashto m num b deleterious material aashto m num class b num aggregate for lean concrete backfill .
furnish hard clean durable nonplastic nonorganic nonreactive aggregate to meet the designated gradation in table num .
table num aggregate for lean concrete backfill sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num t num num inch num mm num no .
num num µm num num num shotcrete aggregate .
combine fine and coarse aggregates to meet the designated gradation in table num .
table num shotcrete gradation limits for combined aggregates sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num aashto t num grading designation a b ½ inch num mm num ⅜ inch num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num mm num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num no .
num num µm num num num num a fine aggregate .
conform to aashto m num class b except as amended or supplemented by the following num material passing no .
num numµm sieve num percent max .
aashto t num num sand equivalent value aashto t num num min .
alternate method no .
num reference method num alkalisilica reactivity see subsection numb b coarse aggregate .
conform to aashto m num class a except as amended or supplemented by the following num los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
section num num num alkalisilica reactivity see subsection numb num granular rock backdrain .
furnish hard durable rock conforming to the following a los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
b apparent specific gravity aashto t num num min .
c absorption aashto t num num percent max .
d durability index course aashto t num num min .
e gradation table num table num granular rock backdrain gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num aashto t num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num no .
num numμm num num section num num section num .
soil num foundation fill .
furnish a suitable material conforming to the following a maximum particle size num in num mm b soil classification aashto m num anuma c material passing no .
num numµm sieve num percent max .
aashto t num and aashto t num num bedding material .
furnish a suitable wellgraded free draining material conforming to the following a maximum particle size ½ in num mm or half the corrugation depth whichever is smaller b material passing no .
num numµm sieve num percent max .
aashto t num and aashto t num num backfill material .
furnish a suitable wellgraded compactable material conforming to the following a for structures and pipes other than plastic pipe num maximum particle size num in num mm num soil classification aashto m num anum anum or anum b for reinforced soil slopes and plastic pipe num maximum particle size num½ in num mm num soil classification aashto m num anum anum anum or anum num structural backfill .
furnish a suitable free draining material conforming to the following a maximum particle size num in num mm b material passing no .
num numµm num percent max .
sieve aashto t num and aashto t num c plasticity index aashto t num num max .
num topping .
furnish a suitable granular material conforming to the following a maximum particle size num in num mm b soil classification aashto m num anum or anum section num num num unclassified borrow .
furnish a suitable material conforming to the following a maximum particle size num in num mm b soil classification aashto m num anum anum or anum num select borrow .
furnish a suitable wellgraded material conforming to the following a gradation table num b liquid limit aashto t num method a num max .
table num select borrow gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num aashto t num num inch num mm num num inch num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num µm num num num select granular backfill .
furnish suitable sound durable granular material conforming to the following a quality requirements .
num gradation table num num angle of internal friction on the portion passing num degree min .
the no .
num nummmsieve aashto t num note compact samples for aashto t num to num percent of the maximum density determined according to aashto t num method c or d and corrected for oversized material according to aashto t num note num .
num soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles num plasticity index aashto t num num max .
num los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
table num select granular backfill gradation sieve size percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num aashto t num num inch num mm num no .
num num µm num num no .
num num µm num num section num num b electrochemical requirements for mse walls with metallic reinforcements .
num resistivity aashto t num num ω centimeter min .
num ph aashto t num num to num num sulfate content aashto t num num ppm max .
num chloride content aashto t num num ppm max .
note tests for sulfate and chloride content are not required when resistivity is greater than num ohm centimeters .
c electrochemical requirements for mse walls with geosynthetic reinforcements .
ph aashto t num num to num section num num section num .
rock num gabion and revet mattress rock .
furnish angular stone from a rock quarry or cut that is hard durable free of organic and spoil material and resistant to weathering and water action .
do not use crushed river rock or rock with rounded surfaces .
conform to the following a durability index course aashto t num num min .
b density of a filled basket num lbftnum num kgmnum min .
c gradation .
furnish rock with breadth and thickness at least onethird its length .
num baskets num foot num millimeters or greater in the vertical dimension .
a maximum dimension num in num mm b minimum dimension num in num mm num baskets less than num foot num millimeters in the vertical dimension .
a maximum dimension num in num mm b minimum dimension num in num mm d los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
num riprap .
furnish hard durable angular rock that is resistant to weathering and water action and free of organic or other unsuitable material .
angular rock is characterized by sharp clean edges at the intersections of relatively flat surfaces .
do not use shale rock with shale seams or other fissile or fissured rock that may break into smaller pieces in the process of handling and placing .
conform to the following a apparent specific gravity aashto t num num min .
b absorption aashto t num num percent max .
c soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles d los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
e rock particle intermediate dimension width and ⅓ longest dimension minimum dimension thickness length min .
f gradation flh t num table num section num num table num gradation requirements for riprapnum class of rock equal or smaller by count dx range of intermediate dimensionsnum inches millimeters range of rock massnum pounds kilograms num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation includes spalls and rock fragments to provide a stable dense mass .
num the intermediate dimension is the longest straightline distance across the rock that is perpendicular to the rocks longest axis on the rock face with the largest projection plane .
num rock mass is based on a specific gravity of num and num percent of the cubic volume as calculated using the intermediate dimension .
section num num num rock for masonry structures .
conform to the size and shape specified .
furnish sound durable rock of the texture and color specified and has been proven satisfactory for the intended use .
do not furnish rock containing reeds rifts seams laminations and minerals that may cause discoloration or deterioration from weathering .
num rock for special rock embankment .
furnish angular stone that is hard durable resistant to abrasion and weathering and that is free of weak cleavages that may cause the rock to disintegrate during handling and placing .
a mechanicallyplaced embankments .
furnish rock conforming to table num .
table num range of mechanicallyplaced rock percent of rock fragments by mass range of intermediate dimensionsnum inches millimeters range of rock massnum pounds kilograms num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the intermediate dimension is the longest straightline distance across the rock that is perpendicular to the rocks longest axis on the rock face with the largest projection plane .
num rock mass is based on a specific gravity of num. b handplaced embankments .
furnish rock conforming to table num .
table num range of handplaced rock percent of rock fragments by mass range of intermediate dimensionsnum inches millimeters range of rock massnum pounds kilograms num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the intermediate dimension is the longest straightline distance across the rock that is perpendicular to the rocks longest axis on the rock face with the largest projection plane .
num rock mass is based on a specific gravity of num .
num rock for buttresses .
a general .
furnish angular stone that is hard durable free of organic and spoil material and resistant to weathering and water action .
conform to the following num rock breadth and thickness at least onethird of the rock length num apparent specific gravity aashto t num num min .
num absorption aashto t num num percent max .
num durability index course aashto t num num min .
b mechanicallyplaced buttresses .
in addition to subsection numa furnish rock conforming to table num .
section num num c handplaced buttresses .
in addition to subsection numa furnish rock conforming to table num .
num rock for rockeries .
furnish hard angular and durable rock that consists of a solid mass without open fractures foliation or other planes of weakness that are generally cubical tabular or rectangular in shape .
do not furnish crushed river rock or rock with rounded surfaces .
conform to the following a apparent specific gravity aashto t num num min .
b absorption aashto t num num percent max .
c los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
d durability index course aashto t num num min .
e soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles f size and shape .
num rock length see plans num rock breadth and thickness at least onethird of rock length num rock dimension num in num mm min .
num cap rock mass num lb num kg min .
num rock mulch .
furnish hard durable native rock that is resistant to weathering and free of excess moisture muck frozen lumps roots sod or other deleterious material conforming to the following a maximum particle size num in num mm b minimum particle size num in num mm c apparent specific gravity aashto t num num min .
d absorption aashto t num num percent max .
e soundness of aggregate using sodium sulfate num percent loss max .
aashto t num num cycles f los angeles abrasion aashto t num num percent max .
section num num section num .
concrete pipe num nonreinforced concrete pipe .
conform to aashto m num for the diameters and strength classes specified .
num reinforced concrete pipe .
conform to aashto m num for the diameters and strength classes specified .
for precast reinforced concrete end sections conform to cited specifications to the extent they apply .
num perforated concrete pipe .
conform to aashto m num type num or type num and aashto m num for the diameters and strength classes specified .
num reinforced archshaped concrete pipe .
conform to aashto m num for the diameters and strength classes specified .
num reinforced ellipticallyshaped concrete pipe .
conform to aashto m num for the diameters placement design horizontal or vertical and strength classes specified .
num reinforced dload concrete pipe .
conform to aashto m num for the diameters specified .
num precast reinforced concrete box sections .
conform to astm cnum .
meet the design requirements for aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge design specifications with hlnum live loading .
clearly mark the following information on the inner surface of each box section by indentation waterproof paint or other approved means a box span and rise b date of manufacture c name of manufacturer d submittal number and e date certified by manufacturer .
num gaskets for concrete pipe .
a elastomeric seals .
conform to astm cnum class c. b resilient connectors .
conform to astm cnum .
num supplemental concrete pipe ties .
conform to astm anum and galvanize tie hardware .
section num num section num .
metal pipe num ductile iron culvert pipe .
conform to astm anum for the sizes specified .
num metalliccoated corrugated steel pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows branch connections and prefabricated flared end sections and coupling bands conforming to aashto m num and either aashto m num aashto m num or aashto m num for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
fabricate underdrain pipe from steel sheets with a minimum thickness of num inches num millimeters .
use any class of perforation specified in aashto m num .
num aluminumalloy corrugated pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows branch connections and prefabricated flared end sections and coupling bands conforming to aashto m num for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
fabricate underdrain pipe from aluminum sheets with a minimum thickness of num inches num millimeters .
use any class of perforation .
num asphaltcoated pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows branch connections and prefabricated flared end sections and coupling bands conforming to section num as applicable for the kinds of pipes to be coated .
coat the pipe with asphalt material conforming to aashto m num for the type of coating specified .
coat special sections such as elbows branch connections and end sections and coupling bands according to aashto m num .
coat flared end sections with an asphalt coating conforming to aashto m num type a or a field applied asphalt mastic coating conforming to aashto m num .
num steel structural plate structures .
furnish structures and assembly fasteners for connecting plates conforming to aashto m num for the sizes and types specified .
num aluminumalloy structural plate structures .
furnish structures and assembly fasteners for connecting plates conforming to aashto m num for the sizes and types specified .
num asphaltcoated structural plate structures .
furnish structures conforming to either subsection num or num as applicable .
coat with an asphalt coating conforming to aashto m num type a or a field applied asphalt mastic coating conforming to aashto m num .
if the asphalt coating is applied to the plates before field erection identify each plates nominal metal thickness by painting the data on the inside surface of the plates after coating .
other methods of plate identification may be used if approved .
num polymercoated steel pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows and branch connections and coupling bands conforming to aashto m num grade num and aashto m num grade num .
num reserved .
section num num num slotted drain pipe .
furnish pipe conforming to aashto m num and either aashto m num aashto m num or aashto m num for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
fabricate the pipe with either angle slots or grate slots and as shown in the plans .
furnish grate assemblies for the grate slot drain conforming to astm anum ss grade num .
galvanize slot angles and grate slot assemblies according to subsection num .
num metalliccoated spiral rib pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows and branch connections and coupling bands conforming to aashto m num type ir and type iir aashto m num aashto m num or aashto m num for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
num aluminumalloy spiral rib pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows and branch connections and coupling bands conforming to aashto m num type ir and type iir for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
num concretelined corrugated steel pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows and branch connections and coupling bands conforming to subsection num for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
fully line the pipe and special sections with concrete according to astm anum class c. num invertpaved corrugated steel pipe .
furnish pipe special sections such as elbows and branch connections and coupling bands conforming to subsection num for the dimensions and thicknesses specified .
pave the invert of the pipe and special sections with concrete or asphalt material according to astm anum class a or class c. num cast iron soil pipe and fittings .
conform to astm anum class sv for the designated sizes .
num seamless copper water tube and fittings .
conform to astm bnum type l for the designated sizes .
num gaskets for metal pipe .
a oring gaskets for flexible metal pipe .
conform to astm cnum class c. b continuous flat gaskets for flexible metal pipe with flat bands or bands with projections .
num conform to astm dnum .
num gasket thickness ½ in num mm greater than the nominal depth of pipe corrugations c continuous flat gaskets for flexible metal pipe with corrugated bands .
num conform to astm dnum .
num gasket thickness ⅜ in num mm num gaskets for ductile iron pipe .
conform to astm anum .
section num num section num .
plastic pipe num smooth wall polyethylene pipe .
furnish perforated and nonperforated num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter pipe conforming to astm fnum and minimum cell class penumc according to astm dnum .
num corrugated polyethylene pipe .
a general use .
furnish perforated and nonperforated num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter pipe conforming to aashto m num. b sanitary sewers .
furnish aashto m num type s pipe .
c water systems numinches num millimeters and over .
furnish pipe conforming to the requirements of ansiawwa cnum .
fabricate from highdensity polyethylene penum conforming to a minimum cell class num c d or e according to astm dnum .
num profile wall ribbed polyethylene pipe .
furnish perforated and nonperforated num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter pipe conforming to astm fnum and minimum cell class numc or numc according to astm dnum .
num corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing .
furnish perforated and nonperforated num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter tubing conforming to aashto m num .
num smooth wall polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe .
a general use .
furnish perforated and nonperforated num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter pipe conforming to aashto m num and minimum cell class num or class num according to astm dnum .
b sanitary sewers .
conform to astm dnum .
c water systems .
num pvc pipe numinches num millimeters and over .
furnish pipe and fittings conforming to the requirements of ansiawwa cnum or ansiawwa cnum and listed by underwriters laboratories inc. furnish joints conforming to the requirements of astm dnum and using a restrained rubber gasket conforming to astm fnum .
num pvc pipe under numinches num millimeters .
furnish pipe and fittings conforming to astm dnum .
select pvc num pvc num or pvc num with a minimum wall thickness equal or greater than a standard dimension ratio sdr of num .
furnish pipes bearing the national sanitation foundation seal for use to transport potable water .
furnish joints conforming to the requirements of astm dnum using a restrained rubber gasket conforming to astm fnum .
furnish solvent cement for pipe and fittings conforming to astm dnum .
d horizontal drains .
furnish schedule num pipe conforming to astm dnum .
select pvc num pvc num pvc num pvc num or pvc num .
furnish schedule num solvent weld fittings conforming to astm dnum .
section num num num profile wall ribbed polyvinyl chloride pipe .
furnish perforated and nonperforated num to numinch num to nummillimeter diameter pipe conforming to aashto m num and minimum cell class numc or class numc according to astm dnum .
for sanitary sewer applications conform to astm fnum or astm fnum .
num acrylonitrilebutadienestyrene abs pipe .
conform to astm dnum .
num gaskets for plastic pipe .
a elastomeric seals .
conform to astm fnum .
b thermoplastic elastomeric seals .
conform to astm fnum .
section num num section num .
reinforcing steel and wire rope num reinforcing steel .
a general .
furnish the following information with each shipment of steel to the project num name and location of the steel rolling mill num manufacturing process num heat numbers num sizes num specifications num copies of mill test analyses for chemical and physical tests and num consignee and destination of shipment .
b reinforcing bars .
furnish deformed grade num num bars conforming to aashto m num or aashto m num. c epoxycoated reinforcing bars .
furnish bars conforming to subsection numb .
conform to astm anum .
inspect the reinforcing bars after the near white blast cleaning .
reject bars with steel slivers or scabs .
selective sorting and rejection at the fabricators shop may avoid unnecessary delays and subsequent rejection of bars during the precoating inspection at the coating applicators shop .
coat epoxycoated reinforcing steel in a plant certified by crsi as a fusion bonded epoxy applicator .
d tie bars .
furnish deformed grade num num bars conforming to aashto m num. e hook bolts .
furnish plain grade num num bars conforming to aashto m num with mnum rolled threads or mnum cut threads .
furnish a threaded sleeve nut capable of sustaining a minimum axial load of num pounds num kilonewtons .
f dowel bars .
conform to aashto m num type a or type b .
use plain round bars without burring or other deformation restricting free movement in the concrete .
paint half the length of each dowel bar with one coat of tar paint .
when the paint dries and immediately before placing the dowels lubricate the painted end to prevent concrete from bonding to the painted end .
for expansion joints furnish a dowel cap that snugly covers num¼ inches num millimeters of the dowel has a closed end and has a suitable stop to hold the closed end num inch num millimeters from the end of the dowel bar .
lubricants for type b dowels may be medium setting emulsified asphalt or a flaked graphite .
lubricants are not required for type a coated dowel bars .
furnish dowel assemblies that hold dowel bars within ¼inch nummillimeter tolerance vertically and horizontally during concrete placement and permit unrestricted movement of the pavement slab .
section num num use wire conforming to aashto m num for dowel assemblies .
coat dowel assemblies with the same material as the dowel bar .
recoat or repair damaged coatings equivalent to the manufacturers original coating .
g deformed steel wire .
conform to aashto m num. h steel welded wire reinforcement plain for concrete .
conform to aashto m num. i colddrawn steel wire .
conform to aashto m num. j welded deformed steel wire fabric .
conform to aashto m num. k fabricated deformed steel bar or rod mats .
conform to aashto m num. l low alloy steel deformed bars .
conform to astm anum .
num prestressing steel .
a fabricate from one of the following num stressrelieved steel wire aashto m num type ba or type wa num uncoated sevenwire steel strand aashto m num grade num num or num highstrength steel bars aashto m num type ii b submit representative samples from prestressed members fabricated off site .
in the case of wire or strand take the sample from the same master roll .
num pretensioning method .
furnish a sample at least num feet num meters long of each strand size from each coil .
num posttensioning method .
furnish samples of the following lengths .
a for wires requiring a head num feet num meters .
b for wires not requiring a head sufficient length to make up one parallellay cable num feet num meters long consisting of the same number of wires as the cable to be furnished .
c for strands furnished with fittings num feet num meters between near ends of fittings .
d for bars to be furnished with threaded ends and nuts num feet num meters between threads at ends .
section num num section num .
fence and guardrail num barbed wire .
furnish galvanized wire or aluminum coated wire conforming to aashto m num .
num woven wire .
furnish galvanized fabric or aluminum coated fabric conforming to aashto m num .
num chain link fence .
furnish fabric posts rails ties bands bars rods and other fittings and hardware conforming to aashto m num .
furnish numinch nummillimeter coiled spring steel tension wire conforming to astm anum hard temper with a class num galvanized coating .
use the same coating on the tension wire as used on the rest of the chain link fence .
num fence posts and bollards .
a wood .
conform to aashto m num .
peel bark except for red cedar posts and bracing which do not require peeling .
trim knots flush with the surface and season the wood .
for dimension lumber for fences bollards or gates use timber that is sound straight and reasonably without knots splits and shakes .
provide snums finish .
b concrete .
conform to section num. c steel .
for line fence posts conform to aashto m num .
for chain link fence conform to aashto m num .
num fence gates .
for frame gates using chain link fabric conform to aashto m num .
use the same chain link fabric in the gate as in the fence .
num rail elements .
a metal beam rail .
furnish metal beam rail conforming to aashtoagcartba a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware .
num galvanized steel .
furnish wbeam or thrie beam rail fabricated from corrugated sheet steel conforming to aashto m num for the designated shape class type and mass of coating specified num painted steel .
furnish wbeam or thrie beam rail conforming to aashto m num for the designated shape class type and mass of coating specified or num corrosion resistant weathering steel .
furnish wbeam or thrie beam rail conforming to aashto m num type iv class b. b box beam rail .
furnish steel box beam rail conforming to aashtoagcartba a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware .
section num num c steelbacked timber rail .
furnish timber conforming to aashto m num .
fabricate the timber rail from dry seasoned and dressed rough sawn douglas fir southern pine or other species having a stress grade of at least num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
do not use refractory species such as larch or rocky mountain douglas fir .
treat according to aashto m num .
fabricate steel backing elements according to astm anum .
d steelbacked log rail .
use logs that are seasoned straight and sound no .
num grade western hemlock western red cedar or pine .
do not use logs that taper in excess of num inches num millimeters between the butt and tip ends of adjacent logs .
remove bark and at least num percent of the inner bark .
do not use logs with peeler or incision marks on surfaces that will be visible .
do not use logs with knot clusters season checks singular or any two opposite each other that exceed the thickness of the member .
logs may contain sound tight wellspaced knots .
treat according to aashto m num .
fabricate steel backing elements according to astm anum .
num guardrail posts .
furnish guardrail posts conforming to aashtoagcartba a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware .
a wood .
furnish posts that do not have a through check shake or end slit in the same plane as or a plane parallel to the bolt hole and extending from the top of the post to within num inches num millimeters or the bolt hole .
treat according to aashto m num .
for steelbacked timber guardrail systems furnish posts conforming to subsection numc .
for steelbacked log rail systems furnish posts conforming to subsection numd .
b steel .
furnish posts of the appropriate size shape according to astm anum .
zinccoat the embedded portion of weathering steel posts according to astm anum .
num guardrail blocks .
a wood .
furnish wood conforming to subsection numa .
b steel .
furnish steel conforming to subsection numb .
c plastic or composite .
furnish blocks that are crashworthy .
provide a new homogeneous block with uniform texture that does not crack chip flake peel or splinter after fabrication .
num guardrail nuts bolts and cables .
a galvanized nuts and bolts .
furnish nuts conforming to astm anum grade a. furnish bolts conforming to astm anum grade a. b weathering nuts and bolts .
furnish nuts conforming to astm anum grade cnum .
furnish bolts conforming to astm anum type num. c cable .
furnish cable conforming to aashto m num type ii class a .
num guardrail hardware .
furnish hardware conforming to aashtoagcartba a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware .
section num num for angles channels wide flanges and plates not contained in the above standard conform to astm anum for nonweathering steel or astm anum for weathering steel .
for structural tubing for short steel posts conform to astm anum or astm anum grade num .
galvanize soil plates and structural tubing according to aashto m num .
do not punch drill cut or weld the metal after galvanizing .
manufacture reflector tabs from numinch nummillimeter aluminum or plastic .
use an adhesive that resists peeling with a force of num pounds per inch num kilograms per centimeter of width .
use mildewresistant adhesive that has no staining effect on retroreflective sheeting .
furnish retroreflective sheeting conforming to astm dnum including supplementary requirements .
num temporary plastic fence .
furnish plastic noncorrosive fence fabricated from polyethylene hdpe and uv stabilized for outdoor weathering .
conform to the following a height num in num mm min .
b mesh openings num to num in num to num mm c color international orange d mass num lbft num kgm min .
section num num section num .
concrete curing material and admixtures num curing material .
conform to the following a burlap cloth aashto m num b sheet material astm cnum c liquid membrane forming compounds astm cnum type numd or type num num airentraining admixtures .
conform to aashto m num .
num chemical admixtures .
furnish waterreducing retarding setaccelerating and hydration stabilizing admixtures or combinations thereof conforming to aashto m num .
for hydration stabilizing admixtures conform to aashto m num type b or type d. num latex emulsion .
furnish a homogeneous nontoxic film forming polymeric emulsion in water with stabilizers added at the point of manufacture .
conform to the following a color white b styrene butadiene polymer type stabilizer num percent styrene num percent butadiene c chlorides num percent d polymer particle size num to num angstroms average num to num µm average e latex nonionic surfactant f solids num to num percent g mass num to num lbgallon num f num to num kgl num c h ph num to num i shelf life num years min .
j portland cement composition polydimethylsiloxene num concrete coloring agents .
conform to astm cnum .
use only coloring agents composed of synthetic or natural inorganic iron oxides .
section num num section num .
joint material num sealants fillers and seals .
conform to the following a joint sealants and crack fillers .
num joint and crack sealant hotapplied astm dnum type ii or type iii for concrete and asphalt concrete pavements num crack filler hotapplied for concrete astm dnum and asphalt concrete pavements num proprietary asphaltrubber products furnish the following a source and grade of asphalt binder b total quantity of granulated rubber and mass as a percent of asphaltrubber mixture c granulated rubber types and quantity of each type if blend num mass as a percent of combined rubber and num gradation of granulated rubber .
d type of asphalt modifier if any e quantity of asphalt modifier and mass as a percent of asphalt binder f other additives g heating and application temperatures and h manufacturers recommended application procedures .
num elastomeric joint sealant astm cnum type m grade p class num use tnum or tnum num flexible cellular joint filler astm dnum type num class b or class c grades num num or num b preformed expansion joint fillers .
furnish in a single piece for the depth and width required for the joint .
num preformed expansion joint filler aashto m num for concrete bituminous type num preformed sponge rubber expansion aashto m num type i joint filler for concrete paving and structural construction num preformed cork expansion joint aashto m num filler for concrete paving and structural construction section num num num preformed expansion joint filler aashto m num for concrete paving and structural construction nonextruding and resilient bituminous types c preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seal for concrete pavements .
conform to astm dnum .
use a lubricant conforming to astm dnum which was manufactured within num months of use .
d coldapplied single component chemically curing silicone joint sealant for concrete pavement nonsag .
conform to astm dnum type ns .
e coldapplied single component chemically curing silicone joint sealant for concrete pavement selfleveling .
conform to astm dnum type sl .
f backer rod .
conform to astm dnum type num .
use a compatible sealant as recommended by the rod manufacture .
for size of backer rod conform to table num .
table num backer rod sizes joint width after preparation rod diameter num inch num millimeters ⅜ inch num millimeters ⅜ inch num millimeters ½ inch num millimeters ½ inch num millimeters ⅝ inch num millimeters ⅝ inch num millimeters ¾ inch num millimeters ¾ inch num millimeters num inch num millimeters num inch num millimeters num¼ inches num millimeters num¼ inches num millimeters num½ inches num millimeters num½ inches num millimeters num inches num millimeters g preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seal for bridges .
conform to aashto m num .
use an adhesive lubricant conforming to astm dnum .
num mortar .
preblend or mix on site .
furnish and proportion mortar according to astm cnum .
use masonry cement mortar type m or type s. section num num section num .
roadside improvement material num topsoil .
a furnished topsoil .
furnish fertile friable free draining sandy loam soil that is free of subsoil refuse stumps roots brush weeds rocks larger than num inch num millimeters or other substances detrimental to the development of vegetative growth .
demonstrate that the soil can sustain healthy crops of grass shrubs or other plant growth .
conform to the following num texture a organic matter aashto t num num to num percent b sand aashto t num num to num percent c silt aashto t num num to num percent d clay aashto t num num to num percent num ph aashto t num num to num b conserved topsoil .
see subsection numc .
num agricultural limestone .
furnish calcic or dolomitic ground limestone conforming to the standards of the association of official analytical chemists international applicable federal and state regulations and the following a purity calcium and magnesium carbonates num percent min .
b gradation table num table num agricultural limestone gradation sieve size minimum percent by mass passing designated sieve aashto t num no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num granulated slag or other approved natural sources of lime may be used provided the application rate is adjusted to equal the total neutralizing power of the specified ground limestone .
num fertilizer .
furnish standard commercial grade dry formulated fertilizer conforming to the standards of the association of official analytical chemists international applicable federal and state regulations and required minimum percentages of available nutrients .
supply the fertilizer in new clean sealed and properly labeled containers with name mass and guaranteed analysis of contents clearly marked .
liquid fertilizer containing the minimum percentage of available nutrients may be used .
section num num num seed .
conform to the federal seed act the federal noxious weed act and applicable state and local seed and noxious weed laws .
do not use wet moldy or otherwise contaminated or damaged seed .
furnish each seed type in separate sealed container .
clearly label each container with the following a name and type of seed b lot number c net mass d percent of purity germination and hard seed e percent of maximum weed seed content f seed origin g noxious weeds present h other crop seed i inert matter j name and address of seed distributor and k mixture percent of each component .
inoculate legume seed with approved cultures according to the manufacturers instructions .
num mulch .
a straw .
furnish certified weed free straw from oats wheat rye rice or other grain crops that is without mold or other objectionable material .
furnish straw in an airdry condition suitable for placing with mulch blower equipment .
b wood fiber .
furnish processed wood fiber from wood chips conforming to the following num colored with a green dye noninjurious to plant growth num readily dispersible in water num nontoxic to seed or other plant material num free of growth or germination inhibiting substances num free of weed seed num air dried to an moisture content of num percent num packaged in new labeled containers with the manufacturers name and num packaged in a condition appropriate for mixing in a homogeneous slurry suitable for application with power spray equipment .
section num num c grass straw cellulose fiber .
furnish processed grass straw fiber conforming to the following num colored with a green dye noninjurious to plant growth num readily dispersible in water num nontoxic to seed or other plant material num free of growth or germination inhibiting substances num free of weed seed num air dried to a moisture content of num percent num air dried to a uniform mass of num percent num packaged in new containers labeled with the manufacturers name and airdry mass and num packaged in a condition appropriate for mixing in a homogeneous slurry suitable for application with power spray equipment .
d peat moss .
furnish a granulated sphagnum peat moss conforming to the following num sticks stones and mineral matter num percent num partially decomposed stems num percent min .
and leaves of sphagnum num color brown num textured from porous fibrous to spongy fibrous num ph num to num num airdried e mature compost .
furnish partially decomposed organic material such as leaves grass shrubs and yard trimmings cured for num to num weeks .
maturity is indicated by temperature stability and soillike odor .
furnish friable dark brown weedfree and pathogenfree mature compost conforming to the following num carbonnitrogen ratio num to num num carbonphosphorus ratio num to num num ph num to num num water content num percent max .
num particle size a seeding and sodding num in num mm max .
b erosion control num inch num mm max .
num organic material num percent min .
num synthetic plastic metal or glass material num percent max .
section num num f straw for hydroseeding .
furnish clean agricultural straw milled to num inch num millimeters or less in length .
dry the fibers to num percent moisture for compaction .
bale in heatsealed plastic bags .
g bonded fiber matrix hydromulch .
furnish a mixture of fibers and bonding agent which when hydraulically applied and dried produce a matrix conforming to the following num does not dissolve or disperse when wetted num holds at least num ounces num grams of water per ounce num grams of dry matrix num has no germination or growth inhibiting factors num forms no water insensitive crust num contains material that is num percent biodegradable and num is colored with a green dye noninjurious to plant growth .
h recycled pulp fiber .
furnish cellulose fiber mulch products manufactured from natural material diverted from the wastestream of manufacturing processes or produced from recycled material .
these include newsprint chipboard corrugated cardboard wood chips and similar material .
process the material to eliminate substances that inhibit seed germination and plant growth .
add a colored dye that is noninjurious to plant growth and fades rapidly with exposure to light .
supply fiber that readily blends with water grass seed fertilizer and other additives to for a slurry suitable for application with power spray equipment .
furnish a homogeneous mixture conforming to the following num synthetic plastic metal or glass material num percent num weed seed num percent num moisture content num percent max .
num ash content num percent max .
num organic matter num percent min .
num boron num ppm max .
num waterholding capacity num to num percent by mass num ph num to num i wood chips .
provide wood chips from local sources including clearing .
maximum size of chips is num by num by ½ inches num by num by num millimeters .
num plant material .
conform to the american standard for nursery stock .
a quality of plant material .
furnish plants that are excellent representatives of their normal species or varieties .
furnish nursery grown stock that has been transplanted or roottrimmed two or more times according to the kind and size of plant .
furnish plants with a normally developed branch system .
do not furnish plants with disfiguring knots sunscald injuries abrasions of the bark dead or dry wood broken terminal growth or other objectionable disfigurements .
furnish trees with reasonably straight stems and well branched and symmetrical branches according to their natural habits of growth .
section num num b plant names .
for scientific and common plant names conform to standardized plant names as adopted by the american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature .
legibly tag and identify plants by name and size .
c grading standards .
conform to american standard for nursery stock as approved by ansi .
d nursery inspection and plant quarantine .
furnish plants that are without plant diseases and insect pests .
comply with nursery inspection and plant quarantine regulations of the states of origin and destination including federal regulations governing interstate movement of nursery stock .
provide a valid copy of the certificate of inspection with each package box bale or carload shipped or otherwise delivered .
e balled and burlapped bb plants .
furnish plants from the original and undisturbed soil in which the plants were grown .
dig bb plants to retain as many fibrous roots as possible .
wrap transport and handle the plants so the soil ball and small and fibrous roots remain intact .
num cellular confinement systems .
furnish a flexible honeycomb threedimensional structure fabricated from light stabilized polyethylene plastic .
conform to the following a functional longevity num months min .
b cell area num to num innum num to num cmnum c sheet thickness astm dnum num to num mils num to num mm d density astm dnum num to num ozinnum num to num gcmnum e carbon black content astm dnum num to num percent f environmental stresscracking num hours min .
astm dnum g conform to table num for the depth specified .
section num num table num cellular confinement systems property requirements nominal cell depth num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm cell joint strength num lb min .
num n min .
num lb min .
num n min .
num lb min .
num n min .
num lb min .
num n min .
num lb min .
num n min .
num miscellaneous planting material .
a stakes for bracing and anchoring .
conform to the american lumber standards .
fabricate stakes for bracing and anchoring trees from rough cypress cedar locust or other approved wood essentially without knots rot crossgrain or other defects that would impair the strength of the stake .
furnish stakes with a minimum num by numinch num by nummillimeter square crosssection and adequate length .
furnish anchor stakes of the same size and quality as bracing stakes .
the diameter and length of the deadman is specified in the contract .
b hose .
furnish numinch nummillimeter diameter garden or steam hose rubber and fabric to be used with wire for bracing and anchoring trees .
c wire .
furnish numinch nummillimeter diameter soft annealed galvanized steel wire for bracing and anchoring trees .
d wrapping material .
furnish numinch num millimeter wide rolls of waterproof paper triple lamination num or numinch nummillimeter wide rolls of burlap for wrapping trees .
e twine .
furnish twoply twine for trees num inches num millimeters and less in diameter and threeply twine for trees over num inches num millimeters in diameter for tying wrapping material to the trees .
f antidesiccant .
if approved furnish a commercially available antidesiccant emulsion to provide a film over plant surfaces that is permeable enough to permit transpiration .
g tree wound dressing .
furnish a commercially available product with asphalt base and fungicide .
furnish material that is antiseptic waterproof adhesive and elastic .
do not use material that is harmful to living tree tissue such as kerosene coal tar or creosote .
num sod .
furnish living vigorous sod of the type of grass and thickness specified in the contract .
furnish sod with a dense root system that is reasonably free of noxious weeds and grasses .
before taking up the sod cut the top growth to less than numinch nummillimeter height .
num pegs for sod .
furnish square or round pegs of sound wood conforming to the following a length num in num mm min .
b approximate crosssectional area num innum num mmnum section num num num tackifiers .
furnish a commercially available product containing no solvents or other diluting agents toxic to plant life that is without growth or germination inhibiting factors nonflammable nontoxic to aquatic organisms and functional for at least num days .
a general purpose tackifier .
furnish one of the following num plant based tackifier .
furnish a natural high molecular weight polysaccharide a high viscosity hydrocolloid that is miscible in water and labeled as one of the following a guar gum .
a product derived from the ground endosperm of the guar plant cyamopsis tetragonolobus treated with dispersing agents for easy mixing and dilutable at the rate of num to num pounds per num gallons num to num kilograms per num liters of water .
b psyllium .
a product manufactured from the finely ground mucilloid coating of plantago ovata or plantago ispaghula seeds able to dry and form a firm but rewettable membrane .
c starch .
a product manufactured from a nonionic watersoluble granular material derived from corn potato or other plantbased source .
num polymeric emulsion blend tackifier .
furnish a prepackaged liquid or dry powder anionic formulation with a residual monomer content not exceeding num percent by mass and labeled with one of the following as the primary active ingredient a acrylic copolymers and polymers b polymers of methacrylates and acrylates c copolymers of sodium acrylates and acrylamides d polyacrylamide and copolymer of acrylamide or e hydrocolloid polymers .
b polymer stabilized fiber matrix tackifier .
furnish the following num a liquid formulation with polyacrylamide as the primary active ingredient with the following requirements a linear anionic copolymer of acrylamide and sodium acrylate and b anionic with a residual monomer content that is at most num percent by mass .
num formulated and labeled as one of the following a waterinoil emulsion .
a product containing at least num pounds per gallon num kilograms per num liters pure polyacrylamide that is at least num percent active or b liquid dispersed polyacrylamide .
a product containing at least num pounds per gallon num kilograms per num liters pure polyacrylamide that is at least num percent active .
num fiber rolls and socks .
a excelsior fiber rolls .
furnish fiber rolls of curled excelsior fiber rolled into a cylindrical shape and encased in a tubular netting .
section num num b straw fiber rolls .
furnish straw fiber rolls that are manufactured from certified weed free straw and wrapped in a tubular mesh .
c coir rolls .
furnish coir fiber rolls that are num percent coconut fiber .
d compost socks .
furnish tubular mesh filled with mature compost according to subsection nume .
e tubular mesh for fiber rolls .
provide tubular mesh with openings no larger than ⅜ inch num millimeters .
mesh material is not required to be biodegradable but must be removed at the end of the project if it is not biodegradable .
provide tubular mesh diameter according to plans .
fill according to manufacturers recommendations .
f other fiber material .
use of recycled material that meet the requirements of the application may be considered .
submit to the co for approval .
num gravel bags .
furnish woven fabric bags with a minimum water flow rating of num gallons per minute per foot num cubic meters per minute per meter as tested by astm dnum .
fill the bags with clean coarse aggregate .
num sandbags .
use clean silt free material for sand filler .
conform to the following a bag material canvas geotextile or burlap b volume per bag ⅓ ftnum num mnum min .
num temporary culvert pipe .
for temporary slope drains and temporary culvert pipes furnish culvert pipe fabricated from corrugated metal plastic or concrete for use in diverting water through or around work areas .
furnish temporary culvert pipe placed beneath the traveled way conforming to hsnum mnum loading rating in aashto load and resistance factor design lrfd bridge design specifications .
num silt fence .
a geotextile .
conform to table num of aashto m num. b posts .
conforming to the following num wood posts .
conform to the following a num½ inches by num½ inches by num feet num millimeters by num millimeters by num meters minimum dimensions b untreated fir redwood cedar or pine cut from sound timber with no loose or unsound knots and c pointed on end driven in ground .
num steel posts .
conform to the following a num inches num millimeter minimum length b crosssection shape that can resist failure from lateral loads tshaped ushaped or lshaped and section num num c num pound per foot num kilograms per meter minimum mass .
c silt fence reinforcement .
furnish a wire mesh consisting of num gauge nummillimeter diameter steel with mesh spacing of num by num inches num by num millimeters or prefabricated polymeric mesh of equivalent strength .
num temporary rolled erosion control products .
furnish temporary rolled erosion control products conforming to table num and the following .
see the erosion control technology council website ectc.org for commercially available products that may conform to these specifications .
a type num.a ultrashort term mulch control netting .
furnish a mulch control netting consisting of rapidly degrading photodegradable synthetic mesh or woven biodegradable natural fiber netting .
b type num.b ultrashort term netless erosion control blanket .
furnish an erosion control blanket composed of processed rapidly degrading natural or polymer fibers mechanically interlocked or chemically adhered together to form a continuous matrix .
c type num.c ultrashort term singlenet erosion control blanket and open weave textile .
furnish one of the following material num an erosion control blanket composed of processed degradable natural or polymer fibers mechanicallybound together by a single rapidly degrading synthetic or natural fiber netting to form a continuous matrix or num an open weave textile composed of processed rapidly degrading natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
d type num.d ultrashort term doublenet erosion control blankets .
furnish an erosion control blanket composed of processed natural or polymer fibers mechanicallybound between two rapidly degrading synthetic or natural fiber nettings to form a continuous matrix .
e type num.a shortterm mulch control netting .
furnish a mulch control netting consisting of photodegradable synthetic mesh or woven biodegradable natural fiber .
f type num.b shortterm netless erosion control blanket .
furnish an erosion control blanket composed of processed degradable natural or polymer fibers mechanicallyinterlocked or chemicallyadhered together to form a continuous matrix .
g type num.c shortterm singlenet erosion control blanket or open weave textile .
furnish one of the following material num an erosion control blanket composed of processed degradable natural or polymer fibers mechanicallybound together by a single degradable synthetic or natural fiber netting to form a continuous matrix or num an open weave textile composed of processed degradable natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
h type num.d shortterm doublenet erosion control blankets .
furnish an erosion control blanket composed of processed natural or polymer fibers mechanically bound between two natural fiber or synthetic nettings to form a continuous matrix .
section num num i type num.a extended term mulch control netting .
furnish a mulch control netting consisting of a slow degrading synthetic mesh or woven natural fiber .
j type num.b extended term erosion control blanket or open weave textile .
furnish one of the following material num an erosion control blanket composed of processed slow degrading natural or polymer fibers mechanicallybound together between two slow degrading synthetic or natural fiber nettings to form a continuous matrix or num an open weave textile composed of processed slow degrading natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
k type num longterm erosion control blanket or open weave textile .
furnish one of the following material num an erosion control blanket composed of processed slow degrading natural or polymer fibers mechanicallybound together between two slow degrading synthetic or natural fiber nettings to form a continuous matrix or num an open weave textile composed of processed slow degrading natural or polymer yarns or twines woven into a continuous matrix .
section num num table num temporary rolled erosion control products rolled erosion control product type property test method num.anum num.b num.c num.d num.a num num.b num.c num.d num.a num num.b num typical functional longevitynum months na num num num num num num num num num num num minimum tensile strength astm dnum num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm maximum c factor at maximum gradient for slope applicationsnum astm dnum or other qualified independent testnum num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnumh num at numvnum½h num at numvnumh minimum shear stress for channel applicationsnum astm dnum or other qualified independent testnum num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num obtain max c factor and allowable shear stress for mulch control nettings with the netting used in conjunction with preapplied mulch material .
num functional longevities are for guidance only .
actual functional longevities may vary based on site and climatic conditions .
num c factor calculated as ratio of soil loss from rolled erosion control product protected slope tested at specified or greater gradient vh to ratio of soil loss from unprotected control plot in largescale testing .
these performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using erosion control technology council ectc test method num .
num minimum shear stress the rolled erosion control product unvegetated can sustain without physical damage or excess erosion numinch nummillimeter soil loss during a numminute flow event in largescale testing .
these performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using ectc test method num .
num the permissible shear stress levels established for each performance category are based on historical experience with products characterized by mannings roughness coefficients in the range of num to num .
num other largescale test methods determined acceptable by the co .
section num num num turf reinforcement mats .
furnish a rolled erosion control product composed of nondegradable synthetic fibers filament nets wire mesh and other elements processed into a permanent threedimensional matrix conforming to table num .
see the erosion control technology council website ectc.org for commercially available products that may conform to these specifications .
table num turf reinforcement mats propertiesnum test method rolled erosion control product type num.a num.b num.c minimum tensile strengthnum astm dnum num lbft num knm num lbft num knm num lbft num knm uv stability minimum tensile retention astm dnum numhour exposure num num num minimum thicknessnum astm dnum ¼ in num mm ¼ in num mm ¼ in num mm maximum gradient for slope applications numvnumh numvnumh numvnumh minimum shear stress for channel applicationsnum astm dnum or other qualified independent testnum num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num lbftnum num pa num for turf reinforcement mats containing degradable components obtain property values on the nondegradable portion of the matting alone .
num minimum average roll values machine direction only .
num field conditions with high loading and high survivability requirements may warrant the use of turf reinforcement mats with tensile strengths of num pounds per foot num kilonewtons per meter or greater .
num minimum shear stress the turf reinforcement mat fully vegetated can sustain without physical damage or excess erosion numinch nummillimetersoil loss during a numminute flow event in largescale testing .
these performance test values should be supported by periodic bench scale testing under similar test conditions and failure criteria using erosion control technology council test method num .
num other largescale test methods determined acceptable by the co .
section num num num sediment filter bags .
furnish rot and mildew resistant bags composed of a nonwoven geotextile fabric conforming to table num and the following a minimum footprint num ftnum num mnum b sewnin sleeve to fit minimum numinch nummillimeter pump discharge hose .
secure discharge hose with a hose clamp .
table num sediment filter bag geotextile requirements property test method astm units specifications mass dnum ozyd gm num num minimum grab tensile strength dnum lb n num num tensile elongation at break dnum num minimum puncture strength dnum lb n num num minimum trapezoid tear strength dnum lb n num num minimum sewn seam strength dnum lb n num num mullen burst dnum lbinnum kpa num num ultraviolet resistance dnum num permittivity dnum secnum num water flow rate dnum galmin.ft mnummin.m num num num prefabricated filter insert .
size inlet filter inserts to fit the catch basin or drop inlet and provide a highflow bypass .
follow manufacturers recommendations .
num floating turbidity curtains .
furnish curtains made of tightly woven nylon plastic or other nondeteriorating material conforming to table num and the following a fabric overlap when more than num in num mm one width of fabric is required b supporting flotation buoyancy num lbft num kpa min .
c ballast chain galvanized num in num mm d dual galvanized wire rope load num in num mm diameter lines with a heavy vinyl coating section num num table num floating turbidity curtain material requirements property test method astm units specifications minimum grab tensile strength machine direction dnum lb n num num minimum grab tensile strength cross machine direction dnum lb n num num trapezoid tear strength machine direction dnum lb n num num trapezoid tear strength crossmachine direction dnum lb n num num mullen burst dnum lbinnum kpa num num apparent opening size dnum num num permittivity dnum secnum num section num num section num .
geosynthetic material num geotextile .
use longchain synthetic polymers composed of at least num percent by mass of polyolefins or polyesters to manufacture geotextile and the threads used in joining geotextile by sewing .
form the geotextile including selvedges into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability relative to each other .
property values with the exception of apparent opening size aos in these specifications represent minimum average roll value marv in the weakest principal direction that is average test results of any roll in a lot sampled for conformance or quality assurance testing must meet or exceed the specified values .
values for aos represent maximum average roll values .
conform to the following physical requirements a separation and stabilization geotextile and geotextile filter .
conform to table num .
table num separation and stabilization geotextile and geotextile filter requirements num strength and durability properties property test method astm units class num class num type of geotextile woven nonwoven woven nonwoven elongation at break dnum num num num num minimum grab strength dnum lb n num num num num num num num num minimum sewn seam strength dnum lb n num num num num num num num num minimum tear strength dnum lb n num num num num num num num num minimum puncture strength dnum lb n num num num num num num num num minimum ultraviolet stability dnum num retained strength after num hours of exposure hydraulic properties property test method astm units type a type b type c type d type e minimum permittivity dnum snum num num num num num maximum apparent opening size aos dnum sieve size u.s. mm no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num num do not use woven slit film geotextile .
section num num b paving geotextile .
furnish nonwoven geotextile conforming to table num .
table num paving geotextile requirements property test method astm units specifications grab strength dnum lb n num num elongation at break dnum num asphalt retention dnum galydnum lmnum see note num mass per unit area dnum ozydnum gmnum num num num num melting point dnum ºf ºc num num num asphalt required to saturate fabric only .
value supplied by manufacturer in material certification .
value does not indicate the asphalt application rate required for construction .
product asphalt retention property must meet the marv provided by the manufacturers certification .
num geocomposite drain .
furnish a prefabricated geocomposite drain composed of a drainage core and a nonwoven geotextile that permits inflow from both sides .
geocomposites that only permit inflow from one side may only be used directly against a concrete surface .
furnish geotextile and drainage core manufactured from long chain synthetic polymers composed at least num percent by mass of polypropylene polyester polyamide polyvinyl chloride polyolefin or polystyrene .
build the core up in thickness by columns cones nubs cusps meshes stiff filaments or other configurations .
fabricate the core in sheets panels or rolls of adequate strength to resist installation stresses and longterm loading conditions .
property values with the exception of fungi resistance in these specifications represent marv in the weakest principal direction that is average test results of any roll in a lot sampled for conformance or quality assurance testing must meet or exceed the specified values .
furnish a nonwoven encapsulating geotextile meeting requirements of table num .
firmly attach the encapsulating geotextile to the core at the manufacturing plant so that folding wrinkling or other movement can not occur during handling or after placement .
use a nonwatersoluble adhesive heat sealing or other methods recommended by the geotextile manufacturer .
do not use adhesive on areas of the geotextile where flow is intended to occur .
if heat sealing is used do not weaken the geotextile below the required strength values .
extend the geotextile beyond the core length on all sides sufficiently to encapsulate the core and collector pipe .
section num num conform to table num .
table num geocomposite drain requirements property test method units specifications sheet drain strip drain type num type num type num transmissivity flow rate num astm dnum galminft mnumsecm num num num num num num compressive strength at yield astm dnum psi kpa num num num num num num applied normal compressive stress astm dnum psi kpa num num num num num num hydraulic gradient astm dnum dimensionless num num num fungi resistance astm gnum no visible growth num if core construction separates the flow channel into two or more discrete sections only the flow rate on one inflow face is considered in determining the cores acceptability .
num numinch num millimeter long specimen .
num numhour seating period .
num rubber membrane between platens and geocomposite .
num stabilization geogrid .
furnish biaxial geogrid manufactured using longchain synthetic polymers composed of at least num percent by mass of polyolefins polyesters or polyamides .
fabricate the geogrid into a stable network such that the ribs filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability relative to each other including selvages .
property values with the exception of maximum opening size represent marv that is average test results of any roll in a lot sampled for conformance or quality assurance testing must meet or exceed the minimum specified values .
the value for maximum opening size represents maximum average roll value .
section num num conform to table num .
table num stabilization geogrid requirements property test method specificationsnum minimum opening size nanum ½ in num mm maximum opening size nanum num in num mm tensile strength at num strain astm dnum num lbft num knm tensile strength at num strain astm dnum num lbft num knm ultimate tensile strength astm dnum num lbft num knm junction strength grinum ggnum num lb num n ultraviolet stability astm dnum num retained strength after num hours of exposure num strength values are in the weaker principal direction .
num direct measure with caliper .
num geosynthetic research institute .
num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid .
furnish reinforcement geotextile manufactured using longchain synthetic polymers composed at least num percent by mass of polyolefins or polyesters .
form the geotextile including selvedges into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability relative to each other .
furnish reinforcement geogrid manufactured as a regular network of integrallyconnected longitudinal and transverse polymer tensile elements with a geometry that permits significant mechanical interlock with the backfill .
provide geogrid composed of fibers or ribs that are at least num percent by mass polypropylene polyethylene or polyester .
the geogrid structure must remain dimensionally stable under construction stresses and have a high resistance to damage during construction to ultraviolet degradation and to chemical and biological degradation encountered in the soil being reinforced .
conform to tables num and table num .
property values represent marv that is average test results of any roll in a lot sampled for conformance or quality assurance testing must meet or exceed the minimum specified values .
the nominal longterm strength tal is based on tal tultrf where rf rfid rfcr rfd .
rfid rfcr and rfd values must be substantiated by evaluation of independent test results by highway innovative technology evaluation center hitec aashto national transportation product evaluation program ntpep or an equivalent third party report .
provide a copy of the report to the co .
determine rfid rfcr and rfd according to the following section num num a rfid determine the reduction factor for installation damage from the results of full scale construction damage tests conducted according to astm dnum .
conduct the tests with a soil having the same maximum particle size dnum and angularity as the soil to be used for construction .
tests using coarser soils same or larger maximum particle size and dnum may be an acceptable substitution .
the co will make the final determination as to whether the test data based on the substitute soil is acceptable .
interpolation of rfid will not be allowed the results for the coarser soils will be used .
the contractor may elect to perform a test using project specific fill placement and compaction techniques and equipment to determine the rfid .
use a default value of num if no installation damage testing has been conducted .
the minimum value for rfid is num. b rfcr .
determine the creep reduction factor according to one of the following num conventional creep testing according to astm dnum or num a combination of stepped isothermal method sim according to astm dnum and conventional creep testing .
perform testing and determine creep reduction factors for a num year design life according to the procedures in appendix d of fhwanhinum design and construction of mechanically stabilized earth walls and reinforced soil slopes volume ii .
if testing has not been conducted default values for rfcr are num for polyester polymer and num for polypropylene or polyethylene polymer .
c rfd .
for polypropylene or polyethylene geosynthetics conforming to the requirements of table num a default reduction factor of num may be used for rfd .
for polyester geosynthetics conforming to the requirements of table num a default reduction factor of num may be used for rfd if the soil has a ph between num and num and a reduction factor of num may be used if the soil ph is between num and num or between num and num .
table num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid polymer requirements polymer type property test method specifications polypropylene and polyethylene thermooxidation resistance env iso num method a polypropylene or method b polyethylene minimum num retained strength after num days polypropylene or num days polyethylene polyester hydrolysis resistance inherent viscosity method astm dnum gri num ggnum minimum number average molecular weight mn of num gri num ggnum maximum carboxyl end group ceg of num all polymers ultraviolet stability astm dnum minimum num retained strength after num hours of exposure mass per unit area astm dnum minimum num ozydnum num gmnum percent post consumer recycled material by mass certification of material used maximum num num geosynthetic research institute .
section num num table num reinforcement geotextile and geogrid strength requirements property test method astm units specificationsnum type i type ii type iii type iv type v type vi ultimate strength num tult dnum or dnum num lbft knm num num num num num num num num num num num num nominal longterm strength tal see note num lbft knm num num num num num num num num num num num num num for reinforcement geotextile also meet the class num strength requirements in table num and the ultraviolet stability requirements in table num .
num the specified strength is in the principal direction of reinforcement that is perpendicular to the wall or slope face .
num based on marv .
num astm dnum is for reinforcement geotextile and astm dnum is for geogrid .
num see the nominal longterm strength tal formula above .
num geomembrane .
furnish geomembrane that consists of textured roughened surface polyvinyl chloride high density polyethylene or linear low density polyethylene geomembrane with a thickness of num to num mils num to num millimeters .
glue or weld seams of the geomembrane to prevent leakage .
conform to table num .
table num geomembrane requirements geomembrane type test method polyvinyl chloride pvc astm dnum high density polyethylene hdpe grinum test method gmnum linear low density polyethylene lldpe grinum test method gmnum num the minimum average asperity height is num mils num millimeters .
of num readings num of num must be greater than or equal to num mils num millimeters and the lowest individual reading must be greater than or equal to num mils num millimeters .
num geosynthetic research institute .
section num num section num .
piling num untreated timber piles .
conform to aashto m num .
fabricate the piles from the following species or group for the sizes and dimensions specified in the contract a douglasfir b larch c red pine d red oak or e southern pine .
num treated timber piles .
conform to aashto m num and aashto m num .
use douglasfir or southern pine .
use the pressure method procedure prescribed in awpa .
apply the treatment to the piles after millwork is completed .
imprint legible symbols or legend on the end of piles identifying the name of the treating company and type and year of treatment according to awpa standards mnum standard for the purchase of treated wood products and mnum brands used on forest products .
num concrete piles .
fabricate piles from class a ae concrete according to section num .
conform to subsection num for reinforcing steel .
conform to subsection num for prestressing steel .
construct precast concrete piles according to section num .
construct prestressed concrete piles according to section num .
when lifting anchors are used maintain at least a numinch nummillimeter clearance from the pile reinforcing steel or prestressing steel .
use metal plywood or dressed lumber forms that are watertight rigid and true to line .
use a numinch nummillimeter chamfer strip in corners of the forms .
cast piles separately or if alternate piles are cast in a tier cast the intermediate piles at least num days after the adjacent piles are poured .
separate piles cast in tiers with tar paper or other suitable separating material .
place concrete in each tier in a continuous operation that prevents the formation of stone pockets honeycombs or other defects .
leave forms in place for at least num hours .
make piles straight so when a line is stretched from butt to tip on any face the line is no more than num inch num millimeters from the face of the pile at any point .
make the pile surface true smooth even and without honeycombs and voids .
remove lifting anchors to a depth of at least num inch num millimeters below the concrete surface and fill the resulting hole with concrete .
finish each pile with a class num ordinary surface finish according to subsection num .
cure the piles according to sections num and num as applicable .
section num num if concrete test cylinders are made and tested according to section num do not move piles until the tests indicate a compressive strength of at least num percent of the design numday compressive strength .
do not transport or drive piles until tests indicate the minimum design numday compressive strength is attained .
if concrete test cylinders are not made do not move piles until they have cured for at least num days at a minimum temperature of num f num c or num days at a minimum temperature of num fnum c. do not transport or drive piles until cured for at least num days at at least num f num c or num days at at least num f num c. when highearlystrength cement is used do not move transport or drive piles until cured for at least num days .
num steel shells .
furnish either cylindrical or tapered pile shells of spiral welded straightseam welded or seamless tube steel material .
use only one type of pile shell throughout a structure .
conform to the following minimum shell wall thicknesses outside cylinder diameter less than num in num mm ¼ in num mm outside cylinder diameter greater than or equal to ⅜ in num mm num in num mm tapered or fluted num in num mm a shells driven without a mandrel .
for tapered or step tapered castinplace concrete piles furnish shells having a minimum numinch nummillimeter diameter at cutoff and a minimum numinch nummillimeter diameter tip .
furnish shells having a minimum nominal diameter of num¾ inches num millimeters for constant diameter castinplace concrete piles .
fabricate shells from not less than numinch nummillimeter plate stock conforming to astm anum .
shells may be either spirally welded or longitudinally welded and may be either tapered or constant in section .
seal the tips as noted on the drawings .
b shells driven with a mandrel .
furnish shells of sufficient strength and thickness to withstand driving without injury and to resist harmful distortion and buckling due to soil pressure after being driven and the mandrel removed .
butt and tip dimensions are specified in the contract .
num steel pipes .
conform to the following a steel pipe to be filled with concrete astm anum grade num or grade num b closure plates for closed end piles astm anum astm anum or astm anum grade num num c unfilled tubular steel piles for welded and astm anum grade num or seamless steel pipe piles with chemical properties grade num conforming to astm anum grade b section num num num steel hpiles .
furnish steel hpiles from rolled steel sections of the mass and shape specified .
fabricate the hpiles from structural steel conforming to astm anum astm anum or astm anum grade num num .
for copperbearing structural steel furnish steel with num to num percent copper .
num sheet piles .
conform to aashto m num or astm anum for steel sheet piles .
num pile shoes .
for timber and steel piles furnish prefabricated cast steel shoes or driving points conforming to astm anum grade num num or astm anum grade num num .
num splices .
manufacture splices from structural steel conforming to astm anum astm anum or astm anum grade num num for h or pipe piles .
section num num section num .
material for timber structures num untreated structural timber and lumber .
conform to aashto m num .
furnish an inspection certification from an agency accredited by the american lumber standards committee for the species and grade .
mark pieces with the inspection service grade designation species and inspector identity .
season and dry structural timber and lumber before fabrication .
do not use material that is twisted curved or otherwise distorted .
do not use boxedheart pieces of douglas fir or redwood in outside stringers floor beams caps posts sills or rail posts .
boxedheart pieces are defined as timber so sawed that at any point in the length of a sawed piece the pith lies inside the four faces .
num hardware .
machine bolts drift bolts and dowels may be medium steel .
fabricate washers from gray iron or malleable iron castings unless structural washers are specified .
use a standard commercial type of cut or round nail .
use cut round or boat spikes as specified .
galvanize hardware according to aashto m num .
use ring or shearplate timber connectors conforming to division ii article num timber connectors of aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications for highway bridges .
num treated structural timber and lumber .
furnish wood according to subsection num .
make dimensional cuts holes and incise wood before pressure treatment .
treat the wood according to awpa standard unum use specification for treated wood and tnum processing and treatment standard .
use the type of treatment shown in the plans .
treat timber members according to the requirements of the current edition of western wood preservers institutes best management practices for the use of treated wood in aquatic environments .
treated timber members must have a quality mark approved by the american lumber standards committee for individual pieces or sealed pallets assuring that treatment conforms to the appropriate awpa standards .
num structural glued laminated timber .
furnish structural glued laminated timber according to american institute of timber constructions aitc num design specifications for structural glued laminated timber of softwood species .
fabricate according to the combination and grade as indicated in the contract .
fabricate structural glued laminated members according to ansiaitc anum american national standard for structural glued laminated timber .
manufacture members as industrial appearance grade for wet use conditions .
use adhesives conforming to the requirements of astm dnum and aitc num standard for wood products structural glued laminated timber .
use only single or multiplepiece laminations with bonded edge joints .
straight or slightly cambered members which are to be loaded perpendicular to the wide face of the laminates must be stamped top on the top at both ends of the beam .
section num num section num .
structural metal num structural steel .
a structural carbon steel .
conform to the following num primary bridge members aashto m num grade numt numt num fracture critical bridge members aashto m num grade numf numf num other shapes plates and bars aashto m num grade num num b highstrength lowalloy structural hsla steel .
conform to the following num primary bridge members aashto m num grade numt numst and welded members numwt or hps numwt numt numst numwt or hps numwt num fracture critical bridge members aashto m num grade numf numsf and fracture critical welded members numwf or hps numwf numf numsf numwf or hps numsf num other shapes plates and bars aashto m num grade num nums numw or hps num num nums numw or hps num c highstrength quenched and tempered qt steel .
conform to the following num primary bridge members aashto m num grade numwt hps numwt numt numwt or hps numwt numwt hps numwt numt numwt or hps numwt num fracture critical bridge members aashto m num grade numwf hps numwf numf numwf or hps numwf numwf hps numwf numf numwf or hps numwf num other shapes plates and bars aashto m num grade numw hps numw num numw or hps numw numw hps numw num numw or hps numw num hollow structural sections astm anum grade b astm anum astm anum or astm anum d bolts and nuts .
conform to astm fnum grade num num or astm anum as shown in the plans .
furnish nuts conforming to astm anum for appropriate grade and size of anchor bolt .
heat treat nuts to be galvanized to grade dh or grade dhnum .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
section num num e highstrength bolts nuts and washers .
conform to astm anum or astm anum as specified .
use type num bolts with steels other than weathering steel .
use type num bolts with weathering steel .
astm anum type num bolts may be either hotdip galvanized according to aashto m num class c or mechanically galvanized according to astm bnum class num .
retest galvanized bolts after galvanizing according to astm anum .
do not galvanize astm anum bolts .
galvanize washers nuts and bolts of any assembly by the same process .
overtap the nuts to the minimum required for the fastener assembly and lubricate with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
except as noted below for astm anum bolts use nuts conforming to astm anum grades dh dhnum c cnum or d. for astm anum bolts use nuts conforming to astm anum grades dh or grade dhnum .
heat treat nuts to be galvanized to grade dh .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
provide plain nuts with a minimum hardness of num hrb .
use only grade cnum or grade dhnum nuts with astm anum type num bolts .
use only grade dhnum nuts with astm anum type num bolts .
use washers conforming to astm fnum .
num steel forgings .
conform to aashto m num classes c d f and g. num pins and rollers .
furnish pins and rollers more than num inches num millimeters in diameter from annealed carbon steel forgings conforming to aashto m num class c. furnish pins and rollers num inches num millimeters or less in diameter from either annealed carbon steel forgings conforming to aashto m num class c or cold finished carbon steel shafting conforming to aashto m num grade num to grade num inclusive with a minimum rockwell scale b hardness of num .
the hardness requirement may be waived if the steel develops a tensile strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals and a yield point of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
for pin threads conform to ansi bnum unified inch screw threads un and unr thread form class numa .
thread pin ends with a diameter of num⅜ inches num millimeters or more with num threads to the inch num millimeters .
num castings .
a steel castings .
conform to aashto m num grade num num. b chromium alloy steel castings .
conform to aashto m num grade canum .
c gray iron castings .
conform to aashto m num class no .
numb unless otherwise specified .
make the castings without pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting strength and value for the service intended .
boldly fillet the castings at angles and make the arrises sharp and perfect .
sand blast castings or otherwise effectively remove the scale and sand to present a smooth clean and uniform surface .
d malleable iron castings .
conform to astm anum grade num unless otherwise specified .
for workmanship finishing and cleaning conform to subsection numc .
section num num num welded stud shear connectors .
conform to aashto m num and article num welded stud shear connectors of aashto lrfd bridge construction specification .
num steel pipe .
furnish galvanized steel pipe conforming to astm anum type f standard weight class and plain ends for the designation specified in the contract .
num galvanized coatings .
when specified galvanize structural steel according to aashto m num .
num sheet lead .
furnish common desilverized lead conforming to astm bnum .
furnish sheets in a uniform numinch nummillimeter thickness without cracks seams slivers scale and other defects .
num steel grid floors .
conform to astm dnum type i. furnish galvanized steel grid floors unless painting is specified .
num bearings .
a elastomeric bearings plain or laminated .
conform to aashto m num. b high load rotational spherical bearings .
conform to astm dnum .
num polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe surfaces for bearings .
when ptfe surfaces are specified for bearings which are not listed in subsection num conform to the following a ptfe resin .
furnish virgin ptfe resin material conforming to astm dnum or astm dnum .
b filler material .
furnish milled glass fibers carbon or other approved inert material .
c adhesive material .
furnish epoxy resin adhesive conforming to aashto m num. d unfilled ptfe sheet .
furnish unfilled ptfe sheet made from ptfe resin .
conform to table num. e filled ptfe sheet .
furnish filled ptfe sheet made from ptfe resin uniformly blended with filler material .
do not exceed num percent filler content using fiberglass or num percent filler content using carbon fibers .
for filled ptfe sheets containing glass fibers or carbon conform to table num. f fabric containing ptfe fibers .
furnish fabric made from oriented multifilament ptfe fluorocarbon and other fibers or from a mixture of ptfe fibers made from twisted slit ptfe tape and other fibers as required by proprietary designs .
conform to table num .
section num num table num polytetrafluoroethylene sheeting property astm method sheet unfilled sheet with num glass fibers sheet with num carbon fibers woven fabric min .
tensile strength dnum or dnum num lbinnum num mpa num lbinnum num mpa num lbinnum num mpa num lbinnum num mpa min .
elongation num num num num min .
specific gravity dnum num num num melting point dnum num ºf num ºc num ºf num ºc num ºf num ºc g interlocked bronze and filled ptfe components .
furnish a phosphor bronze plate conforming to astm bnum with an numinch nummillimeter thick porous bronze surface layer conforming to astm bnum into which is impregnated a leadptfe compound .
overlay the surface with compounded ptfe not less than num inches thick num micrometers .
h lubricants .
use lubricants consisting of a combination of solids that do not react chemically or electrolytically with the ptfe and its mating surface and remain stable in the environmental conditions expected at the bridge site .
i surface treatment .
for epoxy bonding factory treat one side of the ptfe sheet with a sodium naphthalene or sodium ammonia process .
j stainless steel mating surface .
conform to astm anum type num or astm anum type num and the following num thickness num in num mm min .
num surface finish num µin root mean square max .
num µm root mean square max .
polish or roll stainless steel mating surfaces as necessary to a finish no less than num microinches num µm .
num aluminum alloy for bridge rail .
conform to aashtoagcartba a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware .
num aluminum bolt heads and nuts .
conform to american standard heavy hexagon ansi bnum .
for threads conform to american standard coarse series class num fit ansi specification bnum unified inch screw threads un and unr thread form .
section num num num aluminum welding wire .
conform to table num .
table num aluminum welding wire alloys series specification wire numxxx and numxxx aws anum er num numxxx numxxx and numxxx er num numxxx and numxxx er num or er num section num num section num .
traffic signing and marking material num retroreflective sheeting .
conform to astm dnum including supplementary requirements .
num reserved .
num panels .
conform to the following a plywood .
furnish exterior grade bb highdensity overlay plywood or better conforming to nist product standard ps num construction and industrial plywood .
use ½inch nummillimeter thick plywood for sign panels with a facial area num square feet num square meters or less and the horizontal dimension no greater than the vertical dimension .
use ¾inch nummillimeter thick plywood for larger panels .
b steel .
furnish continuous coated galvanized numinch nummillimeter sheet steel blanks conforming to astm anum and zinc coating designation gnum .
furnish panels with a substantially plane surface .
do not use twisted or buckled panels .
c aluminum .
furnish panels conforming to astm bnum alloy numtnum or numhnum .
fabricate temporary panels and permanent panels smaller or equal to num by num inches num by num millimeters from numinch nummillimeter thick aluminum sheets .
fabricate larger permanent panels from numinch nummillimeter thick aluminum sheets .
furnish blanks without laminations blisters open seams pits holes or other defects that may affect their appearance or use .
select blanks with uniform thickness and are commercially flat .
d plastic .
num nonreinforced plastic .
furnish polycarbonate material that is ultraviolet stabilized for outdoor weathering and will accept adhesives coatings and retroreflective sheeting material .
fabricate panels smaller or equal to num by num inches num by num millimeters from numinch nummillimeter thick plastic blanks .
fabricate larger panels from numinch nummillimeter thick plastic blanks .
furnish panels that are flat and free of buckles warps and other defects .
do not allow a gap between adjacent panels greater than ⅝ inch num millimeters where multiple panels adjoin .
attach reinforcement stiffeners on the back of panels larger than num by num inches num by num millimeters for rigidity and mounting on supports .
num reinforced plastic fiberglass .
furnish panels made from fiberglass reinforced thermoset polyester acrylic modified laminate sheets .
furnish sign panels ultraviolet stabilized for outdoor weathering ability that will accept adhesives coatings and retroreflective sheeting material .
furnish sign panels free of visible cracks pinholes foreign inclusions or surface wrinkles that would affect implied performance alter the specific dimensions of the panel or otherwise affect the sign panels serviceability .
section num num fabricate fiberglass reinforced panels conforming to the following mechanical and physical properties a average tensile strength astm dnum num psi num mpa min .
b average tensile modulus astm dnum num psi num gpa min .
c average flexural strength astm dnum num psi num mpa min .
d average flexural modulus astm dnum num psi num gpa min .
e average compression strength astm dnum num psi num mpa min .
f average compression modulus astm dnum num psi num gpa min .
g punch shear astm dnum num psi num mpa min .
h thickness num in num mm i size dimension less than num in num mm num ft num m astm dnum j squareness in numft numm length num in num mm astm dnum k surfaces top and bottom smooth l color visually uniform gray nnum to nnum munsell color system m coefficient of lineal thermal num ininf expansion astm dnum num μmmmc max .
n flame resistance num in num mm max .
extent of burning astm dnum o weather resistance astm dnum grade num or num e extruded aluminum .
furnish panels conforming to astm bnum aluminum alloy numtnum .
conform to subsection numc for panel thickness and fabrication .
the maximum allowable deviation from flat on the face is num inches per foot num millimeters per meter .
num sign posts .
furnish sign posts that are straight smooth and without defects affecting strength durability or appearance .
conform to the following a wood .
furnish posts conforming to aashto m num .
treat the posts according to category numa of the awpa standard unumucnuma ground contact general use for waterborne preservative treatments aca acza or cca .
b galvanized metal .
conform to the following num uchannel steel .
furnish flanged channel galvanized steel posts conforming to astm anum grade num num and the following section num num a punching .
starting num inch num millimeters from the top and extending the full length of the post drill or punch ⅜inch nummillimeter holes on numinch num millimeter centers along the centerline of the bottom of the u .
remove burrs and sharp edges .
b galvanizing after punching aashto m num num square tubular steel .
furnish square tubular galvanized steel posts conforming to astm anum grade num num and the following a punching .
starting num inch num millimeters from the top and extending the full length of the post drill or punch numinch nummillimeter holes on numinch nummillimeter centers along the centerline of all four sides in true alignment and opposite each other directly and diagonally .
remove burrs and sharp edges .
b galvanizing after punching astm anum or astm bnum c aluminum .
furnish standard shapes and thicknesses conforming to astm bnum alloy numtnum numtnum numtnum or numtnum .
d corrosion resistant steel .
furnish posts conforming to astm anum or astm anum .
zinccoat the embedded portion of the corrosion resistant steel post according to astm anum .
num object marker and delineator posts .
conform to the following a wood .
furnish num by numinch num by nummillimeter wooden posts conforming to subsection numa .
b steel .
furnish flanged uchannel steel posts weighing not less than num pounds per foot num kilograms per meter and conforming to astm anum .
galvanize according to aashto m num. c aluminum .
furnish standard shaped ⅛inch nummillimeter thick aluminum posts conforming to astm bnum alloy numtnum .
d plastic .
furnish flexible delineator posts made with highimpact resistant polymer material .
num hardware .
furnish galvanized steel or aluminum alloy lag screws washers clip angles wood screws shear plates ubolts clamps bolts nuts and other fasteners .
for highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers conform to subsection nume .
galvanize steel hardware according to aashto m num .
for aluminum alloy bolts nuts and washers conform to subsections num and num as applicable .
for neoprene or nylon washers furnish ⅛ inch num millimeters thick by numinch num millimeters minimum outside diameter with maximum allowable applied torque num inchpounds num newtonmeters .
num legends and borders .
use colors specified in plans or the mutcd standard highway signs including pavement marking standard alphabets and material conforming to subsection num .
num delineator and object marker retroreflectors .
furnish retroreflectors that are ready for mounting .
section num num a type num acrylic plastic lens .
furnish an acrylic plastic lens with a minimum dimension of num inches num millimeters with prismatic optical elements and a smooth clear transparent face .
fabricate the back from similar material and fuse it to the lens around the entire perimeter to form a homogenous unit .
seal the units against the intrusion of foreign material .
conform to table num regardless of the orientation angle .
table num minimum coefficient of retroreflective luminous intensity ri num candelas per footcandle observation angle entrance angle whitenum yellow red num num num num num num num num num num candelas per lux observation angle entrance angle whitenum yellow red num num num num num num num num num num num see aashto t num .
num crystal clear or colorless are acceptable color designations .
mount the retroreflector unit in a housing fabricated from numinch nummillimeter astm bnum aluminum alloy numhnum or similar or from numinch nummillimeter cold rolled and hot dip galvanized steel .
furnish antitheft attachment hardware .
b type num retroreflective sheeting .
furnish a prismatic retroreflective sheeting with a minimum dimension of num inches num millimeters and with a class num or class num adhesive backing conforming to subsection num .
attach the sheeting to an aluminum or plastic support panel target plate of the size and dimension specified .
num solventborne traffic paint .
conform to aashto m num type n or type f traffic paint .
use volatile organic content voc compliant solventborne paint with a voc of num ounces per gallon num grams per liter or less .
yellow pigment must be without lead chrome and other heavy metals as defined by the epa .
num waterborne traffic paint .
furnish an acrylic waterbased readymixed paint conforming to the following a composition .
furnish a paint composed of resin solids of num percent acrylic polymer with the exact formulation determined by the manufacturer .
conform to the following num pigment astm dnum num to num percent by mass section num num num lead chromium cadmium or cobalt num percent by mass astm dnum astm dnum num volatile organic compounds epa method num num ozgallon num gl max .
num density of paint astm dnum num lbgallon num kgl min .
b viscosity .
astm dnum num krebs units c drying time .
num dry to no pickup astm dnum num minutes max .
num drying to no track astm dnum num seconds max .
d flexibility .
astm dnum using the ¼in no cracking or flaking nummm cylindrical mandrel e dry opacity .
astm dnum contrast ratio at num min .
num ftnumgallon num mnuml spreading rate f color .
num white astm dnum match fhwa standard highway white num yellow astm dnum match fhwa standard highway yellow g daylight reflectance .
without glass beads num white astm enum num percent relative to magnesium oxide standard num yellow astm enum num percent relative to magnesium oxide standard h bleeding ratio .
astm dnum .
determine num min .
reflectance according to astm dnum immediately after drying .
divide the average of three reflectance readings of the paint over the bleeding surface by the average of three readings over the nonbleeding surface to determine the bleeding ratio i freezethaw stability .
astm dnum num krebs units max .
j storage stability .
during a nummonth storage period conform to the following num no excessive setting caking or increase in viscosity and num readily stirred to a consistency for use in the striping equipment .
section num num num epoxy markings .
furnish a numcomponent num percent solids type system for hotspray application conforming to the following a pigments .
component a .
percent by mass .
num white .
a titanium dioxide tionum num percent min .
astm dnum type iv b epoxy resin astm dnum num to num percent num yellow a chrome yellow pbcronum num percent min .
astm dnum b epoxy resin astm dnum num to num percent num nonlead yellow a titanium dioxide tionum num percent min .
astm dnum type ii and type iii b organic yellow num to num percent c epoxy resin astm dnum num to num percent b epoxy content .
component a .
manufacturers target mass per epoxy equivalent value num astm dnum c amine value .
component b manufacturers target astm dnum value num d toxicity .
toxic or injurious fumes none at application temperature e color .
num mil num millimeter film thickness specimen cured .
num white astm dnum match fhwa standard highway white num yellow astm dnum match fhwa standard highway yellow f directional reflectance .
without glass beads num white astm enum num percent relative to magnesium oxide standard num yellow astm enum num percent relative to magnesium oxide standard section num num g drying time .
nummil nummillimeter film thickness with glass beads cured .
num laboratory at num f num c num minutes max .
astm dnum to nopickup condition num field at num f num c viewed from num minutes max .
num ft num m astm dnum to notracking condition h abrasion resistance .
wear index num max .
with a csnum wheel under a num oz num g load for num cycles astm dnum i hardness .
type d hardness with num to num numhour cure at num f num c astm dnum num thermoplastic markings .
conform to aashto m num .
num preformed pavement marking tape .
conform to astm dnum reflectivity level i class num num or num skid resistance level a or b .
num glass beads .
conform to aashto m num for the type specified .
treat glass beads with an adherence coating as recommended by manufacturer .
num pavement markers .
a nonplowable extended life retroreflective pavement markers .
conform to astm dnum .
b plowable retroreflective pavement markers .
conform to astm dnum .
c nonreflective pavement markers .
furnish ceramic plastic or thermoplastic markers that are num⅛ inch num millimeters in diameter at the base num inch num millimeters in height and where the base of the marker does not deviate from a flat plane by more than num inch num millimeters .
furnish markers of uniform composition without surface irregularities cracks checks chipping peeling spalling crazing and other physical damage interfering with appearance application or durability .
furnish precast markers in the form of a single based spheroidal segment terminating in a rounded or squared shoulder .
num temporary pavement markings .
a preformed retroreflective tape .
furnish numinch nummillimeter wide tape conforming to astm dnum type i removable .
b pavement markers .
furnish temporary pavement markers conforming to astm dnum or flexible pavement markers not exceeding approximately num inches num millimeters high with retroreflective tape on both faces of the vertical section capable of retroreflecting light from opposite directions and with an adhesive on the base .
c traffic paint .
conform to subsections num or num .
section num num num epoxy resin adhesives .
furnish epoxy resin adhesives conforming to aashto m num for bonding traffic markers to rigid and asphalt concrete pavements .
section num num section num .
paint num general .
furnish a contrasting color for each coat of paint .
for the finish coat color conform to fedstd num b .
if requested provide color chips from the paint supplier .
a packaging .
furnish paint in strong substantial containers plainly marked with the following num trade name or trade mark num paint type color formulation lot number and date of manufacture num net mass num volume including the percent of solids and the percent of volatile organic compound voc num storage requirements and shelf life num mixing instructions and equipment cleanup instructions and num name and address of the manufacturer .
b volatile organic compound voc content .
conform to the following voc limits for both shop and field painting num clear unpigmented coatings num lbgallon num gl max .
num other coatings num lbgallon num gl max .
c lead content .
none d other properties .
furnish paint that num does not show excessive settling in a freshly opened full container num easily redisperses with a paddle to a smooth homogeneous state free of curdling livering caking color separation lumps and skins num does not skin within num hours in a threequarter filled closed container num brushes on easily num possess good leveling properties num shows no running or sagging tendencies when applied to smooth steel vertical surfaces num dries to a smooth uniform finish without roughness grit unevenness and other surface imperfections num shows no streaking or separation when flowed on clean glass and num shows no thickening curdling gelling or hard caking after num months of storage in a full tightly covered container at a temperature of num ºf num ºc .
section num num num paint for timber structures .
a primer .
conform to mpi numbers num or num. b paint .
conform to mpi numbers num or num .
num paint for masonry block structures .
conform to mpi numbers num num or num .
color tint with universal or allpurpose concentrates .
num paint for steel structures .
conform to the following a zinc rich coating sspc no .
num b white or colored silicone alkyd paint sspc no .
num c epoxy polyamide paint sspc no .
num d latex primer for steel structures sspc no .
num e latex semigloss exterior topcoat sspc no .
num f zincoxide alkyd linseed oil primer sspc no .
num g aliphatic polyurethane topcoat sspc no .
num h moisturecured polyurethane sspc no .
num i zincrich moisturecured polyurethane primer sspc no .
num j moisturecured polyurethane primer sspc no .
num k white or tinted alkyd paint sspc no .
num num paint for concrete structures .
conform to the following a epoxy low gloss paint mpi num b epoxy semigloss paint mpi num num paint for aluminum structures .
conform to the following a metal primer mpi num b light industrial coating exterior waterbased mpi num num or num num paint for other metal structures .
conform to the following a metal primer galvanized surfaces sspc no .
num b exterior latex mpi num c alkydoil mpi num section num num num penetrating stain .
conform to the following a weatherometer on base num hours material astm gnum or astm gnum b acrylic dispersion num percent of nonvolatile solvent c viscosity astm dnum num krebs units d solids volatile content num percent by mass store stain according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num mineral spirits petroleum spirits .
conform to astm dnum .
section num num section num .
structural wall and stabilized embankment material num mechanicallystabilized earth wall material .
a concrete face panels .
conform to section num and the following num use concrete class aae according to section num .
num conform to section num and fully support the units until the concrete reaches a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
the units may be shipped and installed after the concrete reaches a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals .
num finish the front face of the panel with a class num finish according to subsection num .
screed the rear face of the panel to eliminate open pockets of aggregate and surface distortions in excess of ¼ inch num millimeters .
cast the panels on a flat area .
do not attach galvanized connecting devices or fasteners to the face panel reinforcement steel .
num clearly scribe on an unexposed face of each panel the date of manufacture the production lot number and the piece mark .
num handle store and ship units so as to eliminate the dangers of chipping discoloration cracks fractures and excessive bending stresses .
support panels in storage on firm blocking to protect the panel connection devices and the exposed exterior finish .
num manufacture units within the following tolerances a panel dimensions .
position of panel connection devices within num inch num millimeters .
all other dimensions within num inch num millimeters .
b panel squareness .
do not exceed ½ inch num millimeters as determined by the difference between the two diagonals .
c panel surface finish .
do not exceed ⅛ inch num millimeters for surface defects on smooth formed surfaces of num feet num meters or more in length .
do not exceed num inch num millimeters for surface defects on texturedfinished surfaces of num feet num meters or more in length .
concrete face panels having the following defects will be rejected .
defects that indicate imperfect molding defects indicating honeycombed or open texture concrete cracked or severely chipped panels or color variation on front face of panel .
b wire facing .
fabricate from welded wire fabric conforming to aashto m num except that subsection num. applies for longitudinal and transverse wire sizes .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num after fabrication .
section num num c backing mat .
fabricate from welded wire fabric conforming to aashto m num except that subsection num applies for longitudinal and transverse wire sizes .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num after fabrication .
d clevis connector .
fabricate from colddrawn steel wire conforming to aashto m num and weld according to aashto m num .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num after fabrication .
e connector bars .
fabricate from colddrawn steel wire conforming to aashto m num .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num. f fasteners .
furnish ½inch nummillimeter diameter heavy hexhead bolts nuts and washers conforming to astm anum .
galvanize according to aashto m num. g hardware cloth .
fabricate with maximum ¼inch nummillimeter square mesh openings from woven or welded galvanized steel wire fabric conforming to astm anum .
h reinforcing mesh .
fabricate from colddrawn steel wire conforming to aashto m num .
weld the wire into the finished mesh fabric according to aashto m num .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num after fabrication .
repair damage to the galvanized coating before installation .
i reinforcing strips .
fabricate from highstrength lowalloy structural steel conforming to astm anum grade num num type num .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num after fabrication .
j tie strip .
fabricate from hotrolled steel conforming to astm anum grade num .
galvanize according to aashto m num coating grade num .
num gabion and revet mattress material .
fabricate gabion baskets num inches num millimeters or greater in vertical dimension and revet mattresses less than num inches num millimeters in vertical dimension from either welded wire mesh or twisted wire mesh .
conform to the following a welded wire mesh astm anum b twisted wire mesh astm anum section num num section num .
electrical and illumination material num electrical material .
conform to the following a conduit .
conform to the following num nonmetallic conduit and duct couplings elbows bends and nipples .
for above ground and underground use without concrete encasement furnish rigid pvc heavy wall conduit conforming to ul num schedule num num type eb and a rigid pvc conduit and fittings .
conform to astm dnum for solvent cement to join conduit .
num metallic conduit and duct couplings elbows bends and nipples .
furnish rigid galvanized steel conduit conforming to ul num electrical rigid metal conduit steel .
uniformly coat the conduit on the outside with an asphalt mastic conforming to aashto m num or a nummil nummillimeter pvc coating .
furnish rigid fullmass sherardized or galvanized threaded fittings .
num flexible conduit .
furnish a watertight metallic conduit conforming to ul num liquidtight flexible metal conduit acceptable for equipment grounding .
furnish insulated throat grounding malleable iron watertight fittings .
num conduit bodies boxes and fittings .
furnish watertight galvanized steel conforming to ul numb conduit tubing and cable fittings .
b pull boxes frames and covers .
for boxes formed in concrete fabricate with cast iron or welded sheet steel having a minimum thickness of num inches num millimeters .
galvanize inside and out according to aashto m num. c wire and cable .
num lighting .
furnish either ozone resistant crosslinked polyethylene xlp or polyvinyl chloride pvc insulated cable with or without a nylon jacket conforming to the following a polyethylene xlp .
insulated cable engineers association icea snum icea snumnema wcnum nonshielded power cables rated num v or less icea snumnema wcnum nonshielded power cables rated num v icea snumnema wcnum shielded power cable num v or b polyvinyl chloride pvc .
conform to ul num thermoplasticinsulated wires and cables .
num electrical .
furnish soft drawn or annealed copper conductors conforming to astm bnum and stranding conforming to astm bnum .
furnish num strand for num awg through num awg num square millimeters through num square millimeters and num strand for num awg through num awg num square millimeters through num square millimeters .
furnish num awg num square millimeters minimum solid copper ground wires .
d circuit breakers and panels .
conform to ul num moldedcase circuit breakers moldedcase switches and circuitbreaker enclosures and ul num panelboards .
furnish molded case thermal magnetic trip type breakers .
furnish panel enclosures conforming to nema num enclosures for electrical equipment num v maximum type numr lockable with padlocks .
section num num e safety disconnect switches .
furnish heavy duty nema num enclosures for electrical equipment num v maximum type numr safety disconnect switches conforming to ul num enclosed and deadfront switches .
f grounding and bonding equipment .
furnish ⅝inch nummillimeter diameter numfoot nummeter long copperclad steel ground rods ground clamps grounding and bonding bushings and lock nuts conforming to ul num grounding and bonding equipment .
g contactors and control transformers .
furnish a magnetic numampere twopole contactor with a numvolt coil equipped with control switches for automatic actuation conforming to ul num industrial control equipment .
furnish cadmiumsulfide type photocell controls for num or numvolt operation as applicable rated at num watts resistive load or num voltamperes inductive load adaptable for poletop mounting in a plugin lockingtype receptacle conforming to ul num plugin locking type photocontrols for use with area lighting and with a builtin surge protective device for protection from induced highvoltage and followthrough currents .
furnish singlephase num volt primary num volt secondary dry type num hertz num kva transformers for indoor or outdoor use conforming to ul num specialty transformers .
h secondary lightning arrester .
furnish a secondary lightning arrester rated for a maximum operating voltage of num volts rms with a bracket for mounting on the control cabinet backboard .
i service poles .
furnish treated southern yellow pine treated douglas fir butttreated western red cedar or butttreated northern white cedar service poles that are at least num feet num meters long .
treat the poles according to subsection num. j meter cabinet .
conform to local power company requirements .
k control enclosure .
furnish a nema num enclosures for electrical equipment num v maximum type numr equipped with door clamps on the unhinged sides solid neoprene gasket welded seams continuous hinge with stainless steel pin stainless steel external hardware backboard for mounting apparatus padlock with an outdoor tumblertype padlocks keyed the same and supplied with num keys for each lock .
furnish a cabinet constructed of one of the following num codegauge stainless steel conforming to astm anum or num codegauge aluminum sheet with mechanical properties equivalent or exceeding astm bnum alloy numhnum .
num lighting material .
conform to the following a poles .
furnish num gage nummillimeter thick round steel conforming to astm anum or aluminum shafts conforming to astm bnum alloy numtnum tapered uniformly at num inches per foot num millimeters per meter .
provide hand holes with no rough edges and a reinforcing frame and cover designed to maintain the required pole strength .
weld a num to numinch num to nummillimeter outside diameter vertical tenon fabricated from the same material as the pole and welded at the top and on the same axis as the pole .
furnish pole sections in minimum numfoot nummeter lengths .
furnish pole sections less than num feet num meters in height in two sections or less between num and num feet num and num meters in three sections or less and over num feet num meters in four sections or less .
section num num design and furnish poles capable of sustaining the following loadings num a horizontal load of num pounds num kilonewtons applied num inches num millimeters from the shaft top in any direction without failure of any component part and a maximum allowable vertical deflection of num percent of the shaft length .
num a horizontal load of num pounds num newtons applied at the luminaire attachment point and normal to the pole bracket member plane with a vertical load of num pounds num newtons on the luminaire supporting arm and a maximum allowable horizontal deflection of num percent of the luminaire supporting arms horizontal length .
num a vertical load of num pounds num newtons applied at the luminaire attachment point and a maximum allowable vertical deflection of num percent of the pole arms horizontal length .
num a vertical load of num pounds num kilonewtons applied at the luminaire attachment point and no collapse or rupture of any portion of the structure .
num the pole arm and luminaire mass with a maximum allowable deflection from vertical at the top of the pole of num percent of the total shaft length .
prime the poles inside and out according to the fabricators recommendation .
use epoxy modified enamel matching fedstd num color num for the finish coat .
b pole arms .
num material .
furnish steel or aluminum .
use the same material as the pole .
num type .
furnish bracket type truss or single member arms .
furnish single member arms with a minimum diameter of num inches num millimeters and the same taper as the pole .
num connection .
furnish a weather resistant connection to the pole and a smooth raceway for wiring .
furnish fittings for connection to the pole .
c anchor bases .
furnish a onepiece base dimensioned for adequate pole mounting and structural support with holes for anchor bolts and tapped holes for anchor bolt covers .
fabricate anchor bases from material similar to the pole material and conform to the following num steel casings aashto m num grade num num num steel plate astm anum num aluminum castings astm bnum d bolts nuts and washers .
num steel anchor bolts .
conform to astm anum except as amended by a or b below a num yield strength num kipsinnum num mpa min .
num tensile strength num to num kipsinnum num to num mpa num elongation in num in num mm num percent min .
num elongation in num in num mm num percent min .
section num num num area reduction num percent min .
b num yield strength num kipsinnum num mpa min .
num tensile strength num to num kipsinnum num to num mpa num elongation in num in num mm num percent min .
num area reduction num percent min .
num hex head bolts .
conform to the following a num kipsinnum num mpa yield anchor bolts astm anum b num kipsinnum inch num mpa yield anchor bolts astm anum grade bc num nuts .
conform to astm anum .
furnish nuts appropriate for the strength of the anchor bolt .
num washers .
furnish flat circular washers conforming to astm fnum .
galvanize the top num inches num millimeters of anchor bolts and associated hardware according to aashto m num. e anchor bolt covers .
furnish a bolt cover for each anchor bolt and ¼inch nummillimeter stainless steel phillipshead or hexhead screws to attach the cover to the base or pole .
f luminaries .
operate luminaries on a numvolt series circuit .
furnish the following types of luminaires num conventional highway luminaires .
furnish material for a complete installation including a aluminum housings with refractor holder and slipfitter b thermal shockresistant glass prismatic refractors with gaskets and clips c aluminum detachable reflectors with ethylene propylene terpolymer gaskets and d internal regulator or auto regulator type ballast with a power factor greater than num percent that will start lamps at a minimum ambient temperature of num f num c. comply with ansi specifications .
num sign lighting luminaries .
furnish material for a complete installation including a diecast aluminum housings with mounting bracket and door assembly b thermal shockresistant borosilicate glass refractors with gaskets c aluminum reflectors and d num volt num hertz constantwattage ballasts with a power factor greater than num percent that will start lamps at a minimum ambient temperature of num f num c. section num num section num .
anchor material num anchorage devices .
for posttensioning furnish anchorage devices capable of holding the prestressing steel at a load producing a stress of not less than num percent of the guaranteed minimum tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
use a steel distribution plate or assembly to effectively distribute the compressive stresses from the anchoring device to the concrete .
if the anchorage device is sufficiently large and is used with a steel grillage embedded in the concrete the distribution plate or assembly may be omitted .
conform to the following a do not exceed num pounds per square inch num megapascals for the final unit compressive stress on the concrete directly beneath the plate or assembly .
b do not allow bending stresses induced by prestressing to exceed the yield point of the material in the plates or assemblies or cause visible distortion in the anchorage plate when num percent of the nominal load is applied .
num anchor tendons .
furnish material conforming to the following a prestressing steel .
conform to one of the following num wire uncoated stressrelieved for astm anum prestressed concrete num steel strand uncoated sevenwire aashto m num stressrelieved for prestressed concrete num steel strand uncoated sevenwire astm anum compacted stressrelieved for prestressed concrete num uncoated highstrength steel bar for aashto m num prestressed concrete b couplers .
supply couplers that are capable of developing num percent of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
c sheathing .
conform to one of the following num freestressing length .
a polyethylene plastic tubing .
conform to astm dnum types ii iii or iv with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num millimeters .
b hotmelt extruded polypropylene tubing .
conform to astm dnum cell classification pp num bnum with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num millimeters .
c hotmelt extruded polyethylene tubing .
conform to astm dnum and astm dnum type iii highdensity with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num millimeters .
section num num d steel tubing .
conform to astm anum with a minimum wall thickness of num inches num millimeters .
e steel pipe .
conform to astm anum schedule num minimum .
f plastic pipe .
conform to astm dnum schedule num minimum .
num bonded length .
a highdensity corrugated polyethylene tubing .
conform to aashto m num with a minimum wall thickness of num mils num millimeters .
b corrugated polyvinyl chloride tubes .
conform to astm dnum class numb .
c fusionbonded epoxy .
conform to astm anum with a minimum film thickness of num mils num millimeters .
d corrosion inhibiting compounds .
use grease conforming to pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors .
e centralizers and spacers .
fabricate centralizers and spacers from material except wood that are not deleterious to the prestressing steel .
f anchorages .
furnish material conforming to pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors .
for strand tendons supply anchorages that permit liftoff testing without the jack engaging the strand .
furnish steel plates conforming to astm anum or astm anum for bearing plates .
provide grout tube holes in the bearing plates .
num rock bolts .
furnish deformed bars tendon bearing plates washer nuts and other accessories for tendons conforming to astm fnum and as follows a tendon .
furnish hollow core bars conforming to astm anum .
use minimum grade num num steel .
b coupler .
supply couplers that are capable of developing num percent of the minimum specified ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
c bearing plate .
furnish bearing plates with grout tube holes .
d corrosion inhibiting compounds .
use grease conforming to pti recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors .
e centralizers and spacers .
fabricate centralizers and spacers from any type of material except wood that is not deleterious to the tendon .
f corrosion protection .
furnish steel with either fushion bonded epoxy coating or hot dip galvanizing for corrosion protection .
use fusion bonded epoxy coating conforming to astm anum with a minimum film thickness of num mils num millimeters .
use hot dip galvanizing conforming to astm anum with a minimum thickness of num mils num millimeters .
section num num num soil nails .
a tendon .
furnish deformed bars conforming to one of the following num deformed bars grade num num or grade num num astm anum num deformed bars grade num num astm anum provide new straight continuous undamaged bare epoxycoated or encapsulated bars .
b coupler .
furnish couplers that are capable of developing the full ultimate tensile strength of the tendon as certified by the manufacturer .
c fusion bonded epoxy coating .
apply epoxy coating conforming to astm anum with the exception of the bend test requirements .
electrostatically apply the coating to a minimum thickness of num mils num millimeters .
the coating at the wall anchorage end of epoxycoated bars may be omitted over the length provided for threading the nut against the bearing plate .
d encapsulation .
furnish corrugated polyethylene pipe conforming to aashto m num or corrugated polyvinyl chloride pipe conforming to astm dnum class num .
num section num .
reserved section num .
reserved section num num section num .
miscellaneous material num water .
conform to the following a water for mixing or curing cement concrete mortar or grout .
conform to aashto m num .
potable water of known quality may be used without testing according to aashto t num .
potable water is safe for human consumption as defined by the public health authority having jurisdiction .
b water for planting or care of vegetation .
furnish water that is free of substances injurious to plant life such as oils acids alkalies or salts .
c water for earthwork pavement courses dust control and incidental construction .
furnish water free of substances detrimental to the work .
num calcium chloride magnesium chloride and lignosulfonate .
a calcium chloride liquid .
furnish a water solution conforming to the following num calcium chloride liquid aashto m num type l num calcium chloride by mass num percent min .
b calcium chloride flake .
conform to aashto m num type s grades num num or num class a. c magnesium chloride liquid .
furnish a water solution conforming to the following num magnesium chloride by mass num percent min .
num specific gravity astm dnum num to num d lignosulfonate liquid .
furnish a water solution with a base cation of ammonia calcium or sodium .
conform to the following num dry solids num num percent num specific gravity astm dnum num min .
num ph astm enum num to num note num use pulp and paper technical association of canada standard test method h.num determination of solids content of pulp and paper mill effluents .
num lime .
a lime for masonry .
conform to astm cnum type na .
b lime for soil stabilization .
conform to aashto m num. c lime for asphalt mixtures .
conform to aashto m num .
section num num num pozzolans .
a fly ash .
conform to aashto m num num percent max .
class c or class f. when used to mitigate alkalisilica reactivity also available alkalies as equivalent nanumo b ground granulated blastfurnace slag .
num percent max .
conform to aashto m num grade num or grade num .
when used to mitigate alkalisilica reactivity also total alkalies as equivalent nanumo c silica fume microsilica .
num percent max .
conform to aashto m num .
when used to mitigate alkalisilica reactivity also total alkalies as equivalent nanumo num mineral filler .
conform to aashto m num .
num concrete building brick .
conform to astm cnum normal weight .
num concrete masonry units .
conform to one of the following a loadbearing concrete masonry units astm cnum normal weight b concrete masonry units for constructing astm cnum catch basins and manholes c nonloadbearing concrete masonry units astm cnum normal weight num paving brick .
conform to one of the following a pedestrian and light traffic paving brick astm cnum class sx type i b heavy vehicular paving brick astm cnum type f application ps num precast concrete units and accessories .
conform to the following a precast reinforced concrete manhole sections aashto m num b precast concrete barrier astm cnum c concrete grid paving units astm cnum d underground precast concrete utility structures astm cnum e precast concrete water and wastewater structures astm cnum f solid concrete interlocking paving units astm cnum section num num g other precast concrete units and accessories section num num frames grates covers and ladder rungs .
fabricate metal grates and covers to evenly bear on the frames .
correct bearing inaccuracies by machining .
assemble units before shipment .
mark pieces to facilitate reassembly at the installation site .
uniformly coat castings with a commercial preservative according to the manufacturers standard practice .
conform to the following a gray iron castings aashto m num b carbon steel castings aashto m num c structural steel astm anum d galvanizing aashto m num e malleable iron castings astm anum f aluminum alloy ladder rung material astm bnum alloy numtnum g aluminum castings astm bnum alloy numtnum num corrugated metal units .
conform to aashto m num for steel corrugated units .
conform to aashto m num for aluminum corrugated units .
for coatings conform to the following a bituminouscoated corrugated units aashto m num type a b polymerprecoated corrugated units aashto m num grade num num plastic lining .
furnish a film or fabric that is serviceable for the duration of the installation .
num grout .
a neat hydraulic cement grout .
num ground anchors micropiles and soil nails .
furnish a pumpable mixture of portland cement sand water and admixtures .
use type ii portland cement conforming to aashto m num .
furnish sand according to subsection num .
furnish water according to subsection numa .
provide the minimum water content necessary for placement and a maximum watercementitious material ratio of num by mass .
chemical admixtures that control bleed or retard set may be used provided the additives conform to subsection num and are mixed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not use admixtures containing more than trace from impurities not as an intended constituent quantities of chlorides fluorides aluminum zinc or nitrates .
the maximum watersoluble chloride ion cl content of the grout is num percent cl by mass of cement when tested according to astm cnum .
section num num furnish grout conforming to the following minimum compressive strengths a ground anchors num lbinnum num mpa at num days b micropiles num lbinnum num mpa at num days and num lbinnum num mpa at num days c soil nails num lbinnum num mpa in num days and num lbinnum num mpa in num days num miscellaneous applications .
furnish a grout consisting of a mixture of hydraulic cement water and admixtures .
do not exceed a watercementitious material ratio of num .
do not exceed num percent of the cement by mass if fly ash is used .
admixtures to reduce water content improve the flowability control bleeding or control shrinkage may be added according to the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish admixtures free of chlorides fluorides sulphites and nitrates .
b nonshrink grout .
conform to astm cnum .
provide a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals in num days .
c grout for posttensioned structures .
conform to the requirements of the pti guide specification for grouting of posttensioned structures .
d polyester resin grout .
furnish polyester resin grout with a minimum ultimate compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals a minimum ultimate tensile strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals and a minimum ultimate shear strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals when fully cured .
conform to astm fnum except where noted .
furnish polyester resin grout consisting of an unsaturated polyester resin evenly filled with nonreactive inorganic aggregate of suitable size and a separated catalyst filled with nonreactive inorganic filler .
supply resin in cartridge form .
provide cartridge lengths and diameters according to the manufacturer recommendations for the specified drill hole and reinforcing bar size .
provide resin cartridges readily and individually identified as to their respective gel times .
num polymer concrete and mortar .
furnish a polymer binder and fine aggregate in the proportions recommended by the polymer manufacturer with a minimum compressive strength of num pounds per square inch num megapascals in num hours .
conform to the following a epoxy mortar .
conform to aci num. b other polymer concrete or mortar .
conform to astm cnum type ii .
num color coating .
furnish a semiopaque colored toner containing methyl methacrylateethyl acrylate copolymer resins or equivalent resins solvents and colortoning pigments suspended in solution by a chemical suspension agent .
provide colortoning pigments consisting of laminar silicates titanium dioxide and inorganic oxides .
conform to the following a mass per liter astm dnum num lb num kg min .
b solids by mass astm dnum num percent min .
section num num c solids by volume num percent min .
d drying time astm dnum num minutes at num f num c and num percent max .
humidity e color change astm dnum num hours no appreciable change f resistance to acids alkalies gasoline excellent and mineral spirits astm dnum g water vapor transmission from interior transmittable concrete astm dnum h oxidation over time none num slurry drilling fluids .
a mineral slurry .
furnish sodium bentonite or attapulgite in potable water .
use a mineral grain size that remains in suspension with sufficient viscosity and gel characteristics to transport drilled material out of the hole .
b polymer slurry .
furnish a slurry compatible with soil type and water chemistry .
num reinforcing fibers .
a fibers for shotcrete .
use deformed steel or fibrillated polyolefin fibers conforming to astm anum or astm dnum .
b fibers for concrete .
use fully oriented collated fibrillated white ¾inch nummillimeter long fibers of num percent virgin polyolefin conforming to astm dnum .
dose at num to num pounds per cubic yard num to num kilograms per cubic meter of concrete .
num epoxy resin adhesives .
furnish epoxy resin adhesives conforming to aashto m num for structural concrete injection and crack repair .
num index abbreviations num acceptance partial and final num acceptance of work num accidents report num acquisition regulations num acronyms num agreements num anchor bases lighting material num anchor bolt covers lighting material num archeological num asbuilt drawings see drawings authority of contracting officer co num inspectors num backer rod num backfilling pipe culverts num structural plate structures num backing mat mse wall material num balled and burlapped plants num bars dowel num fabricated deformed steel num low alloy steel deformed num bedding other than pipe culverts num pipe culverts num bid guarantee num opening of num preparation num rejection of num blended hydraulic cement num bolts nuts and washers lighting material num bonded fiber matrix hydromulch num bonds performance and payment num boring logs drilled shafts num bulletin board num certificates of insurance num certification commercial num production num channel preservation num chromium alloy steel castings num num circuit breakers and panels electrical material num claims num release num clean water act see environmental protection clearances contractorselected noncommercial num clevis connector mse wall material num cofferdams num coir rolls num colddrawn steel wire num commercial weighing systems num compost socks num concrete curing num finishes num concrete face panels mse wall material num concretelined corrugated steel pipe num conduit electrical material num conformance measured or tested num conformity with contract requirements num connector bars mse wall material num contactors and control transformers electrical material num contract conformity with requirements num intent of num time determination and extension num liquidated damages num stop order num contract quantity num contractor records num contractorlocated sources see material sources control cabinet electrical material num control strip num coordination of contract documents num crack fillers num curing concrete num definitions measurement units num subsection num num deformed steel wire num direct indirect payment see payment direct costs num direct payment see payment disposal excess material num material num num unsuitable material num disputes num dowel bars num drawings num asbuilt num earthwork geotextile num elastomeric bearings plain or laminated num embankment construction num environmental protection num epoxy mortar num epoxycoated reinforcing bars num excavation borrow num subexcavation num excelsior fiber rolls num fabricated deformed steel bar or rod mats num fasteners mse wall material num federal lands highway field materials manual fmm num fillers crack num preformed expansion joint num final acceptance see acceptance final payment num fly ash pozzolan material num fp definition i geotextile earthwork num paving num geotextile silt fence num governmentprovided material stockpile see material sources sources see material sources grading standards nursery stock num grass straw cellulose fiber mulch num gray iron castings num ground granulated blastfurnace slag pozzolan material num grounding and bonding equipment electrical material num grout posttensioned structures num grouted riprap num handling and storing material num hardware cloth mse wall material num health num high load rotational spherical bearings num highstrength lowalloy structural hsla steel num highstrength quenched and tempered qt steel num hook bolts num indirect payment see payment num industry standards num inspection at the plant num governments rights num visual num inspection and quarantine nursery stock num inspectors osha others num insurance automobile liability num certificates of num comprehensivegeneral num workers compensation num invoices weighing num joint sealants num keyed riprap num laws num liquidated damages num load restrictions num num lowmodulus silicone joint sealant num luminaries lighting material num maintaining roadways during nonwork periods num during work num malleable iron castings num masonry cement num material disposal num handling and storing num salvaging num source management num source restoration num sources num material found in work num materials manual see federal lands highway materials manual mature compost mulch num meaning of terms num measurement record format num meter cabinet electrical material num metric prefix symbols num symbols num mineral filler num mineral slurry drilling fluids num mortar cement num neat hydraulic cement grout num nonnative plants num num nonshrink grout num notice to proceed num operations limitations on num nighttime num overhead num painting steel num paleontological num partial acceptance see acceptance partnering num pavement markers temporary pavement markings num paving geotextile num pay factor concrete num payment final num scope of num peat moss mulch num permits num placed riprap num plank floors num plant names num planting material antidesiccant num planting material braces and anchors num planting material hose num planting material tree wound dressing num planting material twine num planting material wire num planting material wrapping material num pole arms lighting material num poles lighting material num polyester resin grout num polymer concrete or mortar num polymer slurry drilling fluids num portland cement num posts silt fence num postwork pricing see pricing preconstruction conference num preformed expansion joint fillers num joint seals num sleeves num preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seal for bridges num preformed retroreflective tape temporary pavement markings num prework meeting num pricing adjustments num num direct costs num overhead num postwork num profit num unilateral determination num profit num progress payments num project weighing systems num protection archeological num environmental see environmental protection forests parks and public lands num paleontological num property num railroad num utilities num workers num pull boxes frames and covers electrical material num quality of plant material num railroad num receiving procedures num recycled pulp fiber mulch num regulations blasting num far i tar i reinforcing bars num reinforcing mesh mse wall material num reinforcing strips mse wall material num reset curb num restoration material source num rightofway furnishing num roadways maintaining during nonwork periods see maintaining roadways maintaining during work see maintaining roadways safety num audible alarms num traffic and safety supervisor num safety disconnect switches electrical material num salvaging material num sample labeling num sand bags material num num sanitation num scales see weighing schedules num scope of payment num secondary lightning arrester electrical material num service pole electrical material num sieve aashto m num num silica fume pozzolan material num silicone joint sealer num silt fence reinforcement num slope notation num source of supply num quality requirements num specifications num format num more strict num spill prevention control and countermeasure spcc plan num steel castings num stop order num straightedge measurement num num straw mulch num straw fiber rolls num straw for hydroseeding mulch num structural carbon steel num structural steel bolts and nuts num structural steel highstrength bolts nuts and washers num subcontracting num substantial completion num surety num survey and staking tolerances num tackifier plant based num tackifier polmer stabilized fiber matrix num tackifier polymeric emulsion blend num tie bars num tie strips mse wall material num time extensions num tolerances manufacturing num topsoil conserved num traffic and safety supervisor num traffic paint temporary pavement markings num trusses num tubular mesh for fiber rolls num u.s .
customary unit abbreviations num num unilateral determination num utilities num value engineering num visual inspection see inspection weigh ticket format num weighing num welded fabric deformed steel wire num steel wire num welding num wheelstops num wire colddrawn steel num deformed steel num wire and cable electrical material num wire facing mse wall material num wood mulch num wood fiber mulch num work acceptance num commencement prosecution and completion num contractors responsibility num eliminated num governments responsibility num limitations num measurement of num remove and replace num statistical evaluation num writing style imperative mood num
