colorado department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction num i ii preface these standard specifications are to be used on contract work awarded by the colorado department of transportation cdot .
they may be supplemented or modified to suit specific contracts .
these specifications are expressed in united states standard measure english units .
the international system of units si modernized metric is used only where standardized testing requires metric units .
for clarity aggregate sieve sizes appear in both si and english units .
the dimensions measurements and requirements stated in english units are the specification requirements .
all contractor submittals shall be prepared in english units .
pay item quantities will be measured in english units .
unless otherwise identified forms herein referred to e.g .
form num are cdot forms .
forms from other organizations or agencies are clearly identified e.g .
fhwa form num .
use of these specifications by any other organization or individual will be at the users risk .
organizations or individuals citing these specifications by reference in their contract work will be responsible for furnishing prospective bidders copies of the specifications along with any addenda that may affect their contract .
copies of this book may be obtained from the colorado department of transportation office of bid plans num e. arkansas avenue denver co num .
addenda to these specifications may be issued by the department to suit its needs .
addenda may be accessed on the cdot website and will be available for purchase at prices established by the department .
iii iv table of contents page division num general provisions num section num definitions and terms num section num bidding requirements and conditions num num prequalification of bidders .
num num contents of proposal forms .
num num interpretation of quantities in proposal form .
num num interpretation of plans and specifications .
num num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work .
num num preparation of proposal .
num num irregular proposals .
num num combination or conditional proposals .
num num anticollusion affidavit .
num num material guaranty .
num section num award and execution of contract num num consideration of proposals num num award of contract .
num num requirement of contract bonds .
num num execution and approval of contract .
num section num scope of work num num intent of contract .
num num differing site conditions suspensions of work and significant changes in the character of work .
num num extra work .
num num maintaining traffic .
num num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
num num final cleaning up .
num num value engineering change proposals by the contractor .
num section num control of work num num authority of the engineer .
num num plans shop drawings working drawings other submittals and construction drawings .
num num conformity to the contract .
num num conformity to the contract of superpave performance graded binders num num conformity to the contract of hot mix asphalt .
num v num conformity to the contract of portland cement concrete pavement .
num num conformity to roadway smoothness criteria of hma .
num num conformity to roadway smoothness criteria of portland cement concrete pavement .
num num coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions .
num num cooperation by contractor .
num num cooperation with utilities .
num num cooperation between contractors .
num num construction stakes lines and grades .
num num authority and duties of the project engineer .
num num duties of the inspector .
num num inspection and testing of work .
num num removal of unacceptable work and unauthorized work .
num num load restrictions .
num num maintenance during construction .
num num failure to maintain roadway or structure .
num num acceptance .
num num dispute resolution .
num num dispute review board num num claims for unresolved disputes .
num section num control of material num num source of supply and quality requirements .
num num material sources .
num num samples tests cited specifications .
num num qualification of testing personnel and laboratories num num sampling and testing of hot mix asphalt .
num num sampling and testing of portland cement concrete paving .
.. num num material inspection at plant .
num num storage of materials .
num num handling materials .
num num department furnished materials .
num num buy america requirements num num certificates of compliance .
num num certified test report .
num section num legal relations and responsibility to public num num laws to be observed .
num num permits licenses and taxes .
num num patented devices materials and processes .
num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit num num federal aid provisions .
num num safety health and sanitation provisions .
num vi num public convenience and safety .
num num railroadhighway provisions .
num num construction over and adjacent to navigable waters .
num num barricades and signs .
num num use of explosives .
num num protection and restoration of property and landscape .
num num forest protection .
num num interruption of irrigation water flow .
num num responsibility for damage claims insurance types and coverage limits num num opening sections of project to traffic .
num num contractors responsibility for work .
num num unused num num furnishing right of way .
num num personal liability of public employees .
num num no waiver of legal rights .
num num third party beneficiary .
num num archaeological and paleontological discoveries .
num num air quality control .
num num water quality control .
num section num prosecution and progress num num subletting of contract .
num num notice to proceed .
num num project schedule .
num num payment schedule .
num num limitation of operations .
num num character of workers methods and equipment .
num num workplace violence .
num num determination and extension of contract time .
num num failure to complete work on time .
num num default of contract .
num num termination of contract .
num section num measurement and payment num num measurement of quantities .
num num scope of payment .
num num compensation for altered quantities .
num num compensation for changes and force account work .
num num eliminated items .
num num partial payments .
num num payment for material on hand stockpiled material .
num num reserved num num acceptance and final payment .
num num compensation for compensable delays .
num vii divisions num through num construction detail division num earthwork num num clearing and grubbing num num removal of structures and obstructions num num excavation and embankment num num excavation and backfill for structures num num topsoil num num erosion control num num watering and dust palliatives num num reset structures num num seeding fertilizer soil conditioner and sodding num num mulching num num planting num num transplanting num num soil retention covering num num herbicide treatment num num environmental health and safety management num division num bases num num aggregate base course num num reconditioning num num lime treated subgrade num division num pavements num num plant mix pavementsgeneral num num hot mix asphalt num num heating and scarifying treatment num num cold asphalt pavement recycle num num prime coat tack coat and rejuvenating agent num num joint and crack sealant num num chip seal error bookmark not defined .
num asphalt materials num num portland cement concrete pavement num num geosynthetics num division num structures num num steel sheet piling num num piling num num drilled caissons num num walls num num riprap num num riprap gabions and slope mattress num num slope and ditch paving num num timber structures num viii num steel structures num num structural plate structures num num bearing device num num pedestrian and bikeway railing num num waterproofing membrane num num dampproofing num num waterproofing num num waterstops and expansion joints num division num miscellaneous construction num num structural concrete num num reinforcing steel num num culverts and sewers num num manholes inlets and meter vaults num num subsurface drains num num guardrail num num fences num num sidewalks and bikeways num num curb and gutter num num median cover material num num cattle guards num num delineators and reflectors num num lighting num num traffic control devices num num water control devices num num siphons num num reserved num num prestressed concrete num num water lines num num field facilities num num rest areas and buildings num num irrigation system num num drainage pipe num num construction surveying num num mobilization num num pavement marking num num survey monumentation num num construction zone traffic control num num shotcrete num division num materials details num num hydraulic cement num num bituminous materials num num aggregates num num masonry units num ix num joint waterproofing and bearing material num num concrete and clay pipe num num metal pipe num num paints num num reinforcing steel and wire rope num num fence and guardrail num num concrete curing materials and admixtures num num miscellaneous num num water num num calcium chloride .
num num hydrated lime num num unused num num precast concrete units .
num num frames grates covers and steps .
num num geosynthetics .
num num geotextiles .
num num gabions and slope mattresses .
num num epoxy .
num num plastic pipe for underdrains .
num num geocomposite drains .
num num plastic pipe .
num num traffic control materials num num prestressed unit materials num num lighting and electrical materials num num water line materials num num rest area and building materials num index num x num division num general provisions section num definitions and terms titles used in these specifications having a masculine gender such as workmen and the pronouns he or his are for the sake of brevity and are intended to refer to persons of either sex .
the titles or headings of the sections and subsections herein are intended for convenience of reference and shall not have any bearing on their interpretation .
when the contract indicates that work is to be accepted acceptable subject to approval approved authorized condemned considered necessary contemplated deemed necessary designated determined directed disapproved established given indicated deemed insufficient subject to interpretation interpreted ordered permitted rejected required reserved satisfactory specified sufficient suitable suspended unacceptable or unsatisfactory it shall be understood that these expressions are followed by the words by the engineer or to the engineer .
when the contract indicates that something shall be done the action is required and is not discretionary .
wherever the following abbreviations or terms are used in these specifications plans or other contract documents the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows abbreviations .
aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america ai asphalt institute aia american institute of architects aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute aitc american institute of timber construction ansi american national standards institute inc. ara american railway association area american railway engineering association artba american road and transportation builders association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects asme american society of mechanical engineers astm american society for testing and materials atssa american traffic safety services association num num awg american wire gauge awpa american wood protection association aws american welding society awwa american water works association cca colorado contractors association cdot colorado department of transportation cdphe colorado department of public health and environment cfr code of federal regulations cp colorado procedure cpl colorado procedure laboratory crs colorado revised statutes num as amended crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute eia electronic industries association fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards ieee institute of electrical and electronics engineers ies illuminating engineering society imsa international municipal signal association ipcea insulated power cable engineers association ite institute of transportation engineers mash manual for assessing safety hardware mil military specifications msnum municipal separate storm sewer system mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nchrp national cooperative highway research program nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association nist national institute of standards and technology nsf national sanitation foundation nsf osha occupational health and safety administration pci prestressed concrete institute row right of way swmp stormwater management plan sae society of automotive engineers ul underwriters laboratories inc. advertisement .
a public announcement inviting proposals for work to be performed or materials to be furnished .
affected area .
as related to mined land reclamation the total disturbed surface of a pit or quarry such as sand gravel topsoil or borrow that is being mined or will be mined .
the area includes but is not limited to the excavation area plant and stockpile areas parking and storage areas and the haul roads .
award .
the acceptance by the department of a proposal .
basis of payment .
the terms under which work is paid as a designated pay item in accordance with the quantity measured and the pay unit .
num num best management practices bmps for stormwater pollution prevention .
bmps prevent or reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges from the construction site .
bidder .
an individual firm corporation or other legal entity submitting a proposal for the advertised work .
a contractor intending to contract with the department for performance of prescribed work .
bridge .
a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water highway or railroad and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a length measured along the center of roadway of more than num feet between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
length .
the length of a bridge structure is the overall length measured along the line of survey stationing back to back of backwalls of abutments if present otherwise end to end of the bridge floor but in no case less than the total clear opening of the structure .
roadway width .
the clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or guard timbers or in the case of multiple height of curbs between the bottoms of the lower risers .
calendar day .
each and every day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
when day is used it shall mean calendar day unless otherwise defined .
cdot resident engineer .
the resident engineer is directly responsible for the overall administration of assigned construction projects .
unless the cdot project engineer is a professional engineer the resident engineer is cdots full time engineer in responsible charge of the project .
the resident engineer will delegate authority to project engineers consistent with their experience and abilities .
only a cdot resident engineer can approve and sign vouchers for interim and final contractor pay estimates .
only a cdot resident engineer can authorize and sign changes to the contract if the project engineer is a consultant employee .
certificate of compliance .
a certification including a signature by a person having legal authority to act for the manufacturer stating that the product or assembly to be incorporated into the project was fabricated in accordance with and meets the applicable specifications .
certified invoice .
any invoice or billing endorsed by the contractor certifying that material specialty work subcontract work rental lease services etc .
were acquired for the project and that the invoiced or billed amount represents the actual costs .
certified test report .
a test report from the manufacturer or an independent testing laboratory including a signature by a person having legal authority to act for the manufacturer or the independent testing laboratory stating that num num the test results show that the product or assembly to be incorporated into the project has been sampled and tested and the samples have passed all specified tests .
conformity .
compliance with reasonable and customary manufacturing and construction tolerances where working tolerances are not specified .
where working tolerances are specified conformity means compliance with such working tolerances .
construction drawings .
a complete set of plans reviewed shop drawings working drawings and other submittals kept available on the project site at all times by the contractor .
construction requirements .
specifications covering performance of work required for proper completion and acceptance .
contract .
the written agreement between the state of colorado through the department of transportation and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties for the performance of the work and the basis of payment .
the contract includes the invitation for bids proposal contract bonds standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans notice to proceed contract modification orders and authorized extensions of time all of which constitute one instrument .
contract item pay item .
a specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
contract modification order .
a written order issued to the contractor by the department covering contingencies extra work increases or decreases in contract quantities and additions or alterations to the plans or specifications within the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
the contract modification order is the only method authorized for changing the contract .
contract modification orders must be approved as established in subsection num .
contract payment bond .
the security executed by the contractor and surety or sureties and furnished to the department to guarantee payment of all legal debts of the contractor pertaining to the construction of the project .
contract performance bond .
the security executed by the contractor and surety or sureties and furnished to the department to guarantee completion of the work in accordance with the contract .
contract time .
the number of working days or calendar days allowed for completion of the contract including authorized time extensions .
where a calendar date of completion is specified the contract shall be completed on or before that date .
contractor .
the individual firm or corporation contracting with the num num state of colorado through the department of transportation for performance of prescribed work .
contractors engineer .
a professional engineer registered in the state of colorado who is an employee of either the contractor a consulting engineer under contract to the contractor or a manufacturer or supplier of materials supplied to the project .
county .
the county in which the work is to be done .
culvert .
any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under the roadway .
day .
see subsection num department .
state department of transportation .
a department within the executive branch of the state of colorado .
engineer .
the chief engineer of the department acting directly or through an authorized representative who is responsible for engineering and administrative supervision of the project .
equipment .
all machinery tools and apparatus together with supplies for upkeep and maintenance necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
extra work .
work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found by the engineer to be essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope .
falsework .
falsework is temporary construction used to support structural elements of concrete steel masonry or other materials during their construction or erection until they become selfsupporting .
falsework may also be used to provide temporary support to elements of a structure during demolition or reconstruction .
force account work .
work paid for on the basis of actual costs plus approved additives .
see subsection num .
formwork .
formwork is the temporary structure or mold used to retain plastic or fluid concrete in its designated shape until it hardens .
highway .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
num num holidays .
holidays recognized by the state of colorado are new years day dr. martin luther king jr.s birthday observed washingtonlincoln day cesar chavez day memorial day independence day labor day columbus day veterans day thanksgiving day christmas day when new years day cesar chavez day independence day or christmas day falls on a sunday the following monday shall be considered a holiday .
when one of these days falls on a saturday the preceding friday shall be considered a holiday .
additional legal holidays when designated by the governor or the president of the united states will also be recognized by the state .
inspector .
the engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of contract performance .
invitation for bids .
all documents whether attached or incorporated by reference utilized for soliciting proposals .
the advertisement will indicate with reasonable accuracy the quantity and location of the work to be done or the character and quantity of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of proposals .
laboratory .
the testing laboratory of the department or any other testing laboratory designated by the engineer .
materials .
all components required for use in the construction of the project .
method of measurement .
the manner in which a pay item is measured to conform with the pay unit .
notice to proceed .
written notice to the contractor to proceed with the contract work including when applicable the date of beginning of contract time .
ordinary high water mark .
the term ordinary high water mark means that line on the shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics such as clear natural line impressed on the bank shelving changes in the character of soil destruction of terrestrial vegetation the presence of litter and debris or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas .
this is typically the num year storm event elevation .
num num original contract amount .
the sum of the total dollar amounts bid for all the construction pay item quantities .
in subsection num this figure is modified for use in calculating partial payments for mobilization .
pavement structure .
the combination of one or more of the following courses placed on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
num subbase .
the layer or layers of specified or selected material placed on a subgrade to support a base course surface course or both .
subgrade that has been treated with lime fly ash cement kiln dust or combinations thereof for stabilization will be considered subbase .
num base course .
the layer or layers of specified or selected material placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course .
num surface course .
one or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
the top layer is sometimes called wearing course .
planned force account .
items of work included on the plans which will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
plans .
the drawings or reproductions provided by the department which show the location character dimensions and details of the work to be done .
preconstruction conference .
a meeting of cdot project personnel contractor project personnel and other stake holders held prior to the beginning of construction at which topics pertinent to the successful prosecution of the work are discussed .
profile grade .
the trace of a vertical plane usually intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface and usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such .trace according to the context .
project .
the specific section of the highway on which construction is to be performed as described in the contract .
project engineer .
the chief engineers duly authorized representative who may be a cdot employee or an employee of a consulting engineer consultant under contract to cdot as defined below a cdot project engineer .
the cdot employee assigned by the resident engineer who is the chief engineers duly authorized representative .
the cdot project engineer is in direct charge of the work and is responsible for the administration and satisfactory completion of the project under contract .
num num b consultant project engineer .
the consultant employee under the responsible charge of the consultants professional engineer who is in direct charge of the work and is responsible for the administration and satisfactory completion of the project .
the consultant project engineers duties are delegated by the cdot resident engineer in accordance with the scope of work in the consultants contract with cdot .
the consultant project engineer is not authorized to sign or approve contract modification orders .
project special provisions .
see definition for special provisions in subsection num .
project termini .
limits of the project as shown on the plans .
proposal .
the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form to perform the work at the prices quoted .
also called bid .
proposal form .
the documents furnished by the department on which the offer of a bidder is submitted .
also called bid proposal .
proposal guaranty .
the security furnished with a proposal to guarantee that the bidder will enter into the contract if the proposal is accepted .
record set .
a reproduction of a drawing or set of drawings design calculations or other record of engineering work required to be performed by the contractors engineer which is signed and sealed by the contractors engineer in accordance with the rules of procedures of the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors .
region transportation director .
the departments representative responsible for construction maintenance and safety activities within the geographical jurisdiction established by the department .
the region transportation director is responsible for acting on written appeals made by the contractor relating to contract claims for additional compensation or extension of contract time .
right of way .
a general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to a highway .
road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
roadbed .
the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
roadside .
a general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
num num roadside development .
those items necessary for the preservation of landscape materials and features .
the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers .
suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
roadway .
the portion of a highway within limits of construction .
roadway prism .
the portion of the roadway defined as the prism of embankment situated beneath the shoulders and pavement structure and inside the lines projected downward and outward on a one to one slope from the outside edges of the roadway shoulders to their intersection with the base of the embankment .
safety critical work .
elements of the work that if performed improperly could encroach upon and endanger traffic that is following all traffic regulations .
safety critical work may include work elements performed under one or more of the following situations num work that is constructed on over or near a traffic route and could become unstable over time if installed improperly .
num work that requires the use of lifting devices in the vicinity of traffic .
elements of work considered safety critical for the project will be identified in a project special provision titled revision of section num performance of safety critical work .
traffic as used above is defined as the vehicles railroad pedestrians aircraft and watercraft moving along a route .
the route may be permanent or temporary such as a detour .
salvable material .
material that can be saved or salvaged .
unless otherwise specified in the contract all salvable material shall become the property of the contractor .
shop drawings .
a general term that includes drawings diagrams illustrations samples schedules calculations and other data which provide details of the construction of the work and details to be used by the engineer for inspection .
shop drawings shall be prepared by the contractor subcontractors manufacturers suppliers or distributors .
shop drawings are submitted to the engineer for formal review and return to the contractor in accordance with subsection numc .
shop drawings include data which illustrates material equipment and items which are incorporated in and become part of the permanent work in accordance with the contract .
shoring .
shoring is temporary construction that is used to support the earth adjacent to excavation or embankment .
num num shoulder .
the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk .
that portion of the roadway constructed for pedestrian use .
special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications covering conditions specific to an individual project or group of projects .
special provisions fall within one of the two following categories and take precedence as specified in subsection num. a project special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications specific to the project .
b standard special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications specific to a selected group of projects or which are intended for temporary use .
specifications .
a general term applied to all directions provisions and requirements pertaining to performance of the work .
a standard specifications the departments printed book including errata titled standard specifications for road and bridge construction .
the book is divided into three parts namely num general provisions division num num construction details divisions num thru num num material details division num b supplemental specifications additions and revisions to the standard specifications that are adopted subsequent to the issuance of the printed book .
the outline for work items in the construction details contains the following num description num materials num construction requirements num method of measurement num basis of payment specified completion date .
the date on which the contract work is specified to be completed .
standard special provisions .
see definition for special provisions subsection num .
state .
the state of colorado acting through its authorized representative .
state waters .
state waters means any and all surface and subsurface waters which are contained in or flow in or through this state but does not include waters in sewage systems waters in treatment works of disposal systems waters in num num potable water distribution systems and all water withdrawn for use until use and treatment have been completed .
examples of state waters include but are not limited to perennial streams intermittent or ephemeral gulches and arroyos ponds lakes reservoirs irrigation canals or ditches wetlands stormwater conveyances when they discharge to a surface water and groundwater .
note that for the purposes of these specifications surface waters means all state waters except groundwater .
stormwater management plan swmp .
the stormwater management plan comprises those contract documents containing the requirements necessary to accomplish all the following num protect and identify sensitive environments state waters wetlands habitat and existing vegetation .
num minimize the amount of disturbed soil .
num control and minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after project construction .
num minimize runoff from offsite areas from flowing across the site .
num slow down the runoff .
num reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff .
street .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
structures .
bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings storm drains service pipes underdrains foundation drains fences guardrail signs end sections traffic signals light standards and other features which may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classified .
subcontractor .
an individual firm corporation or other legal entity to whom the contractor sublets part of the contract .
subgrade .
the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
subgrade that has been treated with lime fly ash cement kiln dust or combinations thereof for stabilization will be considered subbase .
substructure .
all of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with the backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
superintendent .
the contractors authorized employee in responsible charge of the work .
num num superstructure .
the entire structure except the substructure as defined in subsection num .
supplemental specifications .
see definition for specifications subsection num .
surety .
the corporation partnership or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor .
traffic control plan tcp .
the parts of the contract documents for each project that contain the requirements for the maintenance of traffic during construction of the project .
traveled way .
the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
value engineering change proposal vecp .
a change to contract requirements proposed by the contractor which will accomplish the projects functional requirements at less cost or improve value or service at no increase or at a minor increase in cost .
wheel path .
wheel paths are the two sections of each throughtraffic lane that bear the wheel loading .
the center of each wheel path is located num feet from the center of the lane each wheel path is num feet wide .
work .
the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and incidentals necessary to successfully complete the project according to all duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
working day .
any day exclusive of saturdays sundays and holidays on which weather and other conditions not under the control of the contractor will permit construction operations to proceed with the normal working force engaged in performing those items controlling the completion of the work .
working drawings .
a general term that includes drawings diagrams illustrations samples schedules calculations and other data which illustrate the construction of the work material equipment methods and items which are necessary to construct the work in accordance with the plans and specifications .
working drawings shall be prepared by the contractor subcontractors manufacturers suppliers or distributors .
working drawings are submitted to the engineer for information only and are not formally reviewed and returned to the contractor .
num num workplace violence .
workplace violence is conduct in the workplace against employees employers or outsiders committed by a person who either has an employment related connection with cdot or is a contractor working on a cdot project .
this conduct includes num physical acts against persons or their property or against cdot or contractor property that are perceived to be harmful or threatening .
num veiled or direct verbal threats profanity or vicious statements or gestures that are meant to harm or create a threatening or intimidating work environment .
num written threats profanity vicious cartoons or notes that are meant to create a threatening or intimidating environment num any other acts that are perceived to be threatening or intended to injure or convey hostility .
num num section num bidding requirements and conditions prequalification of bidders .
the bidder shall follow the prequalification and bidding procedures contained in the rules governing construction bidding for cdot public works projects num ccr num rules on file with the colorado secretary of state .
copies are available upon request in the contracts and market analysis branch of the department .
only prequalified bidders will be allowed to bid on any project .
at least ten days prior to opening of proposals the bidder must file an experience questionnaire and a confidential financial statement on standard forms furnished by the department .
contents of proposal forms .
the department will publish bidding opportunities to prospective bidders on the cdot business center website .
the forms on this website will state the location and description of the contemplated construction and will show the estimate of the various quantities and types of work to be performed or materials to be furnished and will have a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited .
the proposal form will state the time in which the project must be completed the amount of the proposal guaranty and the date time and place of the opening of proposals .
all bidders on projects shall submit electronic bids only .
innovative delivery method projects such as designbuild cmgc and best value are not subject to this electronic bidding requirement .
the plans specifications and other documents designated in the proposal form will be considered a part of the proposal .
the prospective bidder shall pay the department the sum stated in the invitation for bids for each paper set of plans .
interpretation of quantities in proposal form .
except as otherwise provided in this subsection and the method of measurement for individual items the quantities appearing in the proposal form are estimates prepared for the comparison of proposals .
payment to the contractor will be made in accordance with the following procedures a measurement required .
when the contract requires measurement of work performed or material furnished payment will be made for actual quantities measured and accepted .
b measurement not required .
when the contract does not require quantities of work performed or materials furnished to be measured payment will be made for the quantities appearing in the contract .
the estimated quantities of work to be performed and materials to be furnished may be increased decreased or omitted .
num num interpretation of plans and specifications .
any change to proposal forms plans or specifications prior to the opening of proposals will be issued by the department by certified mail to all holders of proposal forms .
certain individuals are named in the project specifications who have authority to provide information clarification or interpretation to bidders prior to opening of proposals .
information obtained from persons other than those named individuals is invalid and shall not be used for bidding purposes .
examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work .
the bidder is expected to examine the site of the proposed work the proposal plans specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and contract forms before submitting a proposal .
the submission of a proposal will be considered conclusive evidence that the bidder has made this examination and is aware of the conditions to be encountered in performing the work according to the contract .
boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations if they exist are available for inspection by bidders .
these logs and records are made available so that all bidders have access to identical subsurface information that is available to the department and is not intended as a substitute for personal investigation interpretation and judgment of the bidders .
the department does not warrant the adequacy of boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations and such information is not considered to be a part of the contract .
when a log of test borings is included in the subsurface investigation record the data shown in the individual log of each test boring apply only to that particular boring and are not intended to be conclusive as to the character of any material between or around test borings .
if bidders use this information in preparing a proposal it is used at their own risk and bidders are responsible for all conclusions deductions and inferences drawn from such information .
bidders may conduct subsurface investigations at the project site at bidders expense the department will afford them this opportunity prior to public opening of proposals .
if a bidder discovers an apparent error or omission in the proposal form estimated quantities plan or specifications the bidder shall immediately notify the engineer to enable the department to make any necessary revisions .
the department may consider it to be detrimental to the department for a bidder to submit an obviously unbalanced unit bid price .
see subsection num .
preparation of proposal .
the bidder shall submit the proposal bid upon the forms furnished by the department in accordance with the rules referenced in subsection num .
irregular proposals .
proposals bids will be considered irregular and may be rejected for any of the following reasons num if the proposal is on a form other than that prescribed by the department or if num num the form is altered or any part thereof is detached or if the form does not contain original signatures .
num if there are unauthorized additions conditional or alternative proposals or irregularities of any kind which may tend to make the proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous .
num if the bidder fails to acknowledge in the proposal the receipt of all revisions current on the date of opening of proposals .
num if the proposal does not contain a unit price for each pay item listed except in the case of authorized alternative pay items the mathematical products of the respective unit prices and the estimated quantities and the total amount of the bid obtained by adding such mathematical products .
num if the department determines that any of the unit bid prices are materially unbalanced to the potential detriment of the department .
there are two types of unbalanced bids num mathematically unbalanced and num materially unbalanced .
the mathematically unbalanced bid is a bid containing lump sum or unit pay items which do not reflect reasonable actual costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs but not necessarily to the detriment of the department .
these costs should all relate to the performance of the items in question .
the materially unbalanced bid is a mathematically unbalanced bid which the department determines leaves reasonable doubt that award will result in the lowest ultimate cost to the department or that award is in the public interest .
num if the contractor submitting the bid is affiliated with another bidder that has submitted a bid on the same public project .
num if the bidder has been sent a notice of intent to revoke prequalification under chapter two of the rules .
num if the bidder has been asked in writing to show why it should not be found in default on a department contract .
num if the bidder has been sent a notice of intent to debar or of suspension under chapter three of the rules .
the department reserves the right to reject any or all bids to waive technicalities or to advertise for new bids if in the judgment of the department its best interests will be promoted thereby .
combination or conditional proposals .
if proposal forms are issued for projects in combination and separately the bidder may submit proposals either on the combination or on separate units of the combination .
the department reserves the right to make awards on combination or separate proposals to the advantage of the department .
combination proposals will be considered only when specified .
anticollusion affidavit .
every proposal bid submitted to the num num department shall contain a statement certifying that the bidder has not participated in any collusion or taken any action in restraint of free competitive bidding .
this statement shall be in the form of an affidavit provided by the department and signed by the bidder .
the original of the signed anticollusion affidavit form num shall be submitted with the proposal .
the proposal will be rejected if it does not contain the completed form num .
material guaranty .
the successful bidder may be required to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of materials used in the construction of the work together with samples which will be tested for conformance with contract provisions num num section num award and execution of contract consideration of proposals .
after the proposals bids are opened and read they will be evaluated and the contract awarded or rejected in accordance with the rules referenced in subsection num .
the low responsible bidder shall submit a completed contractors performance capability statement form num and a completed assignment of antitrust claims form num to the award officer prior to num p.m. on the fifth calendar day after the bid opening .
failure to submit the forms num and num may result in the denial of award to the apparent low responsible bidder and forfeiture of the proposal guaranty .
award of contract .
if the contract is awarded the award will be made within num calendar days after the opening of proposals to the lowest bidder whose proposal complies with all the requirements prescribed .
the successful bidder will be notified in writing of the acceptance of the proposal and the award of the contract .
requirement of contract bonds .
at the time of the execution of the contract the successful bidder shall furnish a contract payment bond and a contract performance bond .
each bond shall be in a penal sum equal to the nearest integral one hundred dollars in excess of the sum of the original bid items plus all force account items specified in the project special provisions to be included in the payment and performance bonds .
the bonds and the security shall be acceptable to the department .
execution and approval of contract .
the contract shall be signed and returned by the successful bidder together with the contract bonds within num days after the date of award .
if the signed contract and bonds are returned by the successful bidder within num days after award and if the contract is not executed by the department within num days from date of award the bidder shall have the right to withdraw the proposal without penalty .
the contract will not be considered effective until it has been fully executed by all of the parties to the contract .
num num section num scope of work intent of contract .
the contractor shall complete the work described and furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the contract .
alterations of plans or the nature of the work will not involve or require work beyond the termini of the original project until a contract modification order has been executed .
differing site conditions suspensions of work and significant changes in the character of work .
a differing site conditions .
during the progress of work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if the engineer determines that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
b suspensions of work ordered by the engineer .
if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation contract time or both are due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
upon receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost time required or both for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract num num is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
c significant changes in the character of work .
the engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding loss of anticipated profit will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract .
the term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances num when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or num when a major item of work is increased in excess of num percent or decreased below num percent of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of num percent of original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num percent to the actual amount of work performed .
a major item is defined to be any item having an original contract value in excess of num percent of the original contract amount .
extra work .
the contractor shall perform unforeseen work for which there is no price included in the contract whenever the extra work is necessary or desirable for contract completion .
this work shall be performed in accordance with the contract and as directed and will be paid for as provided under subsection num .
num num maintaining traffic .
unless otherwise provided the contractor shall keep the road open to all traffic in accordance with the traffic control plan during the progress of the work .
the contractor shall schedule construction operations so that only one side of the existing roadbed is denied to traffic at any time .
the contractor shall also provide and maintain in a safe condition temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages and farms .
the road and the intersections of the access points shall be maintained in a manner that will safely and adequately accommodate traffic .
the contractor shall not store materials or equipment nor park vehicles on the highway except in designated areas .
the contractor shall not have materials or equipment in the traffic lanes open to traffic at any time unless directed .
portions of the roadway that are not included in the contract work will be maintained by the department .
snow removal will be the responsibility of the department .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all work that is included in the contract and maintaining approaches crossings intersections and other features as may be necessary to accommodate traffic without direct compensation except as provided in the contract or described in a and b below .
a approved detours .
the cost of constructing detours and temporary bridges and the removal of temporary bridges and obliteration of the detour road will be paid for at the appropriate unit bid prices for the items of work involved .
maintenance requirements as approved will be paid for by the appropriate bid item however if a bid item does not exist then payment will be made as provided in subsection num. b maintaining traffic during suspension of work .
during any suspension ordered by the engineer in accordance with subsection num the contractor shall open to traffic the portions of the project as directed .
prior to allowing traffic on the project the contractor shall prepare the roadbed so that it will safely and adequately accommodate traffic .
during the suspension period the maintenance of the roadway will be the responsibility of the department .
however when the suspension is the result of a failure by the contractor all costs for maintenance of traffic during the suspension period shall be borne by the contractor .
when the suspension is lifted the contractor shall renew any work or replace materials lost or damaged on the project and shall remove as directed work or materials used during the suspension .
the contractor shall complete the project as though the prosecution of the work had been continuous and without interference .
all additional work caused during the suspensions for reasons beyond the contractors control will be paid for as provided in subsection num when contract unit prices exist or as extra work as provided in subsection num when no unit price exists .
c maintaining traffic during free time .
during the free time period if provided for in the contract the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining traffic control items as long as construction operations interfere with traffic .
when construction operations which interfere with traffic cease num num the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing and shall adhere to the same procedures as in paragraph b above .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing when construction operations which interfere with traffic will resume and shall resume responsibility for maintaining traffic .
d maintenance directed by the engineer .
if the engineer directs special maintenance for the benefit of the traveling public that is not included in the contract the contractor will be paid in accordance with subsection num when contract unit prices exist or as extra work in accordance with subsection num when no contract unit prices exist .
the engineer will determine the work to be classed as special maintenance .
rights in and use of materials found on the work .
the engineer may authorize the contractors use of materials found in the excavation for completing pay items other than excavation .
payment will be made for both the excavation of such materials at the corresponding contract unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used .
the contractor shall replace the removed material with acceptable material at no additional cost to the department .
the department will not charge the contractor royalty or additional cost of select material for the removed material .
the contractor shall not excavate or remove any material from within the roadway which is not within the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines without written authorization from the engineer .
unless otherwise provided the material from structures designated for removal shall be the contractors property and may be used temporarily by the contractor in the erection of the new structure .
final cleaning up .
before final acceptance the highway material pits and all ground occupied by the contractor in connection with the project shall be cleaned of all rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment and all parts of the work shall be left in an acceptable condition .
the cost of final cleanup will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
value engineering change proposals by the contractor .
the contractor is encouraged to develop and offer proposals for improved construction techniques alternative materials and other innovations .
proposals must provide a project comparable to cdots original design either at lower cost improved quality or both .
proposals that lower the quality of the intended project will be rejected .
bid prices shall not be based on the anticipated approval of a value engineering change proposal vecp .
proposals shall be submitted only by the successful bidder after contract award .
if a vecp is rejected the work shall be completed in accordance with the contract at contract bid prices .
any delay to the project due to a vecp submittal and review shall be considered within the contractors control and will be nonexcusable with the exception of those delays that are approved as part of the vecp .
proposals shall be categorized as vecp category a or vecp category b .
num num vecps category a will be all proposals that involve the design and construction of a structure including but not limited to a bridge retaining wall concrete box culvert or building .
a vecp category a will also include any proposal that would result in a change of original bid items that totals over num .
alternatives investigated and not selected in the project structural selection reports may be presented in a vecp if significant benefits can be demonstrated to the engineer .
in addition design criteria and constraints listed in the structural selection report can not be modified or relaxed as part of a vecp unless significant and previously unknown benefits can be proven to the engineer .
experimental or demonstrationtype design concepts products structures or elements that have not been preapproved by cdot in writing for general use will be considered a vecp category a .
category a proposals will also result in a realized and shared cost savings to cdot .
cost savings generated to the contract as a result of vecp offered by the contractor and accepted by cdot shall be shared between the contractor and cdot .
all other vecps that do not meet the previous requirements will be classified as a vecp category b .
net cost savings on vecps that are less than num can be kept by the contractor .
net cost savings greater than num shall be split equally between the contractor and cdot as defined in the basis of payment section of this specification .
both vecp category a and vecp category b will produce savings to cdot or provide improved project quality without impairing essential functions and characteristics of the facility .
essential functions include but are not limited to service life requirements for planned future development prior commitments to governmental agencies or the public corridor requirements economy of operation ease of maintenance desired appearance safety and impacts to the traveling public or to the environment during and after construction .
the contractor may submit either a full vecp or a preliminary conceptual vecp followed by a full proposal .
these proposals are subject to rejection at any time if they do not meet the criteria outlined in this subsection .
a submittal of conceptual proposal .
for a vecp category a that requires a significant amount of design or other development resources the contractor may submit an abbreviated conceptual proposal for preliminary evaluation .
the engineer will evaluate the information provided .
the contractor will then be advised in writing if any conditions or parameters of the conceptual proposal are found to be grounds for rejection .
preliminary review of a conceptual proposal reduces the contractors risk of subsequent rejection but does not commit cdot to eventual approval of the full vecp .
the following information shall be submitted for each conceptual proposal num statement that the proposal is submitted as a conceptual vecp .
num general description of the difference between the existing contract and num num the proposed change and the advantages and disadvantages of each including effects on service life requirements for planned future development prior commitments to governmental agencies or the public corridor requirements economy of operation ease of maintenance desired appearance safety and impacts to the traveling public or to the environment during and after construction .
the contractor shall request in writing the necessary information from the engineer .
num one set of conceptual plans and a description of proposed changes to the contract specifications .
num estimate of the anticipated cost savings or increase .
num statement specifying the following i when a response to the conceptual proposal from the cdot is required to avoid delays to the existing contract prosecution .
ii the amount of time necessary to develop the full proposal .
iii the date by which a contract modification order must be executed to obtain maximum benefit from the proposal .
iv the proposals impact on time for completing the contract .
b submittal of full value engineering change proposal .
the following materials and information shall be submitted for both category a and category b vecps num a statement that the proposal is submitted as a vecp num a description of the difference between the existing contract and the proposed change and the advantages and disadvantages of each including effects on service life requirements for planned future development prior commitments to governmental agencies or the public corridor requirements economy of operation ease and cost of maintenance desired appearance safety and impacts to the traveling public or to the environment during and after construction .
the contractor shall request in writing the necessary information from the engineer .
num a complete set of plans and specifications showing the proposed revisions relative to the original contract .
this portion of the submittal shall include design notes and construction details .
the proposed plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by the contractors engineer .
num a cost comparison summarizing all of the items that the proposed vecp replaces reduces eliminates adds or otherwise changes from the original contract work including all impacts to traffic control detours and all other changes .
the cost comparison shall not include cost savings resulting from purportedly decreased inspection or testing requirements or cdot overhead .
all costs and proposed unit prices shall be documented by the contractor .
num num num a statement specifying the date by which a contract modification order must be executed to obtain the maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the contract and the date when a response from cdot is required to avoid delays to the prosecution of the contract .
num a statement detailing the effect the proposal will have on the time for completing the contract .
num a description of any previous use or testing of the proposed changes and the conditions and results .
if the proposal was previously submitted on another cdot project the proposal shall indicate the date contract number and the action taken by cdot .
num an estimate of any effects the vecp will have on other costs to cdot .
num a statement of life cycle costs when appropriate .
life cycle costs will not be considered as part of cost savings but shall be calculated for additional support of the proposal .
a discount rate of four percent shall be used for life cycle calculations .
c evaluation .
vecp will be evaluated by cdot in accordance with the cdot construction manual .
additional information needed to evaluate proposals shall be provided in a timely manner .
untimely submittal of additional information will result in rejection of the proposal .
where design changes are proposed the additional information shall include results of field investigations and surveys design and computations and changed plan sheets required to develop the design changes .
num .
the engineer will determine if a proposal qualifies for consideration and evaluation .
the engineer may reject any proposal that requires excessive time or costs for review evaluation or investigation .
the engineer may reject proposals that are not consistent with cdots design criteria for the project .
num .
vecps whether or not approved by cdot apply only to the ongoing contracts referenced in the proposal and become the property of cdot .
proposals shall contain no restrictions imposed by the contractor on their use or disclosure .
cdot has the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in part any data necessary for the utilization of the proposal .
cdot retains the right to utilize any accepted proposal or part thereof on other projects without obligation to the contractor .
this provision is subject to rights provided by law with respect to patented materials or processes .
num .
if cdot is already considering revisions to the contract or has approved changes in the contract that are subsequently proposed in a vecp the engineer will reject the proposal and may proceed to implement these changes without obligation to the contractor .
num num num .
the contractor shall have no claim against cdot for additional costs or delays resulting from the rejection or untimely acceptance of a vecp .
these costs include but are not limited to development costs loss of anticipated profits increased material or labor costs or untimely response .
num .
proposals will be rejected if equivalent options are already provided in the contract .
num .
proposals that only reduce or eliminate contract pay items will be rejected .
num .
the cost savings and other benefits generated by the proposal must be sufficient to warrant review and processing as determined by the engineer .
num .
a proposal changing the type or thickness of the pavement structure will be rejected .
num .
no vecp proposal can be used to alter incentive and disincentive rates and maximums on cost plus time bid ab projects .
num .
right of way can not be bought as part of a vecp to eliminate phasing on a project .
num .
a vecp changing the design of a structure may be considered by cdot if the design meets the following conditions num the design shall not involve detouring of traffic onto local roads or streets to an extent greater than the original plans unless previously approved by the affected local agencies .
num the design has the same roadway typical section as the original plans .
num the design meets or exceeds the benefits of the construction handling or traffic phasing scheme shown in the original plans .
num the design meets or exceeds all environmental commitments and permit requirements of the original contract .
num the design shall not increase environmental impacts beyond those of the original contract .
num the design meets or exceeds the vertical and horizontal clearances and hydraulic requirements shown on the original plans .
num the design has the same or greater flexibility as the original design to accommodate future widening .
num the design shall not change the location of the centerline of the substructure elements without demonstrating substantial benefits over the original plans .
num the design shall not change the grade or elevation of the final riding surface without demonstrating substantial benefits over the original plans .
num num num the design shall match corridor future development plans and architectural aesthetic and pavement requirements if applicable .
num the design shall not adversely impact cdots bridge inspection maintenance or other longterm costs or operations .
num the design shall meet all cdot design standards and policies .
num the design shall include all additional costs and coordination necessary to relocate utilities .
num major structure designs provided by the contractor shall include an independent plan review and design check by a professional engineer licensed in the state of colorado and employed by a firm other than the engineerofrecord .
this design review will be performed at the contractors expense and shall be included in the contractors engineering costs .
num the contractor shall provide cdot with all design calculations independent design check calculations a rating package for each bridge prepared in accordance with the current cdot bridge rating manual and a record set of quantity calculations for each structure .
num .
the engineer will reject all or any portion of the design or construction work performed under an approved vecp if unsatisfactory results are obtained .
the engineer will direct the removal of such rejected work and require construction to proceed under the original contract requirements without reimbursement for work performed under the proposal or for its removal .
if a structure design vecp meets these and all other requirements cdot may at its sole option accept or reject the proposal .
d basis of payment .
if the vecp is accepted a contract modification order will authorize the changes and payment .
reimbursement will be made as follows num .
the changes will be incorporated into the contract by changes in quantities of unit bid items new agreed unit price items lump sum or any combination as appropriate under the contract .
unless there is a differing site condition as described in subsection num the contractor shall not receive additional compensation for quantity overruns design errors supplemental surveys geotechnical investigations additional items or other increases in cost that were not foreseen in the accepted vecp unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num .
for all vecps the incentive payment shall be calculated as follows gross cost of deleted work gross cost of added work gross savings gross savings contractors engineering costs cdots engineering costs net savings any net savings less than num can be kept by the contractor .
num num if the net savings are greater than num then the amount over num will be shared equally with cdot and calculated as follows net savings num shared savings contractors total incentive shared savings num num the contractors engineering costs will be reimbursable only for outside consultant costs that are verified by certified billings .
cdots engineering costs shall be actual consultant costs billed to cdot and extraordinary inhouse personnel labor costs .
these labor costs will be calculated at the fixed amount of num per hour per employee .
project personnel assigned to the field office or who work on the project on a regular basis shall not be included in cdots portion of the cost .
num .
at the completion of the vecp design work the contractor shall furnish cdot any additional documentation such as surveys geotechnical reports documentation or calculations and shop drawings required to complete the work .
at the completion of the project the contractor shall furnish cdot with pestamped record sets and asconstructed plans showing the vecp work .
e contractor appeal process .
appeals can be made only on vecps category a .
the prime contractor submitting the vecp may file a onetime appeal to the region transportation director rtd on the denial of any vecp category a .
the contractor must have a valid reason for the appeal and the decision of the region transportation director will be final .
num num section num control of work authority of the engineer .
the engineer will decide all questions regarding the quality and acceptability of materials furnished work performed and the rate of progress of the work all interpretation of the plans and specifications and the acceptable fulfillment of the contract .
the engineer will in writing suspend the work wholly or in part num for failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workmen or the general public .
num for failure to carry out contract provisions .
num for failure to carry out orders .
num for periods of unsuitable weather .
num for conditions unsuitable for the prosecution of the work .
num for any other condition or reason determined to be in the public interest .
plans shop drawings working drawings other submittals and construction drawings .
a plans .
the contract plans will show lines grades typical cross sections of the roadway location and design of all structures and summary of items appearing on the proposal .
only general features will be shown for steel and prestressed concrete bridges .
b shop drawings working drawings and other submittals general .
all work shall be performed in accordance with the plans reviewed shop drawings working drawings or other submittals .
specific requirements for the required shop drawings working drawings and other submittals for this project are contained in the specifications .
the contractor shall be responsible for the accuracy of all dimensions and quantities shown on the shop drawings working drawings and other submittals .
the contractor shall correlate all information in the contract in the submittals and in all revisions at the project site to insure that there are no conflicts and that the work can be constructed as shown .
the contractor shall be responsible for all information that pertains to the fabrication processes and methods of construction .
shop drawings working drawings and other submittals shall be delivered to the engineer .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing at the time of submittal of shop drawings working drawings and other submittals of any information submitted that deviates from the requirements of the plans and specifications .
in addition specific notation of the deviations or changes from the plans and specifications shall be placed on the shop drawing working drawing or other submittal .
num num the first sheet or page of each set of shop drawings working drawings and other submittals shall be stamped approved for construction and signed by the contractor .
submittals shall be made in complete packages which will allow the engineer to properly review them for general compliance with the contract and to effectively evaluate the proposed methods of construction .
the allowed time for review shall not begin until such submittals are complete .
the format of the shop drawings working drawings and other submittals shall be as follows num .
all manually drafted shop drawings and working drawings shall be num inches long by num inches wide overall .
there shall be a num inch margin on the left side of the sheet and a  inch margin on the other three sides .
a blank space num inches long by num inches wide shall be left available near the lower righthand corner of shop drawings for the engineers review stamp .
computer drafted num inch by num inch drawings may be submitted .
num .
there shall be a title block in the lower righthand corner of each sheet .
the title block shall show the project number structure number the location of the structure the contents of the sheet designerengineer sheet number and revision number .
num .
design notes calculations lists reports descriptions catalog cuts and other nondrawing submittals shall be submitted on num inch by num inch sheets .
num .
unless otherwise specified seven sets of shop drawings and other submittals shall be submitted to the engineer .
one additional set of shop drawings shall be submitted for each railroad company .
num .
unless otherwise specified two sets of working drawings shall be submitted to the engineer .
num .
the shop drawings working drawings other submittals and all revisions shall be signed and sealed for the contractor by a professional engineer registered in the state of colorado when required by the specifications .
submittals without the required signature and seal will not be accepted and will be returned to the contractor without action .
table num which summarizes the minimum required submittals is included at the end of subsection num .
table num lists submittals in one location for information .
the table clarifies the type of submittal and whether the contractors engineer must sign and seal the submittal .
table num may not be all inclusive .
the contractor shall provide all submittals required by the contract including those not listed in the table .
c shop drawings .
the contractor shall provide shop drawings to adequately control the work .
the contractor shall submit shop drawings to the engineer for formal review .
num num the engineer will review the shop drawings to evaluate that general conformance with the design concept and that general compliance with the information given in the plans and specifications has been achieved .
the review does not extend to accuracy of dimensions means methods techniques sequences schemes procedures of construction or to safety precautions .
the review by the engineer is not a complete check .
review of the shop drawings does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the correctness of the shop drawings .
all work done prior to the engineers review of shop drawings shall be at the contractors sole risk .
the engineer may request additional details and require the contractor to make changes in the shop drawings which are necessary to conform to the provisions and intent of the plans and specifications without additional cost to the department .
after review the engineer will return two sets of shop drawings for use by the contractor and the fabricator or supplier .
returned shop drawings will be stamped with the engineers review stamp to indicate one of the following reviewed no exception taken shop drawings have been reviewed and do not require resubmittal reviewed revise as noted shop drawings have been reviewed and the contractor shall incorporate the comments noted in the shop drawings into the work .
the shop drawings do not require resubmittal .
resubmit revise as noted shop drawings require correction or redrawing and shall be resubmitted for review .
if shop drawings are returned for correction or redrawing corrections shall be made and the shop drawings shall be resubmitted by the contractor in the same manner as the first submittal .
specific notation shall be made on the shop drawing to indicate the revisions .
the time required for the engineers review of each submittal will not exceed four weeks after a complete submittal of shop drawings is received by the engineer .
it is the intent of these specifications that no more than two submittals of shop drawings shall be required for any one particular item .
if additional submittals are required by actions of the contractor resulting delays shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
if additional submittals are required by the engineers actions or if shop drawing review is delayed by the engineer the contractor may request an extension of time as provided in subsection num .
all revisions made to the shop drawings after the engineers initial review process will require resubmittal .
num num d working drawings .
the contractor shall supplement the plans with working drawings to detail the construction or to provide the engineer with information on the proposed methods of construction .
unless otherwise specified the contractor shall submit two sets of working drawings to the engineer for information only .
these drawings will not be formally reviewed by the engineer .
the contractor shall submit working drawings to the engineer ten days before the start of work .
working drawings will not be returned to the contractor .
e other submittals .
other submittals shall be prepared and submitted by the contractor as defined for working drawings .
unless otherwise specified two copies shall be submitted to the engineer for information only .
the plans or specifications will indicate which submittals require formal review by the engineer .
one record set of all design work performed by the contractors engineer shall be submitted to the project engineer .
f construction drawings .
the contractor shall keep one set of plans reviewed shop drawings working drawings and other submittals available on the project site at all times .
this set shall be defined as the construction drawings .
the contractor shall note on these construction drawings all changes and deviations from the work shown on the plans shop drawings working drawings and other submittals .
the construction drawings shall be kept current as the work progresses and notations shall be made within seven days of the change or deviation .
the first sheet or page of each set of construction drawings shall be stamped as constructed and signed by the contractor .
upon completion of the work and prior to final payment the construction drawings shall be submitted to the engineer .
g furnishing the shop drawings working drawings construction drawings and other submittals will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
h failure of the contractor to comply with the requirements for shop drawings working drawings other submittals and construction drawings may be considered unsatisfactory contract progress .
monthly progress payments may be withheld until the requirements are met .
i except as specifically noted all time required for review of shop drawings working drawings and other submittals shall be included in the work and shall not be the basis for any claim for a time extension or monetary adjustment except as provided for herein .
num num table num summary of contractor submittals section no .
description type contractor p.e .
seal required num mse walls contractor alternative shop drawing yes num mse walls default design shop drawing no num timber structures shop drawing no num steel structures shop drawing no num bearing devices type ii shop drawing no num bearing devices type iii shop drawing yes num pedestrian and bikeway railing working drawing no num expansion devices num working drawing no num expansion devices num num num shop drawing yes num num precast panel deck forms working drawing no num permanent steel bridge deck forms working drawing yes num falsework working drawing yes num reinforcing steel working drawing no num bridge railing working drawing no num sound barriers alternative shop drawing yes num sound barriers default design working drawing no num light standards low mast working drawing yes num light standards high mast working drawing yes num overhead sign structures shop drawing yes num variable message signs cabinet and tilting bracket working drawing yes num traffic signal pole mast arm shop drawing no num traffic signal pedestal pole working drawing yes num traffic signal equipment working drawing no num prestressed concrete pretensioned shop drawing yes num prestressed concrete posttensioned shop drawing yes num steel diaphragms between prestressed girders working drawing no num prefabricated pedestrian bridges shop drawing yes a pe seal is required where the contractor has provided the design for the item or performed engineering to modify the details shown on the plans .
the pe seal is not required where complete details are provided on the plans .
num num conformity to the contract .
all work performed and all materials furnished shall conform to the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown in the contract .
all hot mix asphalt hma materials or work will be evaluated for conformity to the contract in accordance with subsection num except hma that is used for patching and temporary pavement .
for those items of work where working tolerances are not specified the contractor shall perform the work in a manner consistent with reasonable and customary manufacturing and construction practices .
when the engineer finds that the materials furnished the work performed or the finished product does not conform with the contract but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced the engineer will determine the extent the work will be accepted and remain in place .
if accepted the engineer will num document the basis for acceptance by contract modification order which will provide for an appropriate reduction in the contract price for such work or materials not otherwise provided for in this subsection or num notify the contractor in writing that the contract unit price will be reduced in accordance with this subsection when p is num or less or num in lieu of a price reduction permit correction or replacement of the finished product provided the correction or replacement does not adversely affect the work .
when the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product are not in conformity with the contract and has resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the work or materials shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected by and at the expense of the contractor .
if asphalt cement testing demonstrates that asphalt cement was acid modified or alkaline modified the supplier will be automatically decertified .
in addition all material placed containing the acid modified or alkaline modified asphalt cement shall be removed and replaced with specification material at no cost to the department .
materials will be sampled and tested by the department in accordance with the sampling and testing schedules and procedures contained in the departments field materials manual .
the approximate maximum quantity represented by each sample will be as set forth in the schedules .
an additional number of samples in relation to the quantity of material represented may be selected and tested at the engineers discretion .
the quantity represented by five consecutive random samples will constitute a lot whenever production schedules and material continuity permit .
the engineer may establish a lot consisting of the quantity represented by any number of consecutive random samples from one to seven inclusive when it is necessary to represent short production runs significant material changes or other unusual characteristics of the work .
tests that are determined to have sampling or testing errors will not be used .
num num materials or work will be evaluated for price reduction only when deviations from specifications occur on any of the several individual tests for the lot .
the several individual test values will be averaged and the percent of price reduction for the lot will be determined by applicable formula .
the formula in num and num below will be used only when the lot is represented by three to seven tests inclusive .
num the formula p xn ar tuf will be used if a maximum limit only is specified or when the average of the several test values is above the mid point of the specification band or above the jobmix formula value .
num the formula p tl ar xnf will be used if a minimum limit only is specified or when the average of the several test values is below the mid point of the specification band or below the jobmix formula value .
num when the lot is represented by fewer than three tests the materials will be evaluated for price reduction by the following procedure lots represented by two tests will be divided into two separate lots represented by one test each as determined by the engineer .
each lot which deviates from the specifications will be price reduced by one of the following formulas .
when a maximum limit only is specified or the test value is above the maximum specified limit the formula p numto tuf will be used .
when a minimum limit only is specified or the test value is below the minimum specified limit the formula p numtl tof will be used .
when a lot is represented by one test only the materials will be evaluated for price reduction as described in this paragraph .
where p is the percent of reduction in contract price xn is the average of the several test values from samples taken from the lot with n indicating the number of values a is a variable factor to be used in n changes according to the following when n is num a num n is num a num n is num a num n is num a num and n is num a num .
r is the difference between the highest and lowest values in the group of several test results from the lot tu is the upper or maximum tolerance limit permitted by the specifications tl is the lower or minimum tolerance limit permitted by the specifications and to is the test value of the test which deviates from the specifications f is price reduction factor to be applied for each element as shown in the following table num num table of price reduction factors element factor f num percent size sieve num num mm  sieve and larger num num m no .
num sieve to num mm  sieve inclusive except num percent size sieve num num m no .
num sieve num numm no .
num sieve cover coat material num liquid limit num plasticity index num asphalt penetration num asphalt residue num portland cement concrete pavement fine aggregate sand equivalent num hydrated lime gradation num toughness inchpounds minimum num tenacity inchpounds minimum num elastic recovery num c percent minimum num ductility num c numcmmin cm minimum of rtfo residue num if p is less than num or a negative quantity the material will be accepted as being in conformity .
in cases where one or more elements show a positive p value such positive values will be added and the resulting sum will be used to determine whether the material is in conformity .
if the total p value is between num and num the engineer may require correction or may accept the material at a reduced price .
if p is greater than num the engineer may num require complete removal and replacement with specification material at no additional cost to the department num require corrective action to bring the material into conformity at no additional cost to the department or num where the finished product is found to be capable of performing the intended purpose and the value of the finished product is not affected permit the contractor to leave the material in place with an appropriate price reduction to be based on engineering evaluation but not to be less than that which would have occurred had a reduction been made where p num .
if the p for aggregate gradation for items num num or the gradation of hydrated lime for item num is num or greater the reduction will apply to the contract price multiplied by the multipliers m listed in the following table num num multiplier for price reductions for miscellaneous items item numbername element multiplier m num structural backfill gradation num numaggregate base course gradation num numhot mix asphalt hydrated lime gradation num the p value for hydrated lime shall be applied to the price of the hma item when asphalt cement is not paid for separately .
lime gradation p values will not be combined with pay factors for other elements .
multiplier for hma price reductions where asphalt cement is not paid for separately item numbername element multiplier m numstone matrix asphalt gradation asphalt cement content or compaction num numhot mix asphalt hydrated lime gradation num the p value for hydrated lime shall be applied to the price of the hma item .
lime gradation p values will not be combined with pay factors for other elements .
the following equation shows how the multiplier is used to determine the price reduction .
price reduction pnum multiplier price per unit quantity .
if no multiplier is listed no adjustment to the computed p is required .
this is equivalent to a multiplier of one .
price reduction for those elements which are not included in the table of price reduction factors will be determined by the engineer .
the contractor will not have the option of accepting a price reduction in lieu of producing specification material .
continued production of nonspecification material will not be permitted .
material which is obviously defective may be isolated and rejected without regard to sampling sequence or location within a lot .
a retroreflectivity of modified epoxy pavement pavement marking .
retroreflectivity of modified epoxy pavement pavement marking shall be tested as follows num .
the contractor shall take retroreflectivity readings on all modified epoxy pavement marking lines for each mile of roadway striping on the project .
num num a test section is defined as each continuous line type lane lines centerlines edge lines channelizing lines and others no greater than one mile in length which has been completed in a single day .
the contractor shall use a contractorfurnished retroreflectometer conforming to astm e num or aashto tpnum .
the retroreflectormeter shall be calibrated tested and operated in accordance with manufacturer recommendations .
the contractor shall take num retroreflectivity readings within the test section for each stripe .
these num readings shall be taken approximately num feet apart and shall be averaged to determine the retroreflectivity of that test section of striping .
in cases where striping is less than num feet long num readings shall be taken in num equal intervals .
num .
the calibration for the retroreflectometer shall be verified every day prior to the readings being taken .
the retroreflectivity readings shall be taken in the presence of the engineer no sooner than num days and no later than num days after the marking is tack free .
traffic control required for retroreflectivity readings shall be included in the cost of the work .
initial minimum retroreflectivity reading mcdmnumlux in a one mile line section of pavement marking paint shall be num for white and num for yellow .
the pay factor for modified epoxy pavement marking which is allowed to remain in place at a reduced price shall be according to the following table and shall be applied to the unit bid price for item num modified epoxy pavement marking color retroreflectivity reading r in a nummile section mcdmnumlux pay factor percent for the entire nummile section white r num num num r num num num r num num num r num num num r num num r num remove and replace yellow r num num num r num num num r num num num r num num num r num num r num remove and replace num num num .
prior to taking retroreflectivity readings the contractor shall remove at the retroreflectivity reading locations any excess beads placed during marking application .
b violation of working time limitation .
if there is a violation of the working time limitations for traffic control as set forth in the special provisions a written notice to stop work will be imposed on the contractor at the start of the next working day .
work shall not resume until the contractor assures the engineer in writing that there will not be a reoccurrence of the working time violation .
if more violations take place the engineer will notify the contractor in writing that there will be a price reduction charge for each incident in accordance with this specification .
this incident price reduction charge will be deducted from any money due the contractor .
this price reduction will not be considered a penalty but will be a price reduction for failure to perform traffic control in compliance with the contract .
an incident is any violation up to num minutes in duration .
each num minutes or increment thereof will be considered as an incident .
a price reduction will be assessed for each successive or cumulative num minute period in violation of the working time limitations as determined by the engineer .
the price reduction for each incident will increase at a progressive rate starting with num for the second incident and increasing to num for the fifth and subsequent incidents in accordance with the following schedule .
a num minute grace period will be allowed at the beginning of the second incident on the project before the price reduction is applied .
this num minute grace period applies only to the second incident .
the number of incident charges will be accumulative throughout the duration of the contract. . price reduction schedule incident incident rate total price reduction numst notice to stop work numnd num num numrd num num numth num num numth num num numth num num etc .
num num etc .
etc .
num num conformity to the contract of superpave performance graded binders .
asphalt binders will be price reduced according to the following if the requirements of subsection num are not met table of performance graded binder limits property specification compliance limit for price reduction of num rejection limit price reduction num gsin delta of rtfo residue num min num min num slope mvalue of the creep curve at low grade temperature num c. num min num min num stiffness of the pav residue at low grade temperature num c mpa num max num max num the price reduction will be num percent at the rejection limit .
between the compliance limit and the rejection limit the price reduction will be calculated as follows pr num cl test value cl rl where pr price reduction cl compliance limit rl rejection limit a the price reductions will be cumulative if more than one pg binder property specified in the table of performance graded binder limits is out of specification resulting in p total .
when binder is included in the contract unit price for hma the price reduction will be calculated as follows amount of reduction p total num invoice price for pg binder when the binder is paid for separately the total price reduction will be calculated as follows amount of reduction ptotal num contract unit price for pg binder num num b price reductions based on the f factors in the table of price reduction factors described in subsection num will be in addition to the pg binder price reductions .
other binder requirements listed in the table of performance graded binder limits but not price reduced in subsections num or num may be tested but will not be considered for price reduction calculations .
however the contractor will not be allowed to continue to produce mix with out of specification pg binder .
if two consecutive samples fail to meet all requirements listed in the table of performance graded binder limits the contractor shall take corrective action before being allowed to continue production of hot mix asphalt .
if proper corrective measures can not be readily determined the engineer will suspend the use of such material until the engineer can determine from laboratory tests that the contractor can provide material that is in compliance with the table of performance graded binder limits .
c the contractor will not have the option of accepting a price reduction in lieu of producing specification material .
continued production of non specification material will not be permitted .
material which is obviously defective may be isolated and rejected without regard to sampling sequence or location within a lot .
conformity to the contract of hot mix asphalt .
conformity to the contract of all hot mix asphalt item num except hot mix asphalt patching and temporary pavement will be determined by tests and evaluations of elements that include asphalt content gradation inplace density and joint density in accordance with the followingall work performed and all materials furnished shall conform to the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown in the contract .
when the engineer finds the materials or work furnished work performed or the finished product are not in conformity with the contract and has resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the work or material shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected at the expense of the contractor .
materials will be sampled randomly and tested by the department in accordance with subsection num and with the applicable procedures contained in the departments field materials manual .
the approximate maximum quantity represented by each sample will be as set forth in subsection num .
additional samples may be selected and tested as set forth in subsection num at the engineers discretion .
a process will consist of either a single test value or a series of values resulting from related tests of an element of the contractors work and materials .
an element is a material or workmanship property that can be tested and evaluated for quality level by the department approved sampling testing and analytical procedures .
all materials produced will be assigned to a process .
a change in process is defined as a change that affects the element involved .
for any element with the exception of the joint density element a process normally will include all produced materials associated with that element prior to a change in the job mix num num formula form num .
for joint density a new process will be established for each new layer of pavement or for changes in joint construction .
density measurements taken within each compaction test section will be a separate process .
the engineer may separate a process in order to accommodate small quantities or unusual variations .
evaluation of materials for pay factors pf will be done using only the departments acceptance test results .
each process will have a pf computed in accordance with the requirements of this section .
test results determined to have sampling or testing errors will not be used .
except for density measurements taken within a compaction test section any test result for an element greater than the distance num times v see table num outside the tolerance limits will be designated as a separate process and the pay factor will be calculated in accordance with subsection numa .
a pay factor less than zero shall be zero .
the calculated pf will be used to determine the incentive or disincentive payment idp for the process .
in the case of inplace density or joint density the contractor will be allowed to core the exact location or immediately adjacent location for joint density of a test result more than num times v outside the tolerance limit .
the core must be taken and furnished to the engineer within eight hours after notification by the engineer of the test result .
the result of this core will be used in lieu of the previous test result .
cores not taken within eight hours after notification by the engineer will not be used in lieu of the test result .
all costs associated with coring shall be at the contractors expense .
a representing small quantities .
when it is necessary to represent a process by only one or two test results pf will be the average of pfs resulting from the following if the test result is within the tolerance limits then pf num if the test result is above the maximum specified limit then pf num numto tuv if the test result is below the minimum specified limit then pf num numtl tov where pf pay factor .
v v factor from table num .
to the individual test result .
tu upper specification limit .
tl lower specification limit .
the calculated pf will be used to determine the idp for the process .
b determining quality level .
each process with three or more test results will be evaluated for a quality level ql in accordance with colorado procedure num .
num num c gradation element .
each specified sieve with the exception of num percent passing sieves will be evaluated for ql separately .
the lowest calculated ql for a sieve will be designated as the ql for gradation element for the process .
d joint density element .
joint density will be tested according to subsection num. e process pay factor .
using the calculated ql for the process compute the pf as follows the final number of random samples pn in each process will determine the final pay factor .
as test values are accumulated for each process pn will change accordingly .
when the process has been completed the number of random samples it contains will determine the computation of pf based on table num and formula num below .
when pn is from num to num or greater than num pf will be computed using the formulas designated in table num .
where pn is equal to or greater than num and less than num pf will be computed by formula num num num num num num num num num num num num num pn pn pn pn pf pf pf pf pf pf pf x formula num where when referring to table num pfnum pf determined at the next lowest pn formula using process ql pfnum pf determined using the pn formula shown for the process ql pfnum pf determined at the next highest pn formula using process ql pnnum the lowest pn in the spread of values listed for the process pn formula pnnum the lowest pn in the spread of values listed for the next highest pn formula pnx the actual number of test values in the process when evaluating the item of furnish hot mix asphalt the pf for the element of inplace density shall be num .
regardless of ql the maximum pf in relation to pn is limited in accordance with table num .
as test results become available they will be used to calculate ql and pf numbers for each process .
the process idps will then be calculated and accumulated for each element and for the item .
the test results and the accumulated calculations will be made available to the contractor upon request .
numbers from the calculations will be carried to significant figures and rounded according to aashto standard recommended practice rnum rounding method .
f evaluation of work .
when the pf of a process is num or greater the finished quantity of work represented by the process will be accepted at the appropriate pay factor .
if the pf is less than num the engineer may num num num require complete removal and replacement with specification material at the contractors expense or num where the finished product is found to be capable of performing the intended purpose and the value of the finished product is not affected permit the contractor to leave the material in place .
if the material is permitted to remain in place the pf for the process will not be greater than num .
when condition red as described in subsection numg exists for any element resolution and correction will be in accordance with section num .
material which the engineer determines is defective may be isolated and rejected without regard to sampling sequence or location within a process .
if removal and replacement is required because the joint density pf for a process is below num the contractor shall remove and replace the full lane width adjacent to and including at least num inches beyond the visible joint line for the entire length of joint representing the process .
if the lane removed is adjacent to another joint that joint shall also be removed to a point num inches beyond the visible joint line .
when a single joint density core is more than numv outside the tolerance limits the removal and replacement limits shall be identified by coring the failing joint at num foot intervals until two successive cores are found to be numv or less below the minimum tolerance limit .
if removal and replacement is required the contractor shall submit documentation identifying the process to be used to correct the area in question in writing .
the process will be approved by the engineer before commencing the corrective work .
table num w and v factors for various elements hot mix asphalt element v factor w factor num mm no .
num mesh and larger sieves num na num m no .
num mesh sieve num na num m no .
num mesh sieve num na gradation na num asphalt content num num inplace density num num joint density num num num num table num formulas for calculating pf based on pn pn when pn as shown at left is num to num or greater than num use designated formula below to calculate pay factor pf when pn is num to num use formula num above maximum pf num num num qlnum num qlnum num num num num qlnum num qlnum num num num num qlnum num qlnum num num num num qlnum num qlnum num num num num qlnum num qlnum num num num num qlnum num qlnum num num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num qlnum num num to num num num qlnum num num num num qlnum num g process idp computation .
idp pf numqrupwnum where idp incentive or disincentive payment pf pay factor qr quantity in tons of hma represented by the process up unit bid price of asphalt mix w element factor from table num when ac is paid for separately up shall be up tonhmauphma tonacupac tonhma num num where tonhma tons of asphalt mix uphma unit bid price of asphalt mix tonac tons of asphalt cement upac unit bid price of asphalt cement for the joint density element up uphma where uphma is as defined above when ac is paid for separately up shall be upbtonhma buphmabtonac bupac btonhma where btonhma bid tons of asphalt mix buphma unit bid price of asphalt mix btonac bid tons of asphalt cement bupac unit bid price of asphalt cement h element idp .
the idp for an element shall be computed by accumulating the process idps for that element .
i idp for a mix design .
the idp for a mix design shall be computed by accumulating the process idps for the asphalt content inplace density and gradation elements for that mix design .
the accumulated quantities of materials for each element must be the same at the end of idp calculations for a mix design .
j project idp .
the idp for the project shall be computed by accumulating the mix design idps and the joint density idps .
the accumulated quantities of materials for each element must be the same at the end of idp calculations for the project .
conformity to the contract of portland cement concrete pavement .
conformity to the contract of all portland cement concrete pavement item num will be determined in accordance with the following when the engineer finds that the materials furnished the work performed or the finished product does not conform to the contract or the pay factor pf for an elements process is less than num but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced the engineer will determine the extent of the work that will be accepted and remain in place .
the engineer will use a contract modification order to document the justification for allowing the work to remain in place and the price adjustment that will be applied .
when the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product is not in conformity with the contract or the pf for an elements process num num is less than num and has resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the work or material shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected by and at the expense of the contractor .
when the pf for any process is num or greater the finished quantity of work represented by the process will be accepted at the calculated pay factor .
materials will be sampled and tested by the contractor and the department in accordance with subsection num and with procedures contained in the departments field materials manual .
the approximate quantity represented by each sample will be as set forth in subsection num tables num and num .
additional samples may be selected and tested at the engineers discretion .
a incentive and disincentive payments idp will be made based on a statistical analysis that yields pay factors pf and quality levels ql .
the pf and ql will be made based on test results for the elements of compressive strength and pavement thickness compressive strength criteria or the elements of flexural strength and pavement thickness flexural strength criteria .
the department will indicate in the plans whether compressive strength or flexural strength criteria will be used .
if the acceptance criteria is not indicated flexural strength criteria shall be used .
incentive or disincentive payment will not be made for thickness of concrete pavement furnished by the contractor and placed by others .
when compressive strength criteria is indicated then the ql will be calculated for the elements of compressive strength and pavement thickness on a process basis .
when flexural strength criteria is indicated then the ql will be calculated for the elements of flexural strength and pavement thickness on a process basis .
a separate process will be established for an element when a change in the process affects that element .
a process will consist of the test results from a series of random samples .
test results determined to have sampling or testing errors will not be used .
all materials produced will be assigned to a process .
a change in process is defined as a change that affects the element involved .
changes in mix design material source design pavement thickness or the method being utilized to place the pavement are considered changes in process .
the following is provided to clarify changes in processes for each element num .
construction of mainline pavement including the shoulders if placed with the mainline is a single process providing there are no changes in process as described above .
num .
construction of ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes shoulders placed separately and areas requiring hand work are considered separate processes .
num .
a change in the mix design is a process change for the compressive strength element or the flexural strength element but is not a process change for the pavement thickness element .
num num b when it is necessary to represent material by one or two tests each individual test shall have a pf computed in accordance with the following if the value of the test is at or above the lower tolerance limit then pf num .
if the value of the test is below the lower tolerance limit then pf num numtl tnumv where pf pay factor .
v v factor from tables num or num .
tnum the individual test value .
tl lower tolerance limit .
c the following procedures will be used to compute incentive and disincentive payments idp quality levels ql and pay factors pf for processes represented by three or more tests num .
quality level ql will be calculated according to cpnum .
num .
compute the pf for the process .
when the process has been completed the number of tests pn it includes shall determine the formula to be used to compute the final pay factor in accordance with the following a .
for compressive strength and pavement thickness when num pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num when num pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num when num pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num when pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num b .
for flexural strength when num pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num num num when num pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num when num pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num when pn num if ql num then pf num ql num if ql num then pf num ql num num .
compute the idp for the process idp pfnumqrup where qr quantity represented by the process .
up unit price bid for the item .
the total idp for an element shall be computed by accumulating the individual idp for each process of that element .
d as acceptance test results become available they will be used to calculate accumulated ql and incentive and disincentive payments idp for each element and for the item .
the contractors test results and the accumulated calculations shall be made available to the engineer upon request .
the engineers test results and the calculations will be made available to the contractor as early as reasonably practical .
numbers from the calculations shall be carried to significant figures and rounded according to aashto standard recommended practice rnum rounding method .
idp will be made to the contractor in accordance with subsection numa .
during production interim idp will be computed for information only .
the pn will change as production continues and test results accumulate .
the pn at the time an idp is computed shall determine the formula to be used .
e the contractor shall not have the option of accepting a price reduction or disincentive in lieu of producing specification material .
continued production of nonspecification material will not be permitted .
material which is obviously defective may be isolated and rejected without regard to sampling sequence or location within a process .
f when compressive strength is indicated the contractor may take cores at his own expense and in accordance with colorado procedure num to provide an alternative determination of strength to replace acceptance test results with a compressive strength less than num psi .
the higher value of the num day compressive strength of acceptance cylinders or the corresponding cores compressive strength will be used for idp .
num num when flexural strength is indicated the contractor may take cores at his own expense and in accordance with colorado procedure num to provide an alternative determination of strength to replace pc test results with a flexural strength less than num psi .
the cores shall be obtained prior to num days after placement .
the higher value of the num day flexural strength of pc beams or the corresponding cores flexural strength will be used for idp .
table num v factors and incentive payments compressive strength criteria element v factor maximum incentive payment lower tolerance limit tl plan value compressive strength num psi num num psi num psi pavement thickness num inch num plan thickness num inch plan thickness table num v factors and incentive payments flexural strength criteria element v factor maximum incentive payment lower tolerance limit tl plan value flexural strength num psi num num psi num psi pavement thickness num inch num plan thickness num plan thickness g sand equivalence .
if compressive strength criteria is indicated then the sand equivalence se as determined by cp num will be considered acceptable when the running average of three consecutive tests is greater than num percent and no individual test result is less than num percent .
when the running average of three consecutive se tests falls below num percent or an individual se test result falls below num percent paving operations shall be suspended .
the contractor shall submit a written plan to correct the low se test results to the engineer for approval .
the contractor shall not continue paving operations until the engineer approves the plan in writing and three se test results from random samples in the stockpile are above num percent .
num num h pavement surface texture .
the contractor shall perform process control pc testing for the pavement surface texture depth in accordance with cp num method b .
all pc results for surface texture depth measurements shall be included in the contractors qc notebook .
the start of pc testing for texturing depth shall be completed within num hours after the first num linear feet of textured pavement is placed for each lane .
paving shall not proceed until results are accepted by the engineer .
surface texture will be considered acceptable when the average texture depth atd of the panel is greater than num inch .
when the atd is less than num inches the contractor shall determine the area represented by this test .
the area shall be determined by taking additional tests at num foot intervals parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until two consecutive tests are found to be within the specified limits .
any surface with unacceptable texturing exceeding num linear feet in any lane or shoulder greater than num feet wide shall be diamond ground full width of the lane .
upon the second unacceptable test result the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of the action taken to provide an acceptable surface texture .
the department will perform surface texture acceptance testing in accordance with cp num method b .
the department will determine the panel locations where acceptance test measurements are to be taken .
one stratified random acceptance test per num linear feet or fraction thereof in each lane and shoulder wider than num feet shall be taken with a minimum of one test per day when the contractor is paving .
when the department locates areas of surface texture that do not meet the minimum atd the contractor will be notified and the contractor shall identify the limits of the deficient texture depth .
after the engineer approves the limits the contractor shall correct the deficient surface texture by diamond grinding full lane width to provide an atd greater than num inch at no additional cost to the project .
the contractor shall correct surface texture deficiencies prior to pavement smoothness testing and pavement thickness determinations .
conformity to roadway smoothness criteria of hma .
roadway smoothness testing and corrective work shall be performed as described below .
the pavement smoothness category shall be mri category ii unless shown otherwise on the plans .
at least num weeks prior to the prepaving conference the contractor may request a change to the pavement smoothness category based on the cdots design bulletin guidelines for assigning pavement smoothness categories which can be found at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportbulletins_manualsdesign bulletins .
num num the contractor shall not assume a change to the pavement smoothness category will be granted and shall be prepared to build the pavement according to the assigned smoothness category .
a smoothness process control testing .
num .
the contractor shall perform smoothness process control spc testing .
the test results shall be submitted to the engineer within num hours of completion .
spc test results shall show the mean roughness index mri for each num mile .
all traffic control costs associated with spc testing will be paid for in accordance with section num .
spc testing shall be performed on the first num tons for the final layer .
spc testing shall be performed using the contractors inertial profiler pursuant to the methods described in subsection numb and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractors profiler shall be certified according to cp num .
a list of certified profilers is located at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportmaterialsand geotechnicalpavesmoothtestingnumcertifiedprofilersview paving shall be suspended if spc testing indicates that corrective work is required in accordance with subsection numc .
if the spc data becomes available after paving has started for the day suspension will begin at the end of that paving day .
paving shall remain suspended until the problem is identified and corrected .
each time paving is suspended corrective actions shall be proposed in writing by the contractor .
paving will not be allowed to resume until the proposed corrective actions have been accepted by the engineer in writing .
when paving resumes the contractor shall profile the first num tons of hma .
the conditions above for suspension of work will apply .
num .
the finished transverse and longitudinal surface elevation of the pavement shall be measured using a num foot straightedge .
areas to be measured will be directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish an approved num foot straightedge depth gauge and operator to aid the engineer in testing the pavement surface .
areas showing high spots of more than num inch in num feet shall be marked and diamond ground until the high spot does not exceed num inch in num feet .
b initial smoothness acceptance testing .
the contractor shall perform smoothness acceptance testing sa which will be used for acceptance and calculation of incentive adjustments .
num num all traffic control costs associated with sa testing will be paid for in accordance with section num .
pavement surfaces shall be tested and accepted for longitudinal smoothness as described herein .
num .
testing procedure general .
the longitudinal surface smoothness of the final pavement surface shall be tested by the contractor in accordance with cp num using the contractors highspeed profiler hsp .
the contractors profiler shall be certified according to cp num .
a list of certified profilers is located at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportmaterialsand geotechnicalpavesmoothtestingnumcertifiedprofilersview the hsp instrumentation shall be verified in accordance with cp num prior to measurements .
the contractor shall lay out a distance calibration site .
the distance calibration site shall be located within ten miles of the project limits .
the distance calibration site shall be num feet long and shall be on a relatively flat straight section of pavement as approved by the engineer .
the site shall have a speed limit equal to the projects highest speed limit that allows for the hsp to operate uninterrupted .
the limits of the site shall be clearly marked and the distance shall be measured to an accuracy of num inches .
the contractor shall provide in writing the site location to the engineer .
the cost of the distance calibration site will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the entire length of each through lane climbing lane and passing lane including bridge approaches bridge decks and intersections from the beginning to the end of the project shall be profiled in their planned final configuration .
shoulders less than num feet in width and medians will not be profiled and will not be subject to incentive adjustments .
shoulders with a width of num feet or greater ramps tapers turn slots acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes will be profiled but will not be subject to incentivedisincentive adjustments .
shoulders with a width of num feet or more ramps tapers turn slots acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes will be evaluated for mri and shall require corrective work if a num mile or fraction thereof exceeds an mri greater than num inmile .
the profile of the entire length of a lane shall be taken at one time .
however the engineer may break a project into sections to accommodate project phasing .
a sufficient distance shall be deleted from the profile to allow the profiler to obtain the testing speed plus a num foot distance to stop and start when required .
incentive adjustments will not be made for this area .
the final surface of these areas shall be tested in accordance with subsection numa num .
num num shoulders less than num feet in width and medians constructed as part of this project shall be measured in accordance with subsection numa num .
the profile shall include transverse joints when pavement is placed by the project on both sides of the joint .
when pavement is placed on only one side of the joint the profile shall start and stop at project paving limits .
the profile of the section of pavement num feet outside the paving limits to num feet inside paving limits will be evaluated in accordance with subsection numa num .
the profile of the area num feet each side of every railroad crossing cattle guard bus pad manhole gutter pan and intersection where there is a planned breakpoint in the profile grade line in the direction of traffic shall be deleted from the profile before the mri is determined .
incentive adjustments will not be made for these areas .
areas deleted from the profile shall be tested in accordance with subsection numa num .
when both new pavement and a new bridge or new bridge pavement are being constructed in a project the profile of the area num feet each side of the bridge deck shall be deleted from the profile before the mri is determined .
incentive adjustments will not be made for this area .
areas deleted from the profile shall be tested in accordance with subsection numa num .
corrective work required in these areas will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
for all other projects the profile of the area num feet each side of the bridge deck shall be deleted from the profile before the mri is determined .
incentive adjustments will not be made for this area .
if the engineer determines that corrective work is required in this area payment will be made in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing at least five working days in advance of his intention to perform sa testing .
the contractor shall profile the project within num days after the completion of paving operations .
the engineer will witness the sa profiling .
within num hours after each profile is collected the contractor shall submit the data electronically to the department at www.dot_profilesstate.co.us .
the contractor shall not perform any corrective work that will affect the pavement smoothness for ten working days after completion of the sa testing or as approved by the engineer .
this time is to allow for the department to analyze the data and per num .
smoothness testing procedures .
the contractor shall submit a method for handling traffic mht to the engineer for approval at least five days in advance of sa testing .
the mht shall detail the methods for traffic control that will allow for continuous nonstop profiling of each lane to be profiled at a minimum speed of num mph and for the placement of triggers .
the contractor shall provide the traffic control in accordance num num with the approved mht .
sa testing shall not be performed without an approved mht the contractor shall mark the profiling limits and excluded areas .
the engineer will verify that the contractors marks are located properly .
the contractor shall use traffic cones with reflective tape or reflective tape on the pavement at the beginning and end of each lane for triggering the start and stop locations on the profiler and at any other location where portions of the profile are being excluded .
these locations shall be marked with temporary paint so that the departments profiler uses the same locations for smoothness verification testing .
the ambient temperature shall be at least num f for the profiler to operate .
the contractor shall clear the lanes to be tested of all debris before profiling .
each lane shall be profiled at least once .
profiling shall be at a constant speed num mph of the distance calibration speed with a minimum speed of num mph and a maximum speed of num mph .
shoulders with a width of num feet or more ramps tapers turn slots acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes shall be profiled .
the profile shall be taken in the planned direction of travel .
the left and right wheel paths shall be profiled simultaneously .
the collected profiles shall be electronically submitted to the department and engineer to be analyzed using cp num .
the department will determine a mri for each num mile section or fraction thereof of completed pavement .
the mri consists of the left and right wheel paths profiles passed through the international roughness index iri filter .
the iris for the left and right wheel paths will be averaged to determine mri .
the contractors sa test results will be available within ten working days of the completion of sa testing .
the engineer will give the contractor a report that will include the lane profiled the mri in num mile increments and a summary of areas requiring corrective work .
the engineer may determine that it is necessary for the contractor to reprofile a lane .
areas requiring corrective work will be determined according to subsection numc sections less than num miles in length shall not be subject to corrective work as specified by table num .
sections less than num miles in length shall be evaluated in accordance with subsection numa num .
num .
acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following num num incentive adjustments will be based on the mri for each num mile section or fraction thereof .
incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made in accordance with table num .
incentive payments will not be made until all sections requiring corrective work have been corrected .
table num hma pavement smoothness inchesmile mean roughness index pavement smoothness category maximun incentive payment sq .
yd .
incentive payment sq .
yd .
no incentive corrective work required i mri num mri num and num mri num and num mri num i num i num num mri ii mri num mri num and num mri num and num mri num i num i num num mri iii mri num mri num and num mri num and num mri num i num i num num mri table num corrective work critera inchesmile num to num mile sections mean roughness index pavement smoothness category corrective work required d section length miles i mri num num d ii mri num num d iii mri num num d num num c corrective work .
the department will analyze the sa testing for acceptance and indicate areas requiring corrective work in accordance with subsection numb .
corrective work shall be proposed in writing by the contractor .
corrective work shall not be performed until approved in writing by the engineer .
the contractor shall not perform any corrective work on the final layer until after the engineer returns the results of the initial smoothness acceptance testing and after the departments smoothness verification testing if performed .
the contractor shall perform corrective work in the areas indicated by the sa testing .
corrective work on lower layers shall be at the contractors discretion .
the contractor shall profile the roadway to demonstrate the required corrective work has been completed .
if the contractor elects to perform corrective work prior to the completion of initial sa testing the entire num mile section or fraction thereof will not be eligible for incentive payment .
the engineer will not modify the limits of the num mile sections to group corrective work areas in an effort to reduce the number of sections impacted by this decision .
the criteria for determining if a num mile section requires corrective work is specified in table num .
the criteria for determining if a section less than num miles in length and greater than num miles in length requires corrective work is specified in table num corrective work shall consist of removal and replacement an approved overlay or diamond grinding .
corrective work shall be performed using one of the following methods num .
removal and replacement .
the pavement requiring corrective work shall be removed full width of the lane and the full thickness of the layer in accordance with subsection num .
the removal area shall begin and end with a transverse butt joint which shall be constructed with a transverse saw cut perpendicular to centerline .
replacement material shall be placed in sufficient quantity so the finished surface conforms to grade and smoothness requirements .
sections removed and replaced shall be at least num miles in length .
num .
overlay .
the overlay shall cover the full width of the pavement including shoulders .
the area overlaid shall begin and end with a transverse butt joint which shall be constructed with a transverse saw cut and asphalt removal .
all material shall be approved hot bituminous mixtures that meet all contract requirements .
the overlay shall be placed so that the num num finished surface conforms to grade and smoothness requirements .
the overlay area shall be compacted to the specified density .
the overlay thickness shall be equivalent to that of the final layer in accordance with the contract .
sections overlaid shall be at least num miles in length .
num .
diamond grinding .
grinding shall not reduce planned pavement thickness by more than num inches .
diamond grinding shall be the full width of a wheel path the wheel path is from the stripe to the center of the lane .
the entire ground area of the final pavement surface shall be covered with a tack coat conforming to section num when grinding is complete .
the tack coat shall be an emulsion of cssnumh diluted with water at the rate of num percent water and num percent emulsion .
the emulsion shall be placed at num gallons per square yard .
the grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance .
the grooves shall be evenly spaced .
any ridges on the outside edge next to the shoulder auxiliary ramps or adjacent lanes greater than num inch high shall be feathered out to the satisfaction of the engineer in a separate feather pass operation .
the pavement surface after grinding shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope in the longitudinal direction exceeding  inch in num feet when measured with a num foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
all areas of deviation shall be reground at no additional cost .
the slurry and residue resulting from the grinding operation shall not be allowed to flow across lanes occupied by the traffic and shall be continuously removed during the grinding operation leaving the pavement in a clean condition .
the contractor shall haul the grinding residue to a suitable location at an approved location at no additional cost .
cores shall be taken to verify that minimum pavement thicknesses have been maintained .
a minimum of one core shall be taken every num cumulative feet or fraction thereof per lane of diamond grinding as directed by the engineer .
coring shall be at the contractors expense .
d final smoothness acceptance testing .
after the contractor has completed the required corrective work the contractor shall retest the pavement in accordance with subsection numb .
final sa testing shall only be required on lanes with sections requiring corrective work .
final sa testing shall start and stop at the same locations as the initial sa testing .
if additional corrective work is required the contractor shall perform the corrective work and perform additional final sa testing .
time count will be charged pursuant to contract requirements during the time period required for all final sa testing .
delays associated with additional final sa testing will be considered non excusable and noncompensable .
num num the contractor shall notify the engineer pursuant to numb to schedule the final sa testing .
final acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following incentive payments will be based on the mri for each num mile section or fraction thereof from the contractors initial sa testing .
those sections requiring corrective work indicated by the initial sa testing will be reevaluated however no incentives may be earned in these areas regardless of the final smoothness .
e department smoothness verification testing sv .
the department may elect to perform smoothness verification sv testing using the departments inertial profiler using the methods described in subsection numb .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the departments intention to perform sv testing .
all traffic control costs associated with department sv testing will be paid for by the department in accordance with section num .
the contractors sa test results will be compared to the departments sv test results .
the contractors sa test results will be considered acceptable and will be used for incentive payment if the following criteria are met num the difference in mri for a num mile section is less than num inchesmile for a minimum of num percent of the num mile sections for each lane .
num the difference in average mri for each lane is less than num inchesmile .
num the difference in the length of each lane is less than num percent when the contractors sa test results are not considered acceptable the departments sv test results will be used for incentive payment and the contractors profiler certification will be evaluated pursuant to cp num .
the department will have num days to complete this evaluation .
the contractor will be assessed a charge of num for sv testing when the contractors sa test results are not considered acceptable .
f mri category iv hma recycling treatments thin lifts and urban rehabilitation treatments smoothness criteria .
for mri category iv pavements the following shall be used for acceptance an mri for each num mile section shall be determined on the original pavement surface prior to beginning the work .
an mri for each num mile section shall be determined on the pavement surface after the work is complete .
when a num mile section has a final mri greater than num inmile and the final mri is greater than the mri prior to performing the work that num mile num num section shall be corrected by a method approved in writing by the engineer .
corrective work shall be such that the resulting final mri is equal to or less than the initial mri or num inmile whichever is greater .
all costs associated with corrective work shall be at the contractors expense including but not limited to traffic control additional hot mix asphalt grinding and milling .
incentive adjustments for smoothness will not be made for category iv .
the pavement smoothness for hma recycling treatments and thin lifts that will be overlaid with a final riding surface will not be evaluated by the department for smoothness acceptance .
conformity to roadway smoothness criteria of portland cement concrete pavement .
roadway smoothness testing and corrective work shall be performed as described below .
the pavement smoothness category shall be mri category ii unless shown on the plans .
at least num weeks prior to the prepaving conference the contractor may request a change to the pavement smoothness category based on the cdots design bulletin guidelines for assigning pavement smoothness categories which can be found at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportbulletins_manualsdesign bulletins .
the contractor shall not assume a change to the pavement smoothness category will be granted and shall be prepared to build the pavement according to the assigned smoothness category .
a smoothness process control testing .
num .
the contractor shall perform smoothness process control spc testing .
a profile shall be taken for each days paving within num hours after the concrete has achieved sufficient strength .
the contractor shall not perform the spc testing until after the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi if a light weight profiler is used or num psi if a high speed profiler is used .
the test results shall be submitted to the engineer within num hours of completion .
spc test results shall show the mean roughness index mri for each num mile .
all traffic control costs associated with spc testing will be paid for in accordance with section num .
spc testing shall be performed using the contractors inertial profiler pursuant to the methods described in subsection numb and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractors profiler shall be certified according to cp num .
a list of certified profilers is located at httpswww.codot.govbusinessdesignsupportmaterialsand geotechnicalpavesmoothtestingnumcertifiedprofilersview .
num num paving shall be suspended if spc testing indicates that corrective work is required in accordance with subsection numc .
if the spc data becomes available after paving has started for the day suspension will begin at the end of that paving day .
paving will remain suspended until the problem is identified and corrected .
each time paving is suspended corrective actions shall be proposed in writing by the contractor .
paving will not be allowed to resume until the proposed corrective actions have been accepted by the engineer in writing .
when paving resumes the contractor shall profile the days paving .
the conditions above for suspension of work will apply .
num .
the finished transverse and longitudinal surface elevation of the pavement shall be measured using a num foot straightedge .
areas to be measured will be directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish an approved num foot straightedge depth gauge and operator to aid the engineer in testing the pavement surface .
areas showing high spots of more than num inch in num feet shall be marked and diamond ground until the high spot does not exceed num inch in num feet .
num .
no more than num working days prior to the departments initial acceptance sa testing the contractor shall profile each lane num times following the procedures in subsection num b .
one profile will be collected in the morning num am to num am one profile will be collected midday num pm to num pm and one profile will be collected in the evening num pm to num pm .
the contractor shall submit the data electronically to the department at dot_profilesstate.co.us and to the project engineer .
the contractor will use this data to determine the best time of day for the department to perform sa testing .
b initial smoothness acceptance testing .
the department will perform smoothness acceptance testing sa which will be used for acceptance and calculation of incentive adjustments .
all traffic control costs associated with sa testing will be paid for in accordance with section num .
pavement surfaces will be tested and accepted for longitudinal smoothness as described herein .
num .
testing procedure general .
the longitudinal surface smoothness of the final pavement surface will be tested by the department in accordance with cp num using the departments highspeed profiler hsp .
the contractor shall lay out a distance calibration site .
the distance calibration site shall be located within ten miles of the project limits .
the distance calibration site shall be num feet long and shall be on a relatively flat straight section of pavement as approved by the engineer .
num num the site shall have a speed limit equal to the projects highest speed limit that allows for the hsp to operate uninterrupted .
the limits of the site shall be clearly marked and the distance shall be measured to an accuracy of num inches .
the contractor shall provide in writing the site location to the engineer .
the cost of the distance calibration site will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the entire length of each through lane climbing lane and passing lane including bridge approaches bridge decks and intersections from the beginning to the end of the project will be profiled in their planned final configuration .
shoulders less than num feet in width and medians will not be profiled and will not be subject to incentive adjustments .
shoulders with a width of num feet or greater ramps tapers turn slots acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes will be profiled but will not be subject to incentive adjustments .
shoulders with a width of num feet or more ramps tapers turn slots acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes will be evaluated for mri and shall require corrective work if a num mile or fraction thereof exceeds an mri greater than num inmile .
the profile of the entire length of a lane will be taken at one time .
however the engineer may break a project into sections to accommodate project phasing .
a sufficient distance will be deleted from the profile to allow the profiler to obtain the testing speed plus a num foot distance to stop and start when required .
incentive adjustments will not be made for this area .
the final surface of these areas shall be tested in accordance with subsection numa num .
shoulders less than num feet in width and medians constructed as part of this project will be measured in accordance with subsection numa num .
the profile will include transverse joints when pavement is placed by the project on both sides of the joint .
when pavement is placed on only one side of the joint the profile will start and stop at project paving limits .
the profile of the section of pavement num feet outside the paving limits to num feet inside paving limits will be evaluated in accordance with subsection numa num .
the profile of the area num feet each side of every railroad crossing cattle guard bus pad manhole gutter pan and intersection where there is a planned breakpoint in the profile grade line in the direction of traffic will be deleted from the profile before the mri is determined .
incentive adjustments will not be made for these areas .
areas deleted from the profile shall be tested in accordance with subsection numa num .
when both new pavement and a new bridge or new bridge pavement are being constructed in a project the profile of the area num feet each side of the bridge deck will be deleted from the profile before the mri is num num determined .
incentive adjustments will not be made for this area .
areas deleted from the profile shall be tested in accordance with subsection numa num .
corrective work required in these areas will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
for all other projects the profile of the area num feet each side of the bridge deck will be deleted from the profile before the mri is determined .
incentive adjustments will not be made for this area .
if the engineer determines that corrective work is required in this area payment will be made in accordance with subsection num .
num .
smoothness testing procedures .
the contractor shall submit a method for handling traffic mht to the engineer for approval at least ten days in advance of sa testing .
the mht shall detail the methods for traffic control that will allow for continuous nonstop profiling of each lane to be profiled at a minimum speed of num mph and for the placement of triggers .
the contractor shall provide the traffic control in accordance with the approved mht .
sa testing will not be performed without an approved mht the contractor shall mark the profiling limits and excluded areas .
the engineer will verify that the contractors marks are located properly .
the department will use traffic cones with reflective tape or reflective tape on the pavement at the beginning and end of each lane for triggering the start and stop locations on the profiler and at any other location where portions of the profile are being excluded .
the contractor shall provide sufficient traffic control for the department to safely place the traffic cones or reflective tape .
the ambient temperature shall be at least num f for the profiler to operate .
the contractor shall clear the lanes to be tested of all debris before profiling .
each lane will be profiled at least once .
profiling will be at a constant speed num mph of the distance calibration speed with a minimum speed of num mph and a maximum speed of num mph .
shoulders with a width of num feet or more ramps tapers turn slots acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes will be profiled .
the profile will be taken in the planned direction of travel .
the left and right wheel paths will be profiled simultaneously .
the collected profiles will be analyzed using cp num .
the department will determine a mri for each num mile section or fraction thereof of completed pavement .
the mri consists of the left and right wheel paths profiles passed through the international roughness index iri filter .
the iris for the left and right wheel paths will be averaged to determine mri .
the sa test results will be available within ten working days of the completion of sa testing .
the engineer will give the contractor a report num num that will include the lane profiled the mri in num mile increments and a summary of areas requiring corrective work .
the engineer may determine that it is necessary to reprofile a lane .
areas requiring corrective work will be determined according to subsection numc sections less than num miles in length shall not be subject to corrective work as specified by table num .
sections less than num miles in length shall be evaluated in accordance with subsection numa num .
num .
acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following incentive adjustments will be based on the mri for each num mile section or fraction thereof .
incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made in accordance with table num .
incentive payments will not be made until all sections requiring corrective work have been corrected .
table num pccp smoothness inchesmile mean roughness index pavement smoothness category maximun incentive payment sq .
yd .
incentive payment sq .
yd .
no incentive corrective work required num mile sections i mri num mri num and num mri num and num mri num i num i num num mri ii mri num mri num and num mri num and num mri num i num i num num mri iii mri num mri num and num mri num and num mri num i num i num num mri num num table num corrective work critera inchesmile num to num mile sections mean roughness index pavement smoothness category corrective work required d section length miles i mri num num d ii mri num num d iii mri num num d c corrective work .
the department will analyze the sa testing for acceptance and indicate areas requiring corrective work in accordance with subsection numb .
corrective work shall be proposed in writing by the contractor .
corrective work shall not be performed until approved in writing by the engineer .
the contractor shall perform corrective work in the areas indicated by the sa testing .
the contractor shall profile the roadway to demonstrate the required corrective work has been completed .
if the contractor elects to perform corrective work prior to the completion of initial sa testing the entire num mile section or fraction thereof will not be eligible for incentive payment .
the engineer will not modify the limits of the num mile sections to group corrective work areas in an effort to reduce the number of sections impacted by this decision .
the criteria for determining if a num mile section requires corrective work is specified in table num .
the criteria for determining if a section less than num miles in length and greater than num miles in length requires corrective work is specified in table num .
corrective work shall consist of diamond grinding .
diamond grinding .
grinding shall not reduce planned pavement thickness by more than num inches .
diamond grinding shall be the full width of a wheel path the wheel path is from the stripe to the center of the lane .
when any grinding on concrete pavement occurs where a core for determining pavement thickness has been previously taken another core shall be taken after the grinding has been completed and shall replace the original core in the calculation of pavement thickness incentive and disincentive .
joint sealant that has been damaged by grinding on concrete pavement shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense in accordance with standard plan mnum and num num subsection num .
cores shall be taken to verify that minimum pavement thicknesses have been maintained .
a minimum of one core shall be taken every num cumulative feet or fraction thereof per lane of diamond grinding as directed by the engineer .
coring shall be at the contractors expense .
the grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance .
the grooves shall be evenly spaced .
any ridges on the outside edge next to the shoulder auxiliary ramps or adjacent lanes greater than num inch high shall be feathered out to the satisfaction of the engineer in a separate feather pass operation .
the pavement surface after grinding shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope in the longitudinal direction exceeding  inch in num feet when measured with a num foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
all areas of deviation shall be reground at no additional cost .
diamond ground surface texture will be considered acceptable when the average texture depth atd of the panel is greater than num inch .
the contractor shall perform surface texture testing in accordance with cp num method b .
each area in a lane that required diamond grinding will be tested at least once .
areas in a lane with more than num continuous feet of grinding will be tested at a frequency of num test per num linear feet .
areas with deficient surface texture shall be diamond ground and retested .
the slurry and residue resulting from the grinding operation shall not be allowed to flow across lanes occupied by the traffic and shall be continuously removed during the grinding operation leaving the pavement in a clean condition .
the contractor shall haul the grinding residue to a suitable location at an approved location at no additional cost .
d final smoothness acceptance testing .
after the contractor has completed the required corrective work the department will retest the pavement in accordance with subsection numb .
final sa testing will only be required on lanes with sections requiring corrective work .
final sa testing will start and stop at the same locations as the initial sa testing .
if additional corrective work is required the contractor shall perform the corrective and additional final sa testing will be performed by the department .
time count will be charged pursuant to contract requirements during the time period required for all final sa testing .
delays associated with additional final sa testing will be considered nonexcusable and noncompensable .
the contractor shall notify the engineer pursuant to numb to schedule the final sa testing .
final acceptance and incentive adjustments for pavement smoothness will be made on a square yard basis in accordance with the following incentive payments will be based on the mri for each num mile section or fraction thereof from the departments initial sa testing .
num num those sections requiring corrective work indicated by the initial sa testing will be reevaluated however no incentives may be earned in these areas regardless of the final smoothness .
coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions .
these specifications the supplemental specifications the plans special provisions and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
in case of discrepancy the order of precedence is as follows a special provisions num .
project special provisions num .
standard special provisions b plans num .
detailed plans num .
standard plans calculated dimensions will govern over scaled dimensions .
c supplemental specifications d standard specifications the contractor shall not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the contract .
if the contractor discovers an error or omission the engineer shall immediately be notified .
the engineer will make corrections and interpretations as necessary to fulfill the intent of the contract .
cooperation by contractor .
the contractor will be supplied with a minimum of six sets of contract documents .
the contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate progress and shall cooperate with the engineer inspectors and other contractors .
the contractor shall have on the project at all times that work is being performed a competent superintendent capable of reading and understanding the contract documents and experienced in the type of work being performed .
the superintendent will receive instructions from the engineer and shall be authorized to act for the contractor on the project and to execute orders or directions of the engineer without delay .
the superintendent shall promptly supply irrespective of the amount of work sublet materials equipment tools labor and incidentals to complete the contract .
cooperation with utilities .
the department will notify all utility companies pipe line owners or other parties affected and have all necessary adjustments of the public or private utility fixtures pipe lines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction made as soon as practicable .
num num water lines gas lines wire lines service connections meter and valve boxes light standards cableways signals and all other utility facilities within the limits of the proposed construction are to be relocated or adjusted at the owners expense unless otherwise provided in the contract .
the contractor shall cooperate with the utility owners in their removal and relocation operations so that progress is expedited duplication of work is minimized and service interruptions are avoided .
the contract will indicate those utility items which are to be relocated or adjusted by the utility owner or which are to be relocated or adjusted by the contractor .
the contractor shall consider in the bid proposal all of the permanent and temporary utility facilities in their present or relocated positions as shown in the contract and as revealed by site investigation .
utility delays due to changes which are the responsibility of the contractor will be considered nonexcusable delays .
the contractor and the engineer shall meet with the utility owners as often as necessary to coordinate and schedule relocations or adjustments .
additional compensation will not be allowed for foreseeable coordination inconvenience or damage sustained due to interference from the utility facilities or the removal or relocation operations as indicated in the contract .
delays shall be dealt with in accordance with subsection num .
if utility facilities or appurtenances are found that are neither identified in the contract nor revealed by site investigation the engineer will determine whether adjustment or relocation of the utility is necessary .
the engineer will make arrangements with either the utility owner or the contractor to accomplish necessary adjustments or relocations when not otherwise provided for in the contract .
extra work will be considered for payment in accordance with subsection num .
consideration for delays shall be in accordance with subsection numd .
where the contractors operations are adjacent to properties of railroad telegraph telephone power or other utility companies to which damage might result in considerable expense loss or inconvenience work shall not commence until arrangements for the protection of the utilities have been made .
if water or utility services are interrupted the contractor shall promptly notify the owner and shall cooperate in the restoration of service .
repair work shall be continuous until the service is restored .
work shall not be undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
cooperation between contractors .
the department reserves the right to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the contract .
when separate contracts are let within the limits of any one project each contractor shall conduct the work without interfering or hindering the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each other as directed .
num num each contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with the contract and shall protect and save harmless the department from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss because of the presence and operations of contractors working within the limits of the same or adjacent project .
construction stakes lines and grades .
construction work shall not be performed until adequate lines and grades have been established by the department or by the contractor .
a contractor surveying .
when the bid schedule contains pay item num construction surveying the department will provide control points and bench marks as described in the contract .
the contractor shall furnish and set construction stakes establishing lines and grades in accordance with the provisions of section num .
the engineer may order extra surveying which will be paid for at a negotiated rate not to exceed num per hour .
b department surveying .
when the bid schedule does not contain pay item num construction surveying the engineer will furnish one set of construction stakes and marks establishing lines and grades as described below for proper prosecution of the work .
roadway staking will include stakes for fence centerline slopes grades bluetops curb and gutter sidewalk and median barrier .
grade stakes for finished subgrade will not be set until the grade established by the slope stakes is constructed to within num foot of the finished subgrade elevation .
minor structures and retaining wall staking will be limited to stakes establishing line and grade by using offset line and grade stakes .
major structures staking and references will be limited to centerlines or work lines or control lines as shown on the plans appropriate offset lines and grades and elevations set for footings piers pier caps abutments bottom of deck grades and finish deck screed grades .
it will be the responsibility of the contractor to use these references and marks and establish any additional control and layout necessary for the proper prosecution of the work in its final location .
the contractor shall be responsible for the accuracy of all the vertical and horizontal control it transfers and establishes .
the contractor shall when required provide access to abutments piers or other locations and shall furnish working platforms that meet applicable safety requirements so the engineers duties can be performed .
the contractor shall preserve all stakes and marks .
if any stakes or marks are destroyed disturbed or removed by the contractor subcontractors or suppliers the cost of replacing them will be charged against the contractor and will be deducted from the payment for the work at a negotiated rate not to exceed num per hour .
num num it is the responsibility of the contractor to perform all required layout work which shall include but will not be limited to the following num piling locations and cut off elevation .
num girder seats on piers and abutments .
num bolt locations and patterns .
num construction sign locations .
num guardrail .
the engineer reserves the right to inspect all staking and work in place to insure conformance with the contract .
a minimum of two working days will be required as advance notice to the engineer to provide project control staking .
authority and duties of the project engineer .
the project engineer has immediate charge of the administration and engineering details of each construction project .
the project engineer has the authority to exercise all duties and responsibilities of the engineer contained in the contract except those specifically retained by the chief engineer .
the cdot project engineer and the cdot resident engineer are the only representatives of the chief engineer authorized to sign contract modification orders .
the project engineer is responsible for initial decisions relating to contractor disputes pursuant to subsection num .
duties of the inspector .
inspectors employed by the department are authorized to inspect all work done and materials furnished .
this inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used .
the inspector is not authorized to alter or waive the provisions of the contract .
the inspector is not authorized to issue instructions contrary to the provisions of the contract or to act as foreman for the contractor .
inspection and testing of work .
all materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the engineer .
the engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with information and assistance by the contractor as required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
before final acceptance of the work the contractor shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as directed .
after examination by the engineer the contractor shall restore the work to the standard required by the contract .
if the work thus exposed or examined proves acceptable the uncovering removing or restoring the work will be paid for as extra work .
if the work exposed or examined proves unacceptable the uncovering removing or restoring the work shall be at the contractors expense .
any work done or materials used without inspection by an authorized department representative may be ordered uncovered removed or restored at the contractors expense .
num num when any unit of government or political subdivision utility or railroad corporation is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by a highway contract its respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
this inspection shall not make any unit of government or political subdivision utility or railroad corporation a party to the contract and shall not interfere with the rights of either party .
all inspections and all tests conducted by the department are for the convenience and benefit of the department .
these inspections and tests do not constitute acceptance of the materials or work tested or inspected and the department may reject or accept any work or materials at any time prior to the inspection pursuant to subsection numb whether or not previous inspections or tests were conducted by the engineer or authorized representative .
removal of unacceptable work and unauthorized work .
unacceptable work is work that does not conform to the requirements of the contract .
unacceptable work resulting from any cause found to exist prior to the final acceptance of the work shall be removed and replaced in an acceptable manner at the contractors expense .
the fact that the engineer or an inspector may have overlooked the unacceptable work shall not constitute an acceptance of any part of the work .
unauthorized work is work that was done without adequate lines and grades having been established by the engineer or by the contractor work done contrary to the instructions of the engineer work done beyond the lines shown on the plans or extra work done without the engineers authorization .
unauthorized work will not be paid for under the provisions of the contract and may be ordered removed or replaced at the contractors expense .
if the contractor fails to comply with any order of the engineer made under the provisions of this subsection the engineer will have authority to cause unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed .
the engineer will deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
load restrictions .
the contractor shall comply with all legal load restrictions in the hauling of equipment or materials on public roads beyond the limits of the project .
a special permit will not relieve the contractor of liability for damage resulting from the moving of equipment or material .
the operation of equipment or hauling loads which cause damage to structures the roadway or any other construction will not be permitted .
hauling of materials over the base course or surface course under construction shall be limited by the contractor to methods and equipment that will prevent damage to the pavement structure .
loads will not be permitted on a concrete pavement or structure before the expiration of the curing period .
the contractor shall be responsible for the repair of all damage and related expense resulting from hauling equipment and num num construction operations .
if a vehicles gross weight exceeds the legal limit and the material transported by the vehicle is delivered to the project the material and the scale ticket certificate of correct weight will not be accepted .
if a scale ticket from an overweight vehicle is inadvertently accepted and the material incorporated into the project the engineer will adjust the price for the overweight load as follows num the pay item quantity represented by the amount of material in excess of the legal weight will not be paid for .
num a price reduction will be assessed for the overweight portion of the load based on the following schedule .
overweight pounds price reduction dollars num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num plus num for each num lbs over num lbs maintenance during construction .
the contractor shall maintain all work that is included in the contract during construction and until final written acceptance except as otherwise specified in subsection num .
this maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective work prosecuted with adequate equipment and forces so the roadway or structures are kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
if the contract involves the placement of material on or utilization of a previously constructed subgrade pavement structure or structure the contractor shall maintain the previously constructed work during all construction operations .
all cost of maintaining the contract work during construction and before final written acceptance will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work except as otherwise specified in subsection num .
failure to maintain roadway or structure .
if the contractor fails to comply with the provisions of subsection num the engineer will immediately num num notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
except in the case of traffic signal maintenance the contractor shall respond and remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice .
if the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance in the allotted time the engineer may immediately proceed to maintain the project and the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from the monies due or to become due to the contractor on the contract .
in the case of traffic signal maintenance the contractor shall respond and remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within one hour of receipt of notice on urban highways and within four hours of receipt of notice on rural highways .
traffic signal maintenance shall include all approved traffic control items and work that are required to maintain traffic through the affected area while the traffic signal is being repaired or replaced .
if the department performs traffic signal maintenance the department shall be held harmless for all subsequent occurrences of maintenance to the signals that the department maintained .
acceptance .
a partial acceptance .
if during the prosecution of the project the contractor satisfactorily completes a unit or portion of the project such as a structure an interchange or a section of road or pavement that can be used advantageously for traffic the engineer may make final inspection of that unit .
if the engineer finds that the unit has been satisfactorily completed in compliance with the contract the contractor may be relieved of further responsibility for that unit except as otherwise provided in subsection num .
partial acceptance shall not void or alter any of the terms of the contract .
b final acceptance .
upon notice from the contractor of presumptive completion of the entire project the engineer will make an inspection .
if the work provided for by the contract has been satisfactorily completed that inspection shall constitute the final inspection and the engineer will notify the contractor in writing of final acceptance indicating the date on which the project was inspected and accepted .
if the inspection discloses any unsatisfactory work the engineer will give the contractor a written list of the work needing correction .
upon correction of the work another inspection will be made .
if the work has been satisfactorily completed the engineer will notify the contractor in writing of the date of final inspection and acceptance .
final acceptance under this subsection does not waive any legal rights contained in subsection num .
dispute resolution .
subsections num num and num detail the process through which the parties cdot and the contractor agree to resolve any issue that may result in a dispute .
the intent of the process is to resolve issues early efficiently and as close to the project level as possible .
figure num in the standard special provisions outlines the process .
specified time frames may be extended by mutual agreement of the engineer and the contractor .
in these subsections when a time frame ends on a saturday sunday or holiday the time frame shall be extended to the next scheduled work day .
num num an issue is a disagreement concerning contract price time interpretation of the contract or all three between the parties at the project level regarding or relating to the contract .
issues include but are not limited to any disagreement resulting from a delay a change order another written order or an oral order from the project engineer including any direction instruction interpretation or determination by the project engineer interpretations of the contract provisions plans or specifications or the existence of alleged differing site conditions .
the contractor shall be barred from any administrative equitable or legal remedy for any issue which meets either of the following criteria num the contractor did not to bring the issue to the project engineers attention in writing within num days of the contractor being aware of the issue .
num the contractor fails to continually weekly or otherwise approved by both parties work with cdot towards a resolution .
a dispute is an issue which the contractor and cdot have not been able to resolve and for which the contractor submits a written formal notice of dispute in accordance with subsection subsection numb below .
a claim is a dispute not resolved at the resident engineer level or resolved after a drb recommendation .
the term merit refers to the right of a party to recover on a claim or dispute irrespective of quantum based on the substance elements and grounds of that claim or dispute .
the term quantum refers to the quantity or amount of compensation or time deserved when a claim or dispute is found to have merit .
disputes from subcontractors material suppliers or any other entity not party to the contract shall be submitted through the contractor .
review of a passthrough dispute does not create privity of contract between cdot and the subcontractor .
if cdot does not respond within the specified timelines the contractor may advance the dispute to the next level .
when the project engineer is a consultant project engineer actions decisions and determinations specified herein as made by the project engineer shall be made by the resident engineer .
the dispute resolution process set forth in this subsection shall be exhausted in its entirety prior to initiation of litigation or arbitration .
failure to comply with the requirements set forth in this subsection shall bar either party from any further administrative equitable or legal remedy .
if a deadline is missed that does not prejudice either party further relief shall be allowed .
all written notices of dispute shall be submitted within num days of the date of the project engineers final acceptance letter see subsection numb .
num num when a project has a landscape maintenance period the project engineer will grant partial acceptance in accordance with subsection numa .
this partial acceptance will be project acceptance of all the construction work performed prior to this partial acceptance .
all disputes and claims related to the work in which this partial acceptance is granted shall be submitted within num days of the project engineers partial acceptance .
should the contractors dispute use the total cost approach for calculating damages damages will be determined by subtracting the contract amount from the total cost of performance .
should the contractors dispute use the modified total cost approach for calculating damages if the contractors bid was unrealistic in part andor some of its costs were unreasonable andor some of its damages were caused by its own errors those costs and damages will be deducted from the total cost of performance to arrive at the modified total cost .
the total cost or modified total cost basis for calculating damages shall not be available for any disputes or claims seeking damages where the contractor could have kept separate cost records at the time the dispute arose as described in subsection numa .
a document retention .
the contractor shall keep full and complete records of the costs and additional time incurred for each dispute for a period of at least three years after the date of final payment or until the dispute is resolved whichever is more .
the contractor subcontractors and lower tier subcontractors shall provide adequate facilities acceptable to the engineer for an audit during normal business hours .
the contractor shall permit the engineer or department auditor to examine and copy those records and all other records required by the engineer to determine the facts or contentions involved in the dispute .
the contractor shall identify and segregate any documents or information that the contractor considers particularly sensitive such as confidential or proprietary information .
throughout the dispute the contractor and the project engineer shall keep complete daily records of extra costs and time incurred in accordance with the following procedures num daily records shall identify each operation affected the specific locations where work is affected and the potential effect to the projects schedule .
such records shall also reflect all labor material and equipment applicable to the affected operations .
num on the first work day of each week following the date of the written notice of dispute the contractor shall provide the project engineer with the daily records for the preceding week .
if the contractors records indicate costs greater than those kept by the department the project engineer will meet with the contractor and present his records to the contractor at the meeting .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing within three work days of any inaccuracies noted in or disagreements with the departments records .
num num b initial dispute resolution process .
to initiate the dispute resolution process the contractor shall provide a written notice of dispute to the project engineer upon the failure of the parties to resolve the issue through negotiation .
disputes will not be considered unless the contractor has first complied with specified issue resolution processes such as those specified in subsections num num numa and numd .
the contractor shall supplement the written notice of dispute within num days with a written request for equitable adjustment rea providing the following num the date of the dispute .
num the nature of the circumstances which caused the dispute .
num a statement explaining in detail the specific provisions of the contract and any basis legal or factual which support the dispute .
num if any the estimated quantum calculated in accordance with methods set forth in subsection numbnum .
of the dispute with supporting documentation .
num an analysis of the progress schedule showing the schedule change or disruption if the contractor is asserting a schedule change or disruption .
the contractor shall submit as much information on the quantum and impacts to the contract time as is reasonably available with the rea and then supplement the rea as additional information becomes available .
if the dispute escalates to the drb process the drb shall not hear any issue or consider any information that was not contained in the request for equitable adjustment and fully submitted to the project engineer and resident engineer during the num process .
c project engineer review .
within num days after receipt of the rea the project engineer will meet with the contractor to discuss the merits of the dispute .
within seven days after this meeting the project engineer will issue a written decision on the merits of the dispute .
the project engineer will either deny the merits of the dispute or notify the contractor that the dispute has merit .
this determination will include a summary of the relevant facts contract provisions supporting the determination and an evaluation of all scheduling issues that may be involved .
if the dispute is determined to have merit the contractor and the project engineer will determine the adjustment in payment schedule or both within num days .
when a satisfactory adjustment is determined it shall be implemented in accordance with subsections num num num num or num and the dispute is resolved .
if the contractor accepts the project engineers denial of the merits of the dispute the dispute is resolved and no further action will be taken .
if the num num contractor does not respond in seven days it will be assumed he has accepted the denial .
if the contractor rejects the project engineers denial of the merits of the dispute or a satisfactory adjustment of payment or schedule can not be agreed upon within num days the contractor may further pursue resolution of the dispute by providing written notice to the resident engineer within seven days according to subsection numd .
d resident engineer review .
within seven days after receipt of the contractors written notice to the resident engineer of unsatisfactory resolution of the dispute the project engineer and resident engineer will meet with the contractor to discuss the dispute .
meetings shall continue weekly for a period of up to num days and shall include a contractors representative with decision authority above the project level .
if these meetings result in resolution of the dispute the resolution will be implemented in accordance with subsections num num num or num and the dispute is resolved .
if these meetings do not result in a resolution or the participants mutually agree that they have reached an impasse the dispute shall be presented to the dispute review board in accordance with subsection num .
dispute review board .
a dispute review board drb is an independent third party that will provide specialized expertise in technical areas and administration of construction contracts .
the drb will assist in and facilitate the timely and equitable resolution of disputes between cdot and the contractor in an effort to avoid animosity and construction delays and to resolve disputes as close to the project level as possible .
the drb shall be established and operate as provided herein and shall serve as an independent and impartial board .
there are two types of drbs the on demand drb and the standing drb .
the drb shall be an on demand drb unless a standing drb is specified in the contract .
an on demand drb shall be established only when the project engineer initiates a drb review in accordance with subsection numa .
a standing drb when specified in the contract shall be established at the beginning of the project .
a initiation of dispute review board review .
when a dispute has not been resolved in accordance with subsection num the project engineer will initiate the drb review process within num days after the period described in subsection numd .
b formation of dispute review board .
drbs will be established in accordance with the following procedures num .
cdot in conjunction with the colorado contractors association will maintain a statewide list of suggested drb candidates experienced in construction processes and the interpretation of contract documents and the resolution of construction disputes .
the board members shall be num num experienced in highway and transportation projects .
only individuals who have completed training currently titled drb administration practice training through the dispute resolution board foundation or otherwise approved by cdot can be a drb member .
when a drb is formed the parties shall execute the agreement set forth in subsection numl .
num .
if the dispute has a value of num or less the on demand drb shall have one member .
the contractor and cdot shall select the drb member and execute the agreement within num days of initiating the drb process .
if the parties do not agree on the drb member each shall select five candidates .
each party shall numerically rank their list using a scale of one to five with one being their first choice and five being their last choice .
if common candidates are listed but the parties can not agree that common candidate with the lowest combined numerical ranking shall be selected .
if there is no common candidate the lists shall be combined and each party shall eliminate three candidates from the list .
each party shall then numerically rank the remaining candidates with no .
num being the first choice .
the candidate with the lowest combined numerical ranking shall be the drb member .
the cdot project engineer will be responsible for having all parties execute the agreement .
num .
if the dispute has a value over num the on demand drb shall have three members .
the contractor and cdot shall each select a member and those two members shall select a third .
once the third member is approved the three members will nominate one of them to be the chair and execute the agreement within num days of initiating the drb process .
num .
the standing drb shall always have three members .
the contractor and cdot shall each select a member and those two members shall select a third member .
once the third member is approved the three members will nominate one of them to be the chair .
the contractor and cdot shall submit their proposed standing drb members within num days of execution of the contract .
the third member shall be selected within num days of execution of the contract .
prior to construction starting the parties shall execute the three party agreement .
the cdot project engineer will be responsible for having all parties execute the agreement .
the project engineer will invite the standing drb members to the pre construction conference and any partnering conferences .
num .
drb members shall not have been involved in the administration of the project under consideration .
drb candidates shall disclose to the parties the following relationships num prior employment with either party .
num prior or current financial interests or ties to either part .
num prior or current professional relationships with either party .
num anything else that might bring into question the impartiality or independence of the drb member .
num num num prior to agreeing to serve on a drb members shall notify all parties of any other cdot drbs they are serving on or on which they will be serving .
if either party objects to the selection of a potential drb member based on the disclosures of the potential member that potential member shall not be placed on the board .
num .
there shall be no ex parte communications with the drb at any time .
num .
the service of a board member may be terminated only by written agreement of both parties .
num .
if a board member resigns is unable to serve or is terminated a new board member shall be selected within four weeks in the same manner as the board member who was removed was originally selected .
c additional responsibilities of the standing disputes review board num .
general .
within num days after the establishment of the board the board shall meet at a mutually agreeable location to num obtain copies of the contract documents and contractors schedules for each of the board members .
num agree on the location of future meetings which shall be reasonably close to the project site .
num establish an address and telephone number for each board member for the purposes of board business .
num .
regular meetings .
regular meetings of the board shall be held approximately every num to num days throughout the life of the contract except that this schedule may be modified to suit developments on the job as the work progresses .
regular meetings shall be attended by representatives of the contractor and the department .
num .
the board shall establish an agenda for each meeting which will cover all items that the board considers necessary to keep it abreast of the project such as construction status schedule potential problems and solutions status of past claims and disputes and potential claims and disputes .
copies of each agenda shall be submitted to the contractor and the department at least seven days before the meeting date .
oral or written presentations or both shall be made by the contractor and the department as necessary to give the board all the data the board requires to perform its functions .
the board will prepare minutes of each meeting circulate them to all participants for comments and approval and issue revised minutes before the next meeting .
as a part of each regular meeting a field inspection trip of all active segments of the work at the project site may be made by the board the contractor and the department .
num .
advisory opinions num advisory opinions are typically used soon after the parties find they have a potential dispute and have conducted preliminary negotiations num num but before expenditure of additional resources and hardening their positions .
advisory opinions provide quick insight into the drbs likely assessment of the dispute .
this process is quick and may be entirely oral and does not prejudice the opportunity for a drb hearing .
num both parties must agree to seek an advisory opinion and so notify the chairperson .
the procedure for requesting and issuing advisory opinions should be discussed with the drb at the first meeting with the parties .
num the drb may or may not issue a written opinion but if a written advisory opinion is issued it must be at the specific request of both parties .
num the opinion is only advisory and does not require an acceptance or rejection by either party .
if the dispute is not resolved and a hearing is held the oral presentations and advisory opinion are completely disregarded and the drb hearing procedure is followed .
num advisory opinions should be limited to merit issues only .
d arranging a dispute review board hearing .
when the project engineer initiates the drb review process the project engineer will num .
contact the contractor and the drb to coordinate an acceptable hearing date and time .
the hearing shall be held at the resident engineers office unless an alternative location is agreed to by both parties .
unless otherwise agreed to by both parties the drb hearing will be held within num days after the drb agreement is signed by the cdot chief engineer .
num .
ensure drb members have copies of all documents previously prepared by the contractor and cdot pertaining to the dispute the drb request the contract documents and the special provisions at least two weeks before the hearing .
e prehearing submittal at least fifteen days prior to the hearing cdot and the contractor shall submit by email to the drb chairperson each partys prehearing position paper .
the drb chairperson shall simultaneously distribute by email the prehearing position papers to all parties and other drb members if any .
at the same time each party shall submit a copy of all its supporting documents to be used at the hearing to all drb members and the other party unless the parties have agreed to a common set of documents as discussed in subsection numenum below .
in this case cdot shall submit the common set of documents to the board and the contractor .
the pre hearing position paper shall contain the following num .
a joint statement of the dispute and the scope of the desired decision .
the joint statement shall summarize in a few sentences the nature of the dispute .
if the parties are unable to agree on the wording of the joint statement each partys position paper shall contain both statements and identify the party authoring each statement .
the parties shall agree upon a joint statement at least num days prior to the hearing and submit it to the num num drb or each partys independent statement shall be submitted to the drb and the other party at least num days prior to the hearing .
num .
the basis and justification for the partys position with reference to specific contract language and other supporting documents for each element of the dispute .
to minimize duplication and repetitiveness the parties may identify a common set of documents that will be referred to by both parties and submit them in a separate package to the drb .
the engineer will provide a hard copy of the project plans and project and standard special provisions if necessary to the drb .
other standard cdot documents such as standard specifications and ms standards are available on the cdot website .
if any party contends that they are not necessary to the proceedings the drb shall determine that issue in the first instance .
should the drb determine that a dispute does not involve a party that party shall be relieved from participating in the drb hearing and paying any further drb costs .
when the scope of the hearing includes quantum the requesting partys position paper shall include full cost details calculated in accordance with methods set forth in subsection numbnum .
the scope of the hearing will not include quantum if cdot has ordered an audit and that audit has not been completed .
num .
a list of proposed attendees at the hearing .
in the event of any disagreement the drb shall make the final determination as to who attends the hearing .
num .
a list of any intended experts including their qualifications and a summary of what their presentation will include and an estimate of the length of the presentation .
the number of copies distribution requirements and time for submittal shall be established by the drb and communicated to the parties by the chairperson .
a prehearing phone conference with all drb members and the parties shall be conducted as soon as a hearing date is established but no later than num days prior to the hearing .
the drb chairperson shall explain the specifics of how the hearing will be conducted including how the two parties will present their information to the drb ex each party makes a full presentation of their position or presentations will be made on a point by point basis with each party making a presentation only on an individual dispute issue before moving onto to the next issue .
if the pre hearing position papers and documents have been received by the board prior to the conference call the drb chairperson shall at this conference discuss the estimated hours of review and research activities for this dispute such as time spent evaluating and preparing recommendations on specific issues presented to the drb .
if the prehearing position papers num num and documents have not been received by the board prior to the conference call another conference call will be scheduled during the initial conference call to discuss the estimated hours of review .
compensation for time agreed to in advance by the parties will be made at an agreed rate of num per hour in accordance with subsection num k num .
compensation for the phone conference time will also be made at an agreed to rate of num per hour in accordance with subsection num k num .
the engineer shall coordinate the phone conference .
f dispute review board hearing .
the drb shall preside over a hearing .
the chairperson shall control the hearing and conduct it as follows num .
an employee of cdot presents a brief description of the project and the status of construction on the project .
num .
the party that requested the drb presents the dispute in detail as supported by previously submitted information and documentation in the prehearing position paper .
no new information or disputes will be heard or addressed by the drb .
num .
the other party presents its position in detail as supported by previously submitted information and documentation in the prehearing position paper .
no new information or disputes will be heard or addressed by the drb .
num .
employees of each party are responsible for leading presentations at the drb hearing .
num .
attorneys shall not participate in the hearing unless the drb specifically addresses an issue to them or unless agreed to by both parties .
should the parties disagree on attorney participation the drb shall decide on what if any participation will be permitted .
attorneys representing the parties are permitted to attend the hearing provided their presence has been noted in the prehearing submittal .
num .
either party may use experts .
a party intending to offer an outside experts analysis at the hearing shall disclose such intention in the pre hearing position paper .
the experts name and a general statement of the area of the dispute that will be covered by his presentation shall be included in the disclosure .
the other party may present an outside expert to address or respond to those issues that may be raised by the disclosing partys outside expert .
num .
if both parties approve the drb may retain an outside expert .
the drb chairperson shall include the cost of the outside expert in the drbs regular invoice .
cdot and the contractor shall equally bear the cost of the services of the outside expert employed by the drb .
num .
upon completion of their presentations and rebuttals both parties and the drb will be provided the opportunity to exchange questions and answers .
all questions shall be directed to the chairperson first .
attendees may respond only when board members request a response .
num num num .
the drb shall hear only those disputes identified in the written request for the drb and the information contained in the prehearing submittals .
the board shall not hear or address other disputes .
if either party attempts to discuss a dispute other than those to be heard by the drb or attempts to submit new information the chairperson shall inform such party that the board shall not hear the issue and shall not accept any additional information .
the drb shall not hear any issue or consider any information that was not contained in the request for equitable adjustment and fully submitted to the project engineer and resident engineer during the num process .
num .
if either party fails to timely deliver a position paper the drb may reschedule the hearing one time .
on the final date and time established for the hearing the drb shall proceed with the hearing using the information that has been submitted .
num .
if a party fails to appear at the hearing the drb shall proceed as if all parties were in attendance .
g dispute review board recommendation .
the drb shall issue a recommendation in accordance with the following procedures num .
the drb shall not make a recommendation on the dispute at the meeting .
prior to the closure of the hearing the drb members and the contractor and cdot together will discuss the time needed for analysis and review of the dispute and the issuance of the drbs recommendation .
the maximum time shall be num days unless otherwise agreed to by both parties .
at a minimum the recommendation shall contain all the elements listed in rule num form of award of the arbitration regular track provisions included in the contact by standard special provision .
num .
after the meeting has been closed the drb shall prepare a written recommendation signed by each member of the drb .
in the case of a three member drb where one member dissents that member shall prepare a written dissent and sign it .
num .
the chairperson shall transmit the signed recommendation and any supporting documents to both parties .
h clarification and reconsideration of recommendation .
either party may request clarification or reconsideration of a decision within ten days following receipt of the recommendation .
within ten days after receiving the request the drb shall provide written clarification or reconsideration to both parties unless otherwise agreed to by both parties .
requests for clarification or reconsideration shall be submitted in writing simultaneously to the drb and to the other party .
the board shall not accept requests for reconsideration that amount to a renewal of a prior argument or additional argument based on facts available at the time of the hearing .
the board shall not consider any documents or num num arguments which have not been made a part of the prehearing submittal other than clarification and data supporting previously submitted documentation .
only one request for clarification or reconsideration per dispute from each party will be allowed .
i acceptance or rejection of recommendation .
cdot and the contractor shall submit their written acceptance or rejection of the recommendation in whole or in part concurrently to the other party and to the drb within num days after receipt of the recommendation or following receipt of responses to requests for clarification or reconsideration .
if the parties accept the recommendation or a discreet part thereof it will be implemented in accordance with subsections num num num or num and the dispute is resolved .
if either party rejects the recommendation in whole or in part it shall give written explanation to the other party within num days after receiving the recommendation .
when the recommendation is rejected in whole or in part by either party the other party may either abandon the dispute or pursue a formal claim in accordance with subsection num .
if either party fails to submit its written acceptance or rejection of the dispute boards recommendation according to these specifications such failure shall constitute that partys acceptance of the boards recommendation .
j admissibility of recommendation .
recommendations of a drb issued in accordance with subsection num are admissible in subsequent proceedings but shall be prefaced with the following paragraph this recommendation may be taken under consideration with the understanding that num .
the drb recommendation was a proceeding based on presentations by the parties .
num .
no fact or expert witnesses presented sworn testimony or were subject to crossexamination .
num .
the parties to the drb were not provided with the right to any discovery such as production of documents or depositions .
num .
there is no record of the drb hearing other than the recommendation .
k cost and payments .
num .
general administrative costs .
the contractor and the department shall equally share the entire cost of the following to support the boards operation num copies of contract and other relevant documentation .
num meeting space and facilities .
num secretarial services .
num telephone .
num num num mail .
num reproduction .
num filing .
num .
the department and the contractor shall bear the costs and expenses of the drb equally .
each drb board member shall be compensated at an agreed rate of num per day if time spent onsite per meeting is greater than four hours .
each drb board member shall be compensated at an agreed rate of num per day if time spent onsite per meeting is less than or equal to four hours .
the time spent traveling to and from each meeting shall be reimbursed at num per hour if the travel distance is more than num miles .
the agreed daily and travel time rates shall be considered full compensation for onsite time travel expenses transportation lodging time for travel of more than num miles and incidentals for each day or portion thereof that the drb member is at an authorized drb meeting.no additional compensation will be made for time spent by drb members in review and research activities outside the official drb meetings unless that time such as time spent evaluating and preparing recommendations on specific issues presented to the drb has been specifically agreed to in advance by the department and the contractor .
time away from the project that has been specifically agreed to in advance by the parties will be compensated at an agreed rate of num per hour .
the agreed amount of num per hour shall include all incidentals .
members serving on more than one drb regardless of the number of meetings per day shall not be paid more than the allinclusive rate per day or rate per hour for an individual project .
num .
payments to board members and general administrative costs .
each board member shall submit an invoice to the contractor for fees and applicable expenses incurred each month following a month in which the board members participated in board functions .
such invoices shall be in the format established by the contractor and the department .
the contractor shall submit to the department copies of all invoices .
no markups by the contractor will be allowed on any drb costs .
the department will split the cost by authorizing num percent payment on the next progress payment .
the contractor shall make all payments in full to board members within seven calendar days after receiving payment from the department for this work .
num num l dispute review board three party agreement .
dispute review board three party agreement colorado project no .
this three party agreement made this day of by and between the colorado department of transportation hereinafter called the department and hereinafter called the contractor and and hereinafter called the dispute review board or board .
whereas the department is now engaged in the construction of the project name and whereas the contract provides for the establishment of a board in accordance with subsections num and num of the standard specifications now therefore it is hereby agreed article i description of work and services the department and the contractor shall form a board in accordance with this agreement and the provisions of subsection num .
article ii commitment on part of the parties hereto the parties hereto shall faithfully fulfill the requirements of subsection num and the requirements of this agreement .
article iii compensation the parties shall share equally in the cost of the board including general administrative costs meeting space and facilities secretarial services telephone mail reproduction filing and the members individual fees .
reimbursement of the contractors share of the board expenses for any reason is prohibited .
num num the contractor shall make all payments in full to board members .
the contractor will submit to the department an itemized statement for all such payments and the department will split the cost by including num percent payment on the next progress payment .
the contractor and the department will agree to accept invoiced costs prior to payment by the contractor .
board members shall keep all fee records pertaining to this agreement available for inspection by representatives of the department and the contractor for a period of three years after the termination of the board members services .
payment to each board member shall be at the fee rates established in subsection num and agreed to by each board member the contractor and the department .
in addition reimbursement will be made for applicable expenses .
each board member shall submit an invoice to the contractor for fees incurred each month following a month in which the members participated in board functions .
such invoices shall be in the format established by the contractor and the department .
payments shall be made to each board member within num days after the contractor and department have received all the applicable billing data and verified the data submitted by that member .
the contractor shall make payment to the board member within seven calendar days of receipt of payment from the department .
article iv assignment board members shall not assign any of the work to be performed by them under this agreement .
board members shall disclose any conflicts of interest including but not limited to any dealings with the either party in the previous five years other than serving as a board member under other contracts .
article v commencement and termination of services the commencement of the services of the board shall be in accordance with subsection num of the specifications and shall continue until all assigned disputes under the contract which may require the boards services have been heard and a recommendation has been issued by the board as specified in subsection num .
if a board member is unable to fulfill his responsibilities for reasons specified in subsection numbnum he shall be replaced as provided therein and the board shall fulfill its responsibilities as though there had been no change .
article vi legal relations the parties hereto mutually agree that each board member in performance of his duties on the board is acting as an independent contractor and not as an employee of either the department or the contractor .
board members will guard their independence and avoid any communication about the substance of the dispute without both parties being present .
num num the board members are absolved of any personal liability arising from the recommendations of the board .
the parties agree that members of the dispute review board panel are acting as mediators for purposes of c.r.s .
num and as such the liability of any dispute review board member shall be limited to willful and wanton misconduct as provided for in c.r.s .
num in witness hereof the parties hereto have caused this agreement to be executed the day and year first written above .
board member .
by .
board member .
by .
board member .
by .
contractor .
by .
title colorado department of transportation by .
title chief engineer claims for unresolved disputes .
the contractor may file a claim only if the disputes resolution process described in subsections num and num has been exhausted without resolution of the dispute .
other methods of nonbinding dispute resolution exclusive of arbitration and litigation can be used if agreed to by both parties .
this subsection applies to any unresolved dispute or set of disputes between cdot and the contractor with an aggregate value of more than num .
unresolved disputes with an aggregate value of more than num from subcontractors materials suppliers or any other entity not a party to the contract shall be submitted through the contractor in accordance with this subsection as a passthrough claim .
review of a passthrough claim does not create privity of contract between cdot and any other entity .
subsections num num and num provide both contractual alternative dispute resolution processes and constitute remedygranting provisions pursuant to colorado revised statutes which must be exhausted in their entirety .
meritbinding arbitration or litigation proceedings must commence within num calendar days of the chief engineers decision absent written agreement otherwise by both parties .
num num the venue for all unresolved disputes with an aggregate value num or less shall be the county court for the city and county of denver .
nonbinding forms of alternative dispute resolution adr such as mediation are available upon mutual agreement of the parties for all claims submitted in accordance with this subsection .
the cost of the nonbinding adr process shall be shared equally by both parties with each party bearing its own preparation costs .
the type of nonbinding adr process shall be agreed upon by the parties and shall be conducted within the state of colorado at a mutually acceptable location .
participation in a nonbinding adr process does not in any way waive the requirement that meritbinding arbitration or litigation proceedings must commence within numcalendar days of the chief engineers decision absent written agreement otherwise by both parties .
a notice of intent to file a claim .
within num days after rejection of the dispute resolution boards recommendation issued in accordance with subsection num the contractor shall provide the region transportation director rtd with a written notice of intent to file a claim .
the contractor shall also send a copy of this notice to the resident engineer .
for the purpose of this subsection region transportation director shall mean the region transportation director or the region transportation directors designated representative .
cdot will acknowledge in writing receipt of notice of intent within num days .
b claim package submission .
within num days after submitting the notice of intent to file a claim the contractor shall submit five copies of a complete claim package representing the final position the contractor wishes to have considered .
all claims shall be in writing and in sufficient detail to enable the rtd to ascertain the basis and amount of claim .
the claim package shall include all documents supporting the claim regardless of whether such documents were provided previously to cdot .
if requested by the contractor the num day period may be extended by the rtd in writing prior to final acceptance .
as a minimum the following information shall accompany each claim .
num .
a claim certification containing the following language as appropriate a .
for a direct claim by the contractor num num contractors claim certification under penalty of law for perjury or falsification the undersigned name title of company hereby certifies that the claim of for extra compensation and days additional time made herein for work on this contract is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and supported under the contract between the parties .
this claim package contains all available documents that support the claims made herein and i understand that no additional information other than for clarification and data supporting previously submitted documentation may be presented by me .
dated s subscribed and sworn before me this day of .
notary public my commission expires _______________________ b .
for a passthrough claim passthrough claim certification under penalty of law for perjury or falsification the undersigned name title of company hereby certifies that the claim of for extra compensation and days additional time made herein for work on this project is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and supported under the contract between the parties .
this claim package contains all available documents that support the claims made herein and i understand that no additional information other than for clarification and data supporting previously submitted documentation may be presented by me .
dated s subscribed and sworn before me this day of .
notary public my commission expires _______________________ dated s the contractor certifies that the claim being passed through to cdot is passed through in good faith and is accurate and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief .
dated s subscribed and sworn before me this day of .
notary public my commission expires _______________________ num num num .
a detailed factual statement of the claim for additional compensation time or both providing all necessary dates locations and items of work affected by the claim .
the contractors detailed factual statement shall expressly describe the basis of the claim and factual evidence supporting the claim .
this requirement is not satisfied by simply incorporating into the claim package other documents that describe the basis of the claim and supporting factual evidence .
num .
the date on which facts were discovered which gave rise to the claim .
num .
the name title and activity of all known cdot consultant and other individuals who may be knowledgeable about facts giving rise to such claim .
num .
the name title and activity of all known contractor subcontractor supplier and other individuals who may be knowledgeable about facts giving rise to such claim .
num .
the specific provisions of the contract which support the claim and a statement of the reasons why such provisions support the claim .
num .
if the claim relates to a decision of the project engineer which the contract leaves to the project engineers discretion the contractor shall set out in detail all facts supporting its position relating to the decision of the project engineer .
num .
the identification of any documents and the substance of all oral communications that support the claim .
num .
copies of all known documents that support the claim .
num .
the dispute review board recommendation .
num .
if an extension of contract time is sought the documents required by subsection numd .
num .
if additional compensation is sought the exact amount sought and a breakdown of that amount into the following categories a .
these categories represent the only costs that are recoverable by the contractor .
all other costs or categories of costs are not recoverable num actual wages and benefits including fica paid for additional labor .
num costs for additional bond insurance and tax .
num increased costs for materials .
num equipment costs calculated in accordance with subsection numc for contractor owned equipment and based on certified invoice costs for rented equipment .
num costs of extended job site overhead .
num salaried employees assigned to the project .
num claims from subcontractors and suppliers at any level the same level of detail as specified herein is required for all such claims .
num num num an additional num percent will be added to the total of items num through num as compensation for items for which no specific allowance is provided including profit and home office overhead .
num interest shall be paid in accordance with crs num beginning from the date of the notice of intent to file claim .
b .
in adjustment for the costs as allowed above the department will have no liability for the following items of damages or expense num profit in excess of that provided in num.a.num above .
num loss of profit .
num additional cost of labor inefficiencies in excess of that provided in a. above .
num home office overhead in excess of that provided in a. above .
num consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency .
num indirect costs or expenses of any nature in excess of that provided in a. above .
num attorneys fees claim preparation fees and expert fees .
c audit .
an audit may be performed by the department for any dispute or claim and is mandatory for all disputes and claims with amounts greater than num .
all audits will be complete within num days of receipt of the complete claim package provided the contractor allows the auditors reasonable and timely access to the contractors books and records .
for all claims with amounts greater than num the contractor shall submit a copy of certified claim package directly to the cdot audit unit at the following address division of audit num e. arkansas ave denver co. num d region transportation director decision .
when the contractor properly files a claim the rtd will review the claim and render a written decision to the contractor to either affirm or deny the claim in whole or in part in accordance with the following procedure .
the rtd may consolidate all related claims on a project and issue one decision provided that consolidation does not extend the time period within which the rtd is to render a decision .
consolidation of unrelated claims will not be made .
the rtd will render a written decision to the contractor within num days after the receipt of the claim package or receipt of the audit whichever is later .
in rendering the decision the rtd num will review the information in the contractors num will conduct a hearing if requested by either party and num may consider any other information available in rendering a decision .
num num the rtd will assemble and maintain a claim record comprised of all information physically submitted by the contractor in support of the claim and all other discoverable information considered by the rtd in reaching a decision .
once the rtd assembles the claim record the submission and consideration of additional information other than for clarification and data supporting previously submitted documentation at any subsequent level of review by anyone will not be permitted .
the rtd will provide a copy of the claim record and the written decision to the contractor describing the information considered by the rtd in reaching a decision and the basis for that decision .
if the rtd fails to render a written decision within the num day period or within any extended time period as agreed to by both parties the contractor shall either num accept this as a denial of the claim or num appeal the claim to the chief engineer as described in this subsection .
if the contractor accepts the rtd decision the provisions of the decision shall be implemented in accordance with subsections num num num or num and the claim is resolved .
if the contractor disagrees with the rtd decision the contractor shall either num accept the rtd decision as final or num file a written appeal to the chief engineer within num days from the receipt of the rtd decision .
the contractor hereby agrees that if a written appeal is not properly filed the rtd decision is final .
e chief engineer decision .
when a claim is appealed the rtd will provide the claim record to the chief engineer .
within num days of the appeal either party may submit a written request for a hearing with the chief engineer or duly authorized headquarters delegates .
the chief engineer or a duly authorized headquarters delegate will review the claim and render a decision to affirm overrule or modify the rtd decision in accordance with the following .
the contractors written appeal to the chief engineer will be made a part of the claim record .
the chief engineer will render a written decision within num days after receiving the written appeal .
the chief engineer will not consider any information that was not previously made a part of the claim record other than clarification and data supporting previously submitted documentation .
the contractor shall have num days to accept or reject the chief engineers decision .
the contractor shall notify the chief engineer of its acceptance or rejection in writing .
if the contractor accepts the chief engineers decision the provisions of the decision will be implemented in accordance with subsections num num num or num and the claim is resolved .
if the contractor disagrees with the chief engineers decision the contractorshall either num pursue an alternative dispute resolution process in num num accordance with this specification or num initiate litigation or merit binding arbitration in accordance with subsection numf .
if the chief engineer does not issue a decision as required the contractor may immediately initiate either litigation or merit binding arbitration in accordance with subsection numf .
for the convenience of the parties to the contract it is mutually agreed by the parties that any merit binding arbitration or de novo litigation shall be brought within numcalendar days from the date of the chief engineers decision .
the parties understand and agree that the contractors failure to bring suit within the time period provided shall be a complete bar to any such claims or causes of action .
f de novo litigation or merit binding arbitration .
if the contractor disagrees with the chief engineers decision the contractor may initiate de novo litigation or merit binding arbitration to finally resolve the claim that the contractor submitted to cdot depending on which option was selected by the contractor on form num which shall be submitted at the preconstruction conference .
such litigation or arbitration shall be strictly limited to those claims that were previously submitted and decided in the contractual dispute and claims processes outlined herein .
this does not preclude the joining in one litigation or arbitration of multiple claims from the same project provided that each claim has gone through the dispute and claim process specified in subsections num through num .
the parties may agree in writing at any time to pursue some other form of alternative dispute resolution .
any offer made by the contractor or the department at any stage of the claims process as set forth in this subsection shall be deemed an offer of settlement pursuant to colorado rule of evidence num and therefore inadmissible in any litigation or arbitration .
if the contractor selected litigation then de novo litigation shall proceed in accordance with the colorado rules of civil procedure and the proper venue is the colorado state district court in and for the city and county of denver unless both parties agree to the use of arbitration .
if the contractor selected merit binding arbitration or if both parties subsequently agreed to merit binding arbitration arbitration shall be governed by the modified version of arbitration providers construction industry arbitration rules which are incorporated herein by special provision .
pursuant to the modified arbitration rules rnum through rnum the arbitrators shall issue a binding decision with regard to entitlement and a nonbinding decision with regard to quantum .
if either party disagrees with the decision on quantum the disagreeing party may seek a trial de novo in denver district court with regard to quantum only .
num num section num control of material source of supply and quality requirements .
all materials used shall meet all quality requirements of the contract .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements of the special notice to contractors contained in the departments field materials manual including notifying the engineer of the proposed sources of materials at least two weeks prior to delivery .
when alternative materials are permitted for an item in the contract the contractor shall state at the preconstruction conference the material that will be furnished for that item .
reference in the contract to a particular product or to the product of a specific manufacturer followed by the phrase or approved equal is intended only to establish a standard of quality durability and design and shall not be construed as limiting competition .
products of other manufacturers will be acceptable provided such products are equal to that specified .
prior to beginning any work the contractor shall submit to the engineer a completed form num supplier list .
during the performance of the contract the contractor shall submit an updated form num when requested by the engineer .
failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be grounds for withholding of progress payments .
material sources .
where practicable borrow pits gravel pits and quarry sites shall be located so that they will not be visible from the highway .
a available source .
when the contract shows a location that may be used by the contractor as a source of sand gravel or borrow material the location will be known as an available source .
the department will have an agreement with the property owner which allows removal of material under certain conditions and for a stated price .
conditions of this agreement which concern use of this material on the project and pit construction and reclamation requirements for the available source will be included in the contract .
the contract will indicate whether the department has or has not obtained the necessary county or city zoning clearance and the required permit from colorado department of natural resources needed to explore and remove materials from the available source .
if the department did not obtain the necessary clearances or permits the contractor shall obtain them .
any delays to the project or additional expenses that are incurred while these clearances or permits are being obtained shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall ensure that the requirements of the permits do not conflict with the pit construction and reclamation requirements shown in the contract for the available source .
num num the department will investigate and obtain samples from the various available sources .
these samples are not intended to indicate the full extent and composition of an entire deposit .
these samples will be tested by the department and may be combined with various materials such as mineral fillers and additives for further testing especially for testing aggregate sources to obtain a satisfactory design mix .
the contract will show the location of the test holes where samples were obtained test results and amounts and kinds of any added materials utilized in the testing to obtain a satisfactory product .
if the contractor uses an available source all material shall meet contract specifications .
the department will not be responsible for the material as produced by the contractor .
all costs of producing specification material shall be borne by the contractor .
b contractor source .
sources of sand gravel or borrow other than available sources will be known as contractor sources .
the contractor source will be tested by the department and approved by the engineer prior to incorporation of the material into the project .
if the submitted materials do not meet the contract specifications it will become the contractors responsibility to re sample and test the material .
the contractor will supply the department with passing test results from an aashto accredited laboratory signed and sealed by a professional engineer .
if requested by the engineer the department will then resample and retest the material for compliance to the contract specifications .
the contractor shall produce material which meets contract specifications throughout construction of the project .
the cost of sampling testing and corrective action by the contractor will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the contractor shall obtain all permits and agreements necessary to explore and remove material from a contractor source .
the contractor shall also be responsible for any costs or delays associated with obtaining these permits and agreements .
for each source of imported embankment or topsoil the contractor shall provide the following certification .
the contractor shall assure and certify that unacceptable levels of hazardous waste and substances including but not limited to those defined in the code of federal regulations num cfr part num subparts c and d and the comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act cercla section num as amended are not incorporated into the project as a result of importing embankment or topsoil materials .
the contractor shall submit such certification to the engineer signed and stamped or sealed by either a certified industrial hygienist cih certified hazardous materials manager chmm registered professional engineer pe certified safety professional csp or registered environmental manager rem for each contractor source outside of the project limits .
if contractor source material for embankment or topsoil originating outside of the project limits is placed on the project and is at anytime found to be num num contaminated with unacceptable levels of hazardous waste or substances the contractor shall remove the contaminated material from the departments right of way dispose of it in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and make necessary restoration .
the cost of complying with these requirements including sampling testing and corrective action by the contractor shall be included in the work .
samples tests cited specifications .
all materials or the finished product in which the materials are used will be inspected and tested by the engineer or by others if specified in the contract .
the engineer will furnish copies of test results that indicate out of specification material to the contractor promptly as the test results become available .
acceptance will be based on the applicable requirements of section num .
any work in which untested and uninspected materials are used shall be performed at the contractors risk and may be considered as unacceptable and unauthorized work .
unless otherwise designated when aashto astm or other specifications standards or policies are cited the reference shall be to the latest edition as revised or updated by approved supplements or interim editions published and issued prior to the date of advertisement for bids .
sampling and testing will be done in accordance with the departments minimum sampling testing and inspection schedule the special notice to contractors and the colorado procedures all contained in the departments field materials manual .
where the method of test is not cited the applicable procedure shall be in accordance with the standard aashto method which was current on the date of advertisement for bids .
samples will be taken by the department except that the contractor shall take samples of portland cement concrete in accordance with cp num asphalt cement in accordance with aashto t num hot mix asphalt in accordance with cp num and a composite of aggregates for hot asphalt mixtures in accordance with cp num .
the engineer will determine the sampling locations and the samples shall be taken in the presence of the engineer .
the contractor may retain a split of each sample .
all materials being used are subject to inspection and testing at any time prior to or during incorporation into the work .
tests will be made by and at the expense of the department .
qualification of testing personnel and laboratories .
personnel performing tests used in mix design or the acceptance rejection or price adjustment decision and the laboratories in which those tests are performed shall be qualified in accordance with colorado procedure num .
sampling and testing of hot mix asphalt .
all hma item num except hma patching and temporary pavement shall be tested in accordance with the following program of process control testing and acceptance testing num num a process control testing .
the contractor shall be responsible for process control testing on all elements listed in table num .
process control testing shall be performed at the expense of the contractor .
the contractor shall develop a process control plan pcp in accordance with the following num .
process control plan .
for each element listed in table num the pcp must provide adequate details to ensure that the contractor will perform process control .
the contractor shall submit the pcp to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall not start any work on the project until the engineer has approved the pcp in writing .
a .
frequency of tests or measurements .
the pcp shall indicate a random sampling frequency which shall not be less than that shown in table num .
the process control tests shall be independent of acceptance tests .
b .
worksheets forms and charts .
the contractor shall submit examples of worksheets test result forms and test results charts in accordance with cp num as part of the pcp .
c. test result chart .
each process control test result the appropriate tonnage and the tolerance limits shall be plotted .
for in place density tests only results after final compaction shall be shown .
the chart shall be posted daily at a location convenient for viewing by the engineer .
d. quality level chart .
the quality level ql for each element used to calculate incentive or disincentive in table num and each required sieve size shall be plotted .
the ql will be calculated in accordance with the procedure in cp num for determining quality level ql .
the ql will be calculated on tests num through num then tests num through num then tests num through num then thereafter the last five consecutive test results .
the tonnage of material represented by the last test result shall correspond to the ql .
for in place density tests only results after final compaction shall be shown .
the chart shall be posted daily at a location convenient for viewing by the engineer .
num .
elements not conforming to process control .
the ql of each discrete group of five test results beginning with the first group of five test results shall be a standard for evaluating material not conforming to process control .
when the group ql is below num the process shall be considered as not conforming to the pcp .
in this case the contractor shall take immediate action to bring the process back into control .
except where the cause of the problem is readily apparent and corrected without delay production shall be suspended until the source of the problem is determined and corrected .
a written explanation of actions taken to correct control problems shall accompany the test data and be submitted to the engineer on the day the actions are taken .
num .
point of sampling .
the material for process control testing shall be sampled by the contractor using approved procedures .
acceptable num num procedures are colorado procedures aashto and astm .
the order of precedence is colorado procedures aashto procedures and then astm procedures .
the location where material samples will be taken shall be indicated in the pcp .
num .
testing standards .
the pcp shall indicate which testing standards will be followed .
acceptable standards are colorado procedures aashto and astm .
the order of precedence is colorado procedures aashto procedures and then astm procedures .
num .
testing supervisor qualifications .
the person responsible for the process control sampling and testing shall be identified in the pcp and be qualified according to the requirements of cp num num .
technician qualifications .
technicians taking samples and performing tests must be qualified according to the requirements of cp num .
num .
testing equipment .
all of the testing equipment used to conduct process control testing shall conform to the standards specified in the test procedures and be in good working order .
nuclear testing devices used for process control testing of inplace density do not have to be calibrated on the departments calibration blocks .
num .
reporting and record keeping .
the contractor shall report the results of the process control tests to the engineer in writing at least once per day .
the contractor shall assemble a process control pc notebook and update it daily .
this notebook shall contain all worksheets test results forms test results charts and quality level charts for each of the elements listed in table num .
the contractor shall submit the pc notebook to the engineer for review once a month on the date agreed to at the prepaving conference .
the pc notebook will be returned to the contractor within one working day after submittal .
the engineer will notify the contractor in writing of any deficiencies in the pc notebook including the failure to submit the notebook on time or an absence of the required reports .
upon the second failure to submit the complete pc notebook on time or with an absence of the required reports the engineer will notify the contractor and the pay estimate will be withheld until the contractor submits in writing a report detailing the cause for the failure to submit the complete pc notebook on time or the cause for the absence of required reports .
the report shall include how the contractor plans to resolve the failures .
additional failures to submit the pc notebook on time or absent the required reports will result in a delay of the pay estimate until the contractor has identified and resolved the failure along with revising and resubmitting his pcp to address these issues .
once the engineer has reviewed and approved the revised pcp the estimate may be paid .
upon submittal of the pc notebook for the semifinal estimate the pc notebook shall become the property of the department .
the contractor shall make provisions such that the engineer can inspect process control work in progress including pc notebook sampling testing plants and the contractors testing facilities at any time .
num num b acceptance testing .
acceptance testing is the responsibility of the department and shall not be addressed in the pcp .
the department will determine the locations where samples or measurements are to be taken .
the maximum quantity of material represented by each test result and the minimum number of test results will be in accordance with table num .
the location or time of sampling will be based on a stratified random procedure as described in cp num .
acceptance sampling and testing procedures will be in accordance with the schedule for minimum materials sampling testing and inspection in the departments field materials manual .
samples for project acceptance testing shall be taken by the contractor in accordance with the designated method .
the samples shall be taken in the presence of the engineer .
where appropriate the contractor shall reduce each sample to the size designated by the engineer .
the contractor may retain a split of each sample which can not be included as part of the pcp .
if the contractor elects to question the hot mix asphalt hma acceptance test results the steps outlined in cp num shall be followed .
the results from the cp num resolution process shall be binding on both the department and the contractor .
requests for cp num process for all elements except density shall be submitted in writing to the engineer within five working days from the date the contractor receives acceptance test data from the engineer .
the specific element questioned shall be identified in writing .
all requests for the cp num process for the density element shall be submitted in writing to the engineer within num hours of receiving test data from the engineer .
the contractor shall choose either the cdot materials and geotechnical branch or a consultant laboratory not associated with the project to perform the third party testing .
the contractor shall document his choice in writing at the prepaving conference .
if a consultant laboratory is chosen the cdot materials and geotechnical branch will determine the consultant that will be used from a preestablished list and ensure there is no conflict of interest .
if third party testing is required the responsibility for the testing expenses shall be assigned in accordance with cp num .
the costs for testing are shown in cp num table num .
all materials being used are subject to inspection and testing at any time prior to during or after incorporation into work .
acceptance tests will be made by and at the expense of the department except when otherwise provided .
c check testing program ctp .
prior to or in conjunction with placing the first num tons of asphalt pavement under the direction of the engineer a ctp will be conducted between acceptance testing and process control testing programs .
the ctp will consist of testing for asphalt content theoretical maximum specific gravity hma num mm num sieve hma num mm num sieve hma num mm num sieve inplace density and joint density in accordance with cp num .
if the contractor intends to test to determine air voids and vma check testing for these tests is recommended .
the ctp will be continued until the acceptance and process control tests are within the acceptable limits shown in table num of cp num .
for joint density the initial num num check test will be a comparison of the seven cores tested by cdot and the seven cores tested by the contractor .
these are the cores from the compaction test section used for nuclear gauge calibration and test section payment .
during production a split sample check will be conducted at the frequency shown in table num .
except for joint density the split samples will be from an acceptance sample obtained in accordance with subsection numb .
the acceptance test result will be compared to the process control test result obtained by the contractor using the acceptable limits shown in table num of cp num .
for joint density the comparison sample for testing by the contractor will be obtained by taking a second core adjacent to the joint density acceptance core .
the acceptance test result will be compared to the process control test result obtained by the contractor using the acceptable limits as shown in table num of cp num and following the check testing procedure given in cp num .
if production has been suspended and then resumed the engineer may order a ctp between process control and acceptance testing persons to assure the test results are within the acceptable limits shown in table num of cp num .
check test results shall not be included in process control testing .
the region materials engineer shall be called upon to resolve differences if a ctp shows unresolved differences beyond the values shown in table num of cp num. d stability verification testing .
after the mix design has been approved and production commences the department will perform a minimum of three stability verification tests to verify that the field produced hma conforms to the approved mix design the test frequency shall be one per day unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the test results will be evaluated and the contractor shall make adjustments if required in accordance with the following num .
the minimum value for stability will be the minimum specified in table num of the specifications .
there will be no tolerance limit .
num .
quality level .
calculate a ql for stability .
if the ql for stability is less than num then production shall be halted and the contractor shall submit a written proposal for a mix design revision to the engineer .
the engineer shall give written approval to the proposed mix design revision before production continues .
after a new or revised mix design is approved three additional stability tests will be performed on asphalt produced with the new or revised mix design .
the test frequency shall be one per day unless altered by the engineer .
if the stability ql is less than num then production shall be halted until a new mix design has been completed and approved using plant produced material or the contractor shall submit a written proposal for a mix num num design revision to the engineer .
the engineer shall give written approval to the proposed mix design revision before production continues .
num .
new or revised mix design .
whenever a new or revised mix design is used and production resumes three additional stability field verification tests shall be performed and the test results evaluated in accordance with the above requirements .
the test frequency shall be one per day unless altered by the engineer .
num .
field verification process complete .
when the field verification process described above is complete and production continues the sample frequency will revert back to num per num tons .
e mix verification testing .
after the mix design has been approved and production commences the department will perform a minimum of three volumetric verification tests for each of the following elements to verify that the field produced hot mix asphalt hma conforms to the approved mix design num air voids .
num voids in mineral aggregate vma .
num asphalt content ac .
the test frequency shall be one per day unless altered by the engineer .
the test results will be evaluated and the contractor shall make adjustments if required in accordance with the following num .
target values .
the target value for vma will be the average of the first three volumetric field test results on project produced hot mix asphalt or the target value specified in table num and table num of the specifications whichever is higher .
the target value for vma will be set no lower than num percent below the vma target on form num prior to production .
the target values for the test element of air voids and ac shall be the mix design air voids and mix design ac as shown on form num .
num .
tolerance limits .
the tolerance limits for each test element shall be ac num percent air voids num percent vma num percent num .
quality levels .
calculate an individual ql for each of the elements using the volumetric field verification test results .
if the ql for vma or ac is less than num or if the ql for air voids is less than num the production shall be halted and the contractor shall submit a written proposal for a mix design revision to the engineer .
production shall only commence upon receipt of written approval from the engineer of the proposed mix design revision .
num num after a new or revised mix design is approved three additional volumetric field verification tests will be performed on asphalt produced with the new or revised mix design .
the test frequency shall be one per day unless altered by the engineer .
if the ql for vma or ac is less than num or the ql for the test element of air voids is less than num then production shall be halted until a new mix design has been completed in accordance with cp num or cp num a new form num issued and the contractor demonstrates that he is capable of producing a mixture meeting the verification requirements in accordance with a or b below a .
the contractor shall produce test material at a site other than a cdot project .
the contractor shall notify the engineer a minimum of num hours notice prior to the requested test .
the location and time of the test are subject to the approval of the engineer prior to placement .
three samples will be tested for volumetric properties .
if the ql for vma or ac is equal or greater than num and the ql for the element of air voids is equal or greater than num full production may resume or b .
the contractor may construct a num ton test strip on the project .
three samples in the last num tons will be tested for volumetric properties .
after construction of the test section production shall be halted until the testing is complete and element qls are calculated .
if the ql for vma or ac is equal to or greater than num or the ql for the element of air voids is equal to or greater than num full production may resume .
if the ql for vma or ac is less than num or the ql for the element of air voids is less than num the material shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the department .
the time count will continue and any delay to the project will be considered to have been caused by the contractor and will not be compensable .
the costs associated with mix designs shall be solely at the contractors expense .
if the contractor fails to verify the new mix design in accordance with a or b then production shall be halted until a new mix design has been completed in accordance with cp num or cp num a new form num issued and the contractor demonstrates they are capable of producing a mixture meeting the verification requirements in accordance with a or b .
num .
new or revised mix design .
whenever a new or revised mix design is used and production resumes three additional volumetric field verification tests shall be performed and the test results evaluated in accordance with the above requirements .
the test frequency shall be one per day unless altered by the engineer .
num .
field verification process complete .
when the field verification process described above is complete and production continues the sample frequency will revert back to a minimum of num tons .
the engineer has the discretion to conduct additional verification tests at any time .
num num f testing schedule .
process control and project acceptance testing frequency shall be in accordance with table num. g reference conditions .
three reference conditions can exist determined by the moving quality level mql .
the mql will be calculated in accordance with the procedure in cp num for determining quality level ql .
the mql will be calculated using only acceptance tests .
the mql will be calculated on tests num through num then tests num through num then tests num through num then thereafter on the last five consecutive test results .
the mql will not be used to determine pay factors .
the three reference conditions and actions that will be taken are described as follows num .
condition green will exist for an element when an mql of num or greater is reached or maintained and the past five consecutive test results are within the specification limits .
num .
condition yellow will exist for all elements at the beginning of production or when a new process is established because of changes in materials or the jobmix formula following an extended suspension of work or when the mql is less than num and equal to or greater than num .
once an element is at condition green if the mql falls below num or a test result falls outside the specification limits the condition will revert to yellow or red as appropriate .
num .
condition red will exist for any element when the mql is less than num .
the contractor shall be notified immediately in writing and the process control sampling and testing frequency increased to a minimum rate of num pernum tons for that element .
the process control sampling and testing frequency shall remain at num per num tons until the process control ql reaches or exceeds num .
if the ql for the next five process control tests is below num production will be suspended .
if gradation is the element with mql less than num the department will test one randomly selected sample in the first num tons produced in condition red .
if this test result is outside the tolerance limits production will be suspended .
this test result will not be included as an acceptance test .
after condition red exists a new mql will be started .
acceptance testing will stay at the frequency shown in table num .
after three acceptance tests if the mql is less than num production will be suspended .
production will remain suspended until the source of the problem is identified and corrected .
each time production is suspended corrective actions shall be proposed in writing by the contractor and approved in writing by the engineer before production may resume .
upon resuming production the process control sampling and testing frequency for the elements causing the condition red shall remain at num per num tons .
if the ql for the next five process control tests is below num num num production will be suspended again .
if gradation is the element with mql less than num the department will test one randomly selected sample in the first num tons produced in condition red .
if this test result is outside the tolerance limits production will be suspended .
table num schedule for minimum sampling and testing for hma element process control acceptancenum check ctp asphalt content num tons num tons num tons gradation numday num tons num tons theoretical maximum specific gravity num tons minimum numday num tons minimum numday num tons inplace density num tons num tons num tons joint density num corenum linear feet of joint num corenum linear feet of joint num corenum linear feet of joint aggregate percent moisture num num tons minimum numday num tons not applicable percent lime num numday not applicable not applicable notes for table num num the minimum number of acceptance tests will be num asphalt content num gradation num inplace density and num joint density for all projects .
num when unscheduled job mix formula changes are made form num acceptance of the elements except for inplace density will be based on the actual number of samples that have been selected up to that time even if the number is below the minimum listed in the schedule .
at the engineers discretion additional random inplace density tests may be taken in order to meet scheduled minimums provided the applicable pavement layer is available for testing under safe conditions .
beginning with the new job mix formula the quantity it will represent shall be estimated .
a revised schedule of acceptance tests will be based on that estimate .
num not to be used for incentive or disincentive pay .
test according to cp numb and report results from form num or form num on form num num verified per contractors pc plan sampling and testing of portland cement concrete paving .
all portland cement concrete pavement item num shall be tested in accordance with the following process control and acceptance testing procedures num num a process control testing .
the contractor shall be responsible for process control testing of all elements listed in table num or num .
process control testing shall be performed at the expense of the contractor .
the contractor shall develop a process control plan pcp in accordance with the following num .
process control plan .
for each element listed in tables num or num the pcp must provide adequate details to ensure that the contractor will perform process control .
the contractor shall submit the pcp to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
the contractor shall not start any work on the project until the engineer has approved the pcp in writing .
a .
frequency of tests or measurements .
the pcp shall indicate a random sampling frequency which shall be equal to or more frequent than that shown in table num or num .
the process control tests shall be independent of acceptance tests .
b .
test result chart .
each process control test result the appropriate area volume and the tolerance limits shall be plotted .
the chart shall be posted daily at a location convenient for viewing by the engineer .
c. quality level chart .
the ql for each element in table num or num shall be plotted .
the ql shall be calculated in accordance with the procedure in cp num for determining quality level .
the ql shall be calculated on tests num through num then tests num through num then tests num through num then thereafter the last five consecutive test results .
the area of material represented by the last test result shall correspond to the ql .
d. ftest and ttest charts .
if flexural strength criteria is indicated then the results of ftest and ttest analysis between the departments verification tests of flexural strength and the contractors process control tests of flexural strength shall be shown on charts .
the ftest and ttest shall be calculated in accordance with standard statistical procedures using all verification tests and process control tests completed to date .
when a verification test is completed the ftest and ttest calculations shall be redone .
the area of material represented by the last test result shall correspond to the ftest and t test .
a warning value of num percent and an alert value of num percent shall be shown on each chart .
the chart shall be posted daily at a location convenient for viewing by the engineer .
num .
point of sampling .
the material for process control testing shall be sampled by the contractor using cp num .
the location where material samples will be taken shall be indicated in the pcp .
num .
testing standards .
the pcp shall indicate which testing standards will be followed .
acceptable standards are colorado procedures aashto and astm .
the order of precedence is colorado procedures aashto procedures and then astm procedures .
num num the compressive strength test for process control will be the average strength of two test cylinders cast in plastic molds from a single sample of concrete cured under standard laboratory conditions and tested three to seven days after molding .
num .
testing supervisor qualifications .
the person in charge of and responsible for the process control testing shall be identified in the pcp .
this person shall be present on the project and possess one or more of the following qualifications a .
registration as a professional engineer in the state of colorado .
b .
registration as an engineer in training in the state of colorado with two years of paving experience .
c. a bachelor of science in civil engineering or civil engineering technology with three years of paving experience .
d. national institute for certification in engineering nicet certification at level iii or higher in the subfields of transportation engineering technology highway materials or construction materials testing engineering technology concrete and four years of paving experience .
num .
technician qualifications .
technicians performing tests shall meet the requirements of colorado procedure num .
num .
testing equipment .
all of the testing equipment used to conduct process control testing shall conform to the standards specified in the test procedures and be in good working order .
if flexural strength criteria is indicated then the contractor shall provide the following equipment and supplies which will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work a .
a separate temperature controlled facility of at least num square feet usable space .
this facility shall be used exclusively for the molding storage and testing of concrete test specimens as required .
this facility shall be provided in addition to other facilities required in section num .
the storage facility shall have sufficient water storage capacity for curing all required test specimens .
the storage facility shall provide separate storage tanks for each type of required testing .
each storage tank shall have a continuously recording thermometer and sufficient blank charts for the project .
temperatures of each storage tank shall be recorded for the duration of the project .
b .
a machine for testing flexural strength of concrete specimens .
the machine shall be one of the following or an approved equal num forney model number fhsnum with a copilot digital monitor .
num humboldt model number hcmnum with a id digital indicator .
num gilson model number mcnum with pro controller .
num num both the contractor and the engineer will use this machine for testing concrete specimens .
the machine shall meet the requirements of aashto t num and t num and the following the machine and the flexural strength assembly shall be of a rigid construction .
the applied vertical load shall be uniformly distributed to the third points and uniformly across the width of the beam transverse distribution .
uniform distribution of the load is defined as less than a num percent variation in the load between each of the nine strain gages placed in the middle third section of the tension face for loads from num to num pounds .
two firms that can evaluate and assess the ability of the machine to distribute the load evenly are kpff consulting engineers chicago illinois num and construction testing laboratories skokie illinois num .
other firms may be capable of evaluating and assessing the load distribution of the machine .
the engineer must approve the firm prior to assessing the machine .
the machine shall be ready for use and certified two days before paving begins .
after the machine has been certified and accepted by the engineer it shall not be moved until all portland cement concrete paving and flexural strength acceptance tests have been completed .
a weekly check of the planeness of all bearing surfaces on the flexural strength apparatus shall be made and recorded in the contractors pc notebook for each week that flexural strength testing occurs .
if the nominal maximum aggregate size of the mix is  inches or less then the contractor shall also provide a separate flexural strength apparatus that is configured to test numxnumxnum inch beam specimens .
swapping flexural strength apparatuses will not require recertification of the test machine .
c. beam molds for molding all test specimens required .
beam molds shall have a cross section of approximately num inches by num inches .
all beam molds shall be checked by the contractor prior to being placed in service and monthly .
the checks of each beam mold shall be recorded in the contractors pc notebook .
this shall include all testing described in subsection num .
if the nominal maximum aggregate size of the mix is  inches or less then the contractor shall also provide beam molds with a cross section of num inches by num inches and a minimum length of num inches .
num .
reporting and record keeping .
the contractor shall report the results of the tests to the engineer in writing at least once per day .
the contractor shall assemble a process control pc notebook and update it daily .
this notebook shall contain all worksheets test results forms test results charts and quality level charts for each of the elements listed in table num or num .
the contractor shall submit examples of worksheets test result forms and test results charts in accordance with cp numb as part of the contractors process control plan pcp .
the num num contractor shall submit the pc notebook to the engineer for review once a month on the date agreed to at the preconstruction conference .
the pc notebook will be returned to the contractor with a list of recognized deficiencies within two working days after submittal .
deficiencies may include but are not limited to the failure to submit the notebook on time or an absence of the required reports .
for any month in which deficiencies are identified the pc notebook will be submitted for review two weeks after the pc notebook is returned .
upon the second recognized deficiency the engineer will notify the contractor and the pay estimate shall be withheld until the contractor submits in writing a report detailing the cause for the recognized deficiency .
the report shall include how the contractor plans to resolve the deficiencies .
additional recognized deficiencies will result in a delay of the pay estimate until the contractor has identified and resolved the deficiency along with revising and resubmitting his pcp to address these issues .
once the engineer has reviewed and approved the revised pcp the estimate may be paid .
upon submittal of the pc notebook for the semifinal estimate the pc notebook shall become the property of the department .
the contractor shall make provisions such that the engineer can inspect process control work in progress including pc notebook sampling testing plants and the contractors testing facilities at any time .
num .
optimized gradation .
the contractor shall perform process control testing of the combined aggregate gradation cag when an optimized gradation og is used for class e or p concrete .
the combined aggregate gradation testing frequency shall be three per day .
test one shall be sampled and tested after full production begins but before production reaches num cubic yards .
test two shall be sampled and tested after four hours of continuous production or production reaches num cubic yards whichever comes first .
test three shall be sampled and tested after seven hours of continuous production or production reaches num cubic yards whichever comes first .
the frequency shall be a minimum of one per day if production is less than num cubic yards .
the department will perform one gradation test each day that may be a split of one of the three daily pc samples .
this data will not be used to determine acceptability of the material but as information only .
the contractors gradation test data will be used to calculate the coarseness factor cf and workability factor wf and must plot within the workability box .
no corrective action shall be required if the data falls within the workability box .
when the contractors gradation test results and the cf and wf fall outside the workability box the contractor shall immediately make corrections to bring the aggregate gradation within the workability box and notify the engineer .
if two or more consecutive test results for any single day or two successive days are found to fall outside the workability box the contractor shall immediately suspend production and provide a num num written corrective plan to the engineer for approval prior to resuming production .
upon being allowed to resume production the contractor shall follow the daily sampling frequency .
if the next two consecutive gradation tests indicate the cf and wf plot inside the workability box the contractor may continue production .
if the first two aggregate samples do not have cf and wf that fall inside the workability box production shall be suspended .
prior to resuming production the contractor shall sample the individual aggregate stockpiles at two or more locations to determine the range of variability within each stockpile make appropriate adjustments to the percentages for each aggregate component and discharge and sample the combined aggregates .
the combined aggregate gradation shall be tested to determine if the cf and wf fall inside the workability box .
production can resume if the cf and wf plot within the workability box .
production will continue to be suspended for additional evaluation of stockpiles and aggregate feed rates until gradation sampling and testing indicate the cf and wf fall inside the workability box .
all gradation test information during production shall be provided to the engineer daily .
the contractor shall immediately report all gradation test data to the engineer for evaluation during periods when production is suspended or upon resuming production .
the contractor will be notified in writing in all cases when production may resume or shall remain suspended .
b acceptance testing .
acceptance testing frequencies shall be in accordance with the schedule owner acceptance in the departments field materials manual .
except for flexural strength acceptance tests will be conducted by and at the expense of the department .
acceptance sampling and testing procedures will be in accordance with the departments field materials manual with the following exceptions and inclusions a split sample from an acceptance test shall not be used for a process control test .
the engineer will designate the location where samples are to be taken .
samples shall be taken by the contractor in accordance with cp num .
engineer will be present during the sampling and take possession of all acceptance samples .
samples transported in different containers will be combined and mixed before molding specimens .
all materials are subject to inspection and testing at all times .
pavement thickness acceptance will be determined by cores .
the compressive strength test for acceptance will be the average compressive strength of three test cylinders cast in plastic molds from a single sample of concrete and cured under standard laboratory conditions prior to testing .
if the compressive strength of any one specimen differs from the average by more than num percent that specimen will be deleted and the average strength will be determined using the remaining two specimens .
if the compressive strength of more than one specimen differs from the average by more than num num num percent the average strength will be determined using all three specimens .
each set of three cylinders will be tested at num days after molding .
acceptance tests for flexural strength shall be the contractors process control tests .
the flexural strength tests shall be the average flexural strength of four test beams .
the test beams shall be prepared according to aashto t num .
the flexural strength of each specimen shall be measured according to aashto t num with the following additional requirements if the flexural strength of only one specimen differs from the average by more than num percent that specimen shall be deleted and the average strength shall be determined using the remaining three specimens .
if the flexural strength of more than one specimen differs from the average by more than num percent the test value shall be the average of all four specimens .
each set of four beams shall be tested at num days after molding .
if the nominal maximum aggregate size of the mix is  inches or less then the contractor shall prepare three additional test beams using the numxnumxnum inch molds .
the numxnumxnum inch specimens will be tested num days .
the results of the numxnumxnum inch specimens will be for information only and will not be used to determine the acceptability of the concrete .
results of the numxnumxnum inch specimens will be reported to the engineer with the corresponding acceptance test results .
these additional specimens are being used to evaluate the validity of using smaller test specimens for acceptance .
c verification testing .
verification testing will be used only when flexural strength criteria is indicated and is the responsibility of the department .
the department will determine the locations where samples or measurements are to be taken .
the location of sampling shall be based on a stratified random procedure .
verification sampling and testing procedures will be in accordance with sections num num num the schedule for minimum materials sampling testing and inspection in the departments field materials manual and cp num .
samples for verification testing shall be taken by the contractor in accordance with cp num in the presence of the engineer .
an analysis of test results will be performed after all test results are known using the ttest and ftest statistical methods with an alpha value set at num .
if either the above ttest and ftest analysis shows a significant difference then the following items shall be checked comparison of beam fracture locations and types computations and flexural testing machine outputs curing tank temperature charts slump and air contents plant batch tickets for major changes review of sampling molding testing procedures along with iat check tests and any other investigations that may clarify the significant differences .
if after a review of the data no reasons can be determined for the significant difference the departments test data shall be used for determining quality levels and incentive or disincentive according to the methods in this section .
num num d check testing .
the contractor and the engineer shall conduct a check testing program ctp prior to the placement of any concrete pavement .
the check testing program will include a conference directed by the region materials engineer the contractors testers and the departments testers concerning methods procedures and equipment for compressive or flexural strength testing .
check testing shall be completed before any portland cement concrete pavement is placed .
a set of three cylinders or four beams will be molded by both the contractor and the departments project testers from a split sample .
the specimens will be sampled molded and cured for seven days and tested for compressive or flexural strength according to the procedures of section num .
the departments independent assurance tester will also mold cure and test a set of three cylinders or four beams but the independent assurance test results will not be entered in the check testing analysis .
if the results of the check tests do not meet the following criteria then the check testing will be repeated until the following criteria are met num the average of the contractors test results and the average of the departments test results shall be within num percent of the average of all test results .
num each specimen test result shall be within num percent of the average of all test results .
when compressive strength criteria is indicated a check test must also be conducted on the sand equivalent test .
a set of num sand equivalents will be run by both the contractors and the departments project tester from a split sample .
the average of the absolute differences between tests taken by the process control personnel and the acceptance testing personnel will be compared to the acceptable limits shown in table num of cp num .
the ctp will be continued until the acceptance and process control test results are within the permissible ranges shown in table num of cp num .
during production split samples of randomly selected acceptance tests will be compared to the permissible ranges shown in table num of cp num .
the minimum frequency will be as shown in table num .
if production has been suspended and then resumed the engineer may order a ctp between tests taken by process control and acceptance testing persons to assure the test results are within the permissible ranges shown in table num of cp num .
check test results shall not be included in process control testing .
the region materials engineer shall be called upon to resolve differences if a ctp shows unresolved differences beyond the ranges shown in table num of cp num. e independent assurance testing .
the sample for the iat will be a split sample of the contractors process control test .
the departments representative performing verification tests shall also use a split sample of the contractors process control test and participate in the iat .
the iat for flexural strength will be the average flexural strength of four test beams prepared according to the requirements of section num and cured for seven days in the field before being transferred to the iat lab .
iat specimens will be tested at num days .
num num f testing schedule .
all samples used to determine incentive or disincentive payment by quality level formulas in accordance with section num will be selected by a stratified random process .
table num testing schedule item num portland cement concrete pavement flexural strength criteria element minimum testing frequency contractors process control aggregate gradation and sand equivalent for the first five days minimum of numday then num sq .
yds .
after num days num sq .
yds .
slump first three loads each day then as needed for control .
water cement ratio first three loads each day then num cu .
yds .
air content and yield minimum of numday then num sq .
yds .
flexural strength minimum of numday then num sq .
yds .
compressive strength num sq .
yds .
pavement thickness in accordance with subsection num .
pull test joints minimum of six transverse and six longitudinal joint locations for the numst num linear feet then three transverse and three longitudinal joints thereafter load transfer dowel bar placement in accordance with subsection numbnum average texture depth num per num linear feet in each lane and shoulder wider than num feet .
num num table num testing schedule item num portland cement concrete pavement compressive strength criteria material inspection at plant .
if the engineer inspects the materials at the source the following conditions shall be met num the engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the contractor and the materials producer .
num the engineer shall have full entry to all parts of the plant necessary for the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
num adequate safety measures shall be provided and maintained .
the department reserves the right to retest all materials which have been previously tested or inspected .
the retesting may be prior to or after incorporation of the materials into the work .
those materials inspected and tested after delivery on the project or after incorporation into the work that do not meet the requirements of the contract will be rejected or accepted with an adjustment in price in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
storage of materials .
materials shall be stored to assure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
stored materials even though conditionally approved before storage will be subject to inspection and testing prior to incorporation into the work .
stored materials shall be located to facilitate prompt inspection .
with prior approval portions of the right of way may be used for storage of materials and equipment and for the contractors plant .
any element minimum testing frequency contractors process control aggregate gradation minimum of numday then num sq .
yds .
slump first three loads each day then as needed for control compressive strength air content yield and sand equivalent minimum of numday then num sq .
yds .
pavement thickness in accordance with subsection num .
pull test joints minimum of six transverse and six longitudinal joint locations for the numst num linear feet then three transverse and three longitudinal joints thereafter load transfer dowel bar placement in accordance with subsection num b num average texture depth num per num linear feet in each lane and shoulder wider than num feet water cement ratio first three loads each day then num cu .
yds .
num num additional space required shall be provided at the contractors expense .
stored materials will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner or lessee .
if requested copies of such written permission shall be furnished to the engineer .
all storage sites shall be restored to their original condition at the contractors expense .
handling materials .
all materials shall be handled so their quality and fitness for the work is preserved .
aggregates shall be transported to the work in vehicles constructed to prevent loss or segregation of materials .
department furnished materials .
material furnished by the department will be made available to the contractor at the points specified in the contract .
the cost of handling and placing materials after they are made available to the contractor shall be included in the contract price for the item .
the contractor will be held responsible for all material received until it is incorporated into the work and accepted .
demurrage charges resulting from the contractors failure to accept the material at the designated time and point of delivery will be deducted from monies due the contractor .
buy america requirements a steel and iron .
all manufacturing processes including the application of a coating for all steel and iron products permanently incorporated in the work shall have occurred in the united states of america .
all manufacturing processes are defined as processes required to change the raw ore or scrap metal into the finished inplace steel or iron product .
this requirement will not prevent a minimal use of foreign steel or iron provided the total project delivered cost of all such steel and iron which includes the cost of delivering the steel and iron to the project does not exceed onetenth of one percent of the total contract cost or num whichever is greater .
if there is any foreign steel or iron permanently incorporated into the project the contractor shall provide documentation of the project delivered cost of that foreign steel or iron .
the contractor shall maintain on file certifications that every process including the application of a coating performed on steel or iron products either has or has not been carried out in the united states of america .
this certification applies to every iron or steel product that requires pre inspection pretesting certified test results or a certificate of compliance .
the contractor shall obtain such a certification from each supplier distributor fabricator and manufacturer that has handled each steel or iron product .
these certifications shall create a chain of custody trail that includes every supplier distributor fabricator and manufacturer that handles the steel or iron product .
the lack of these certifications will be num num justification for rejection of the steel or iron product .
the contractor shall maintain a document summarizing the date and quantity of all steel and iron material delivered to the project .
the document shall show the pay item quantity of material delivered to the project along with the quantity of material installed by the cutoff date for the monthly progress payment .
the summary shall also reconcile the pay item quantities to the submitted buy america certifications .
the contractor shall also maintain documentation of the project delivered cost of all foreign steel or iron permanently incorporated into the project .
both documents shall be submitted to the engineer within five days of the cutoff date for the monthly progress payment .
a monthly summary shall be submitted even if no steel or iron products are incorporated into the project during the month .
the summary document does not relieve the contractor of providing the necessary buy america certifications of steel and or iron prior to permanent incorporation into the project .
the state fhwa and their representatives shall be allowed access to this documentation upon request .
prior to the permanent incorporation into the project of steel or iron products the contractor shall certify in writing that the documentation is on file and the steel or iron products are in compliance with this requirement .
b glass beads for pavement marking .
all postconsumer and industrial glass beads for pavement marking shall have been manufactured from north american glass waste streams in the united states of america .
the bead manufacturer shall submit a coc in accordance with subsection num confirming that north american glass waste streams were used in the manufacture of the glass beads .
certificates of compliance .
the contract will designate products and assemblies that can be incorporated in the work if accompanied by certificates of compliance .
each certificate shall include num the departments project number .
num manufacturers name .
num address of manufacturing facility .
num laboratory name address .
num name of product or assembly .
num complete description of the material .
num model catalog stock no .
if applicable .
num lot heat or batch number identifying the material delivered .
num dates of the laboratory testing .
num listing of all applicable specifications required by the department for this particular product or assembly .
certificates shall reference the actual tests conducted on samples taken from the same lot heat or batch and shall include a statement that the product or assembly to be incorporated into the num num project was fabricated in accordance with and meets the applicable specifications .
num the following certification signed by a person having legal authority to act for the contractor i hereby certify under penalty of perjury that the material listed in this certificate of compliance represents __________ quantity and units of pay item __________ pay item number and description that will be installed on project number __________________ .
_________________________ __________________ contractor date the original certificate of compliance shall include the contractors original signature as directed above .
the original signature including corporate title on the certificate of compliance under penalty of perjury shall be of a person having legal authority to act for the manufacturer .
it shall state that the product or assembly to be incorporated into the project has been sampled and passed all specified tests in conformity to the plans and specifications for this project .
one legible copy of the fully signed certificate of compliance shall be furnished to the engineer prior to installation of material .
the original shall be provided to the engineer before payment for the represented item will be made .
each product or assembly delivered to the project must contain the lot heat or batch number identical to that on the accompanying certificate of compliance .
products or assemblies furnished on the basis of certificates of compliance may be sampled and tested by the department and if determined not to meet the applicable specifications will be rejected or accepted according to subsection num .
certified test report .
the contract will designate products and assemblies that can be incorporated in the work if accompanied by certified test reports .
each report shall include num the departments project number .
num manufacturers name .
num address of manufacturing facility .
num laboratory name address .
num name of product or assembly .
num complete description of the material .
num model catalog stock no .
if applicable .
num lot heat or batch number identifying the material delivered .
num dates of the laboratory testing .
num all test results are required to verify that the material furnished conforms to all applicable department specifications .
test results shall be from tests num num conducted on samples taken from the same lot heat or batch .
num the following certification signed by a person having legal authority to act for the contractor i herebnumy certify under penalty of perjury that the material listed in this certified test report represents __________ quantity and units of pay item __________ pay item number and description that will be installed on project number __________________ .
_________________________ __________________ contractor date the certified test report shall be a legible copy or an original document and shall include the contractors original signature as directed above .
the signature including corporate title on the certified test report under penalty of perjury shall be of a person having legal authority to act for the manufacturer or the independent testing laboratory .
it shall state that the test results show that the product or assembly to be incorporated into the project has been sampled and passed all specified tests in conformity to the plans and specifications for this project .
one legible copy or original document of the fully signed certified test report shall be furnished to the engineer prior to installation of material .
failure to comply may result in delays to the project or rejection of the materials .
each product or assembly delivered to the project must contain the lot heat or batch number identical to that on the accompanying certified test report .
products or assemblies furnished on the basis of certified test reports may be sampled and tested by the department and if determined not to meet the applicable specifications will be rejected or accepted according to subsection num .
num num section num legal relations and responsibility to public laws to be observed .
the contractor shall keep fully informed and comply with all federal state and local laws ordinances and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority which may affect those engaged or employed on the work or affect the conduct of the work .
the contractor shall protect and indemnify the department and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by the contractor the subcontractors suppliers of materials or services or their employees .
permits licenses and taxes .
the contractor shall procure all permits and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the contract .
prior to beginning work the contractor shall furnish the engineer a written list of all permits required for the proper completion of the contract .
the list shall clearly identify the type of permit or permits that must be obtained before work on any particular phase or phases of work can be started .
copies of the fully executed permits shall be furnished to the engineer upon request .
patented devices materials and processes .
if the contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright the contractor shall provide for their use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the department any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement resulting from the use of any patented design device material or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the department for any costs expenses and damages which they may be obliged to pay by reason of any infringement during the prosecution or after the completion of the contract .
restoration of surfaces opened by permit .
an individual firm or corporation may be issued a permit to construct or reconstruct a utility service .
the contractor shall allow permit holders to perform permitted work .
the contractor shall make necessary repairs resulting from this work as directed .
the repairs will be paid for as extra work in accordance with subsection num .
the repairs will be subject to the same requirements as the original work performed .
federal aid provisions .
when the united states government participates in the cost of a project the federal laws and the rules and regulations made pursuant to such laws must be observed by the contractor and the work shall be subject to the inspection of the appropriate federal agency .
such inspection shall not make the united states government a party to the contract and shall not interfere with the rights of the parties to the contract .
num num safety health and sanitation provisions .
a project safety management plan .
prior to the start of construction the contractors project safety manager shall prepare a written project safety management plan plan which shall be specific to the project .
the plan shall include num designation of a project safety manager and an alternate including names and contact information and competent persons for each construction activity as described below .
num a list of all significant andor highrisk construction activities and safety considerations as described below and a hazard assessment for each .
num direction as to whether engineering administrative personal protection measures training or a combination thereof shall be implemented to address the hazards identified in num above .
num provisions for field safety meetings .
the contractor shall conduct field safety meetings also known as toolbox or tailgate meetings at the frequency specified in the plan which shall be at least once per week .
the contractor shall encourage participation by all persons working at the project site .
participants at these meetings shall discuss specific construction activities for that work period results from safety inspections required personal protective equipment and all other necessary safety precautions .
num provisions for project safety meetings .
in the event of a safety stand down the contractor shall conduct a project safety meeting to discuss the circumstances leading to the standdown and the measures that shall be taken to prevent a recurrence .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the time date and location of these meetings shall require participation by all persons including department personnel and consultants working at the project site and shall track attendance through signup lists .
num at the contractors option portions of the plan may be prepared by the subcontractors that will be performing that subcontracted work .
the contractor shall remain responsible for the overall project plan and for incorporating portions prepared by subcontractors .
portions of the plan prepared by subcontractors shall be as stringent as the contractors overall plan .
num procedures for assuring compliance by subcontractors suppliers and authorized visitors to the project .
in addition the plan shall specify the measures that will be taken to discourage unauthorized personnel from entering the site .
num procedures to be followed in cases where workers are suspected of drug or alcohol impairment .
num num num provisions for project safety inspections .
the project safety manager shall conduct regular project safety inspections at the frequency specified in the plan at least once per month .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in advance of these inspections .
documentation of the inspections shall include the date of the inspection the participants the findings and the corrective measures taken to address the findings .
within one week after these inspections the contractor shall provide a copy of the documentation to the engineer and shall maintain a copy on the project site .
num procedures to be followed to correct violations of the plan by any personnel .
num the notification investigation and implementation procedures that the contractor shall follow in the case of a safety stand down .
num the contractors certification shall be as follows by authorized signature below contractor name hereinafter referred to as the contractor hereby certifies that this project safety management plan plan complies with and meets applicable federal state and local laws rules regulations and guidelines governing safety health and sanitation including but not limited to the occupational safety and health act num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num mine safety and health administration msha title num cfr the colorado work zone best practices safety guide cfr num national consensus standards and the drugfree workplace act public law num title v subtitle d num usc num et seq .
and subsection num of the standard specifications .
all operations and work practices of the contractor shall comply with this plan .
the contractor requires that all subcontractors suppliers department personnel and consultants comply with this plan .
_______________________________________________________ signature of contractors project safety manager or alternate _______________________________________________________ title _______________________________________________________ date prior to the start of construction the contractor shall submit the plan to the engineer for the project records and shall provide updates to the plan as necessary and as work conditions or personnel change .
the contractor shall review the plan for sufficiency and accuracy at least once per twelve months num num of contract time .
the engineer will review the plan for general compliance with subsection num and notify the contractor in writing that the plan has been received and addresses items num thru num above .
an uptodate copy of the plan shall be on the project site in the contractors possession at all times .
b contractor responsibilities .
the contractor shall ensure compliance with applicable federal state and local laws rules regulations and guidelines governing safety health and sanitation including but not limited to the plan the occupational safety and health act num cfr num num cfr num num cfr num mine safety and health administration msha title num cfr the colorado work zone best practices safety guide cfr num national consensus standards and the drugfree workplace act public law num title v subtitle d num usc num et seq ..
the contractor shall provide all safeguards safety devices and protective equipment and shall take all other actions necessary to protect the life safety and health of persons working at or visiting the project site and of the public and property in connection with the performance of the work covered by the contract .
in the case of conflicting requirements the more stringent of the requirements shall apply .
the contractor shall require that all operations and work practices by contractor subcontractor supplier and department personnel and consultants comply with the provisions of the plan .
the contractor shall respond in writing to all safety issues raised by the engineer .
all work vehicles and mobile equipment shall be equipped with one or more functioning warning lights mounted as high as practicable which shall be capable of displaying in all directions one or more flashing oscillating or rotating lights for warning roadway traffic .
the lights shall be amber in color .
the warning lights shall be activated when the work vehicle or mobile equipment is operating within the roadway the right of way or both .
all supplemental lights shall be sae class num certified .
c project safety manager .
prior to the start of construction the contractor shall designate a project safety manager and an alternate who shall be responsible for the coordination of safety activities and preparation certification and implementation of the plan .
d competent persons .
prior to the start of construction the contractor shall designate at least one competent person for each of the construction activities being completed .
a competent person is an individual who by way of training experience or combination thereof is knowledgeable of applicable standards is capable of identifying existing and predictable workplace hazards relating to a specific construction activity is designated by the employer and has authority to take prompt appropriate actions .
construction activities and safety considerations that must be addressed by the plan and by designation of a competent person shall include but are not limited to if applicable to the project num rotomilling and paving operations .
num concrete paving .
num concrete placement .
num num num lead abatement .
num hearing protection .
num respiratory protection .
num rigging .
num assured grounding .
num scaffolding .
num fall protection .
num use of cranes .
num trenching and excavating .
num steel erection .
num underground construction including caissons and cofferdams .
num demolition .
num blasting and the use of explosives .
num stairways and ladders .
num asbestos .
num confined space .
the appropriate competent persons shall be present on the project site at all times during the specific construction activities that require those competent persons .
e project safety health requirements .
all personnel on the project site shall wear the following personal protective equipment ppe at all times when in the highway right of way except when in their vehicles num head protection and high visibility apparel reflectorized for night use conforming to ansiisea num num and appropriate sturdy footwear all of which shall comply with the latest appropriate national consensus standards .
num all other ppe that is stipulated by the plan .
all ppe shall comply with the latest appropriate national consensus standards .
f safety standdown .
the engineer may immediately suspend all or part of any work in the case of an accident including property damage or catastrophe three or more persons hospitalized in a single incident or other situation presenting an imminent danger to life or health such as a near miss violation of the plan or presence of a hazardous situation .
in the case of a worksite fatality directly related to the contractors or any subcontractors work operations the safety standdown shall be mandatory .
in the case of a traffic fatality unrelated to a workzone incident in the opinion of the engineer the safety standdown will not be mandatory .
during any mandatory safety stand down due to a fatality all work on the project shall cease except that work deemed immediately necessary by the engineer to make the project safe .
the contractor will be allowed to resume operations only after providing written documentation certified by the project safety manager or alternate regarding the corrective actions taken to prevent recurrence .
num num g regulatory enforcement actions .
the contractor shall provide written notifications of all regulatory agency actions relating to safety to the engineer .
h failure to comply .
failure to comply with the requirements of subsection num shall be grounds for withholding of progress payments project suspension or both .
i costs .
all costs associated with the preparation and implementation of the plan and compliance with all safety health and sanitation provisions and requirements will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
public convenience and safety .
the contractor shall conduct the work to minimize obstruction to traffic .
the safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along the highway and the protection of persons and property shall be provided for by the contractor as specified under subsection num .
railroadhighway provisions .
if the contract requires materials to be hauled across railroad tracks the department will make arrangements with the railroad company for any new crossings required or for the use of any existing crossings .
the contractor shall make arrangements for the use of crossings not provided in the contract .
work performed by the contractor on the railroad right of way shall be performed to avoid interference with the movement of trains or traffic on the railroad tracks .
the contractor shall use care and precaution in order to avoid accidents damage or unnecessary delay or interference with the railroad companys trains or property .
construction over and adjacent to navigable waters .
work on navigable waters shall be conducted to avoid interference with free navigation of the waterways and so the existing navigable depths will not be impaired except as allowed by permit issued by the u.s. coast guard or the u.s. army corps of engineers as applicable .
barricades and signs .
the contractor shall provide erect and maintain barricades suitable and sufficient lights pavement markings signs and other traffic control devices and shall protect the work and safety of the public in accordance with the contract .
highways closed to traffic shall be protected by barricades and obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of darkness .
signs shall be provided to control and direct traffic .
the contractor shall erect signs at locations where operations may interfere with the use of the road by traffic and at all intermediate points where the new work crosses or coincides with an existing road bikepath or sidewalk .
signs shall be constructed erected and maintained in accordance with the contract .
barricades warning signs lights temporary signals and other protective devices num num shall conform with the latest revision of the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways published by the fhwa and adopted by the department the latest revision of the colorado supplement thereto and the required traffic control plan .
use of explosives .
when explosives are utilized in the prosecution of the work the contractor shall not endanger life property or new work .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage resulting from the use of explosives .
the contractors explosives shall be stored in a secure manner in compliance with laws and ordinances and storage places shall be clearly marked .
when electric blasting caps are used stored or moved in the vicinity of the work warning signs prohibiting the use of radio transmitters and mobile telephones shall be posted on all roads within num feet of the blasting operation .
the contractor shall notify property owners and public utility companies having structures in the proximity of the work of the intention to use explosives .
notice shall be given sufficiently in advance to enable them to protect their property .
in advance of doing any blasting work involving the use of electric blasting caps within num feet of any railroads track or structures the contractor shall notify the proper authority of the railroad company as to the location date time and approximate duration of such blasting operations .
at the conclusion of each day of blasting all spent surface blasting components shall be removed .
at the conclusion of blasting and excavation work the contractor shall properly dispose of all spent blasting components .
at the completion of final grading the contractor shall inspect the project and remove all exposed blasting components .
protection and restoration of property and landscape .
the contractor shall preserve private and public property and protect it from damage .
land monuments and property marks shall not be disturbed or moved until their location has been witnessed or referenced in accordance with section num and their removal approved .
the contractor shall be responsible for the damage or injury to property resulting from num the contractors neglect misconduct or omission in the manner or method of execution or nonexecution of the work or num the contractors defective work or the use of unacceptable materials .
the contractors responsibility shall not be released until the work has been completed in compliance with the contract .
the contractor shall restore damaged or injured property at the contractors expense to a condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage or injury occurred by repairing rebuilding or restoring the property .
num num existing trees shrubs bushes or grass outside the designated work areas but inside project limits that are damaged due to the contractors operations shall be replaced in kind at the contractors expense .
forest protection .
the contractor shall comply with all regulations of the state department of natural resources the national forest supervisor or other authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of forests and shall observe all sanitary laws and regulations with respect to the performance of work within or adjacent to state or national forests .
the contractor shall keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps stores warehouses residences latrines cesspools septic tanks and other structures in accordance with the regulations and instructions issued by the forest supervisor .
the contractor shall take all reasonable precaution to prevent forest fires and shall make every possible effort to notify a forest official at the earliest possible moment of the location and extent of any fire seen by them .
the contractor subcontractors and their employees shall prevent and suppress forest fires and provide assistance in this effort as directed by forest officials .
interruption of irrigation water flow .
the contractor shall arrange the work to avoid interference with the flow of irrigation water .
if it is impractical to install the structure during the time the ditches are not flowing the contractor shall make arrangements with the ditch owners regarding temporary interruption of flow or temporary diversion of water .
this will require construction of new ditches with appurtenant structures before old ditches or canals are altered .
the contractor shall provide any temporary ditches canals or structures necessary for the uninterrupted flow of irrigation water .
temporary construction and removal shall be at the expense of the contractor .
responsibility for damage claims insurance types and coverage limits .
the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the department its officers and employees from suits actions or claims of any type or character brought because of any and all injuries or damage received or sustained by any person persons or property on account of the operations of the contractor or failure to comply with the provisions of the contract or on account of or in consequence of neglect of the contractor in safeguarding the work or through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work or because of any act or omission neglect or misconduct of the contractor or because of any claims or amounts recovered from any infringements of patent trademark or copyright unless the design device material or process involved is specifically required by the contract or from any claims or amounts arising or recovered under the workers compensation act or other law ordinance order or decree .
the department may retain as much of any moneys due the contractor under any contract as may be determined by the department to be in the public interest num num a the contractor shall obtain and maintain at all times during the term of this contract insurance in the following kinds and amounts num .
workers compensation insurance as required by state statute and employers liability insurance covering all of contractors employees acting within the course and scope of their employment .
num .
commercial general liability insurance written on iso occurrence form cg num num num or equivalent covering premises operations fire damage independent contractors products and completed operations blanket contractual liability personal injury and advertising liability with minimum limits as follows num num each occurrence num num general aggregate num num products and completed operations aggregate and num num any one fire .
num completed operations coverage shall be provided for a minimum period of one year following final acceptance of work .
if any aggregate limit is reduced below num because of claims made or paid the contractor shall immediately obtain additional insurance to restore the full aggregate limit and furnish to cdot a certificate or other document satisfactory to cdot showing compliance with this provision .
num .
automobile liability insurance covering any auto including owned hired and nonowned autos with a minimum limit as follows num each accident combined single limit .
num .
professional liability insurance with minimum limits of liability of not less than num each claim and num annual aggregate for both the contractor or any subcontractors when num contract items num num or both are included in the contract .
num plans specifications and submittals are required to be signed and sealed by the contractors professional engineer including but not limited to i shop drawings and working drawings as described in subsection num. ii mix designs .
iii contractor performed design work as required by the plans and specifications .
iv change orders .
v approved value engineering change proposals .
num num num the contractor and any included subcontractor shall renew and maintain professional liability insurance as outlined above for a minimum of one year following final acceptance of work .
num .
umbrella or excess liability insurance with minimum limits of num .
this policy shall become primary drop down in the event the primary liability policy limits are impaired or exhausted .
the policy shall be written on an occurrence form and shall be following form of the primary .
the following form excess liability shall include cdot as an additional insured .
b cdot shall be named as additional insured on the commercial general liability and automobile liability insurance policies .
completed operations additional insured coverage shall be on endorsements cg num num cg num or equivalent .
coverage required of the contract will be primary over any insurance or selfinsurance program carried by the state of colorado .
c each insurance policy shall include provisions preventing cancellation or non renewal without at least num days prior notice to contractor .
the contractor shall forward to the engineer any such notice received within seven days of the contractors receipt of such notice .
d the contractor shall require all insurance policies in any way related to the contract and secured and maintained by the contractor to include clauses stating that each carrier will waive all rights of recovery under subrogation or otherwise against cdot its agencies institutions organizations officers agents employees and volunteers .
e all policies evidencing the insurance coverages required hereunder shall be issued by insurance companies satisfactory to cdot .
f the contractor shall provide certificates showing insurance coverage required by this contract to cdot prior to execution of the contract .
no later than num days prior to the expiration date of any such coverage the contractor shall deliver cdot certificates of insurance evidencing renewals thereof .
at any time during the term of this contract cdot may request in writing and the contractor shall thereupon within ten days supply to cdot evidence satisfactory to cdot of compliance with the provisions of this section .
g notwithstanding subsection numa if the contractor is a public entity within the meaning of the colorado governmental immunity act crs num num et seq .
as amended act the contractor shall at all times during the term of this contract maintain only such liability insurance by commercial policy or selfinsurance as is necessary to meet its liabilities under the act .
upon request by cdot the contractor shall show proof of such insurance satisfactory to cdot .
public entity contractors are not required to name cdot as an additional insured .
num num h when the contractor requires a subcontractor to obtain insurance coverage the types and minimum limits of this coverage may be different than those required as stated above for the contractor except for the commercial general liability additional insured endorsement and those that qualify as needing professional liability insurance .
opening sections of project to traffic .
opening certain sections of the work for traffic use shall not constitute acceptance of the work or provide a waiver of any provision of the contract .
the contract will designate the sections to be opened and specify the method of compensation for signing and traffic control .
the contractor shall maintain the roadway in a condition equal to or better than the condition of the roadway when it was initially opened to traffic .
where applicable the contract may specify the time or date on which certain portions of the work shall be completed to provide for the accommodation of traffic .
the engineer may order certain portions of the work opened for traffic other than specified in the contract .
if the engineer has not ordered the roadway opened because of unnecessary delay by the contractor and if no damage occurs other than that which can be attributed to traffic the contractor will be relieved of all responsibility for maintenance of traffic control devices and damage due to traffic .
any expense resulting from opening such sections shall be borne by the department or the contractor will be compensated for the added expense in accordance with subsection num .
if the opening causes changed working conditions or delays the completion of other items of work on the project compensation for the added expense and recommendations for additional time will be set forth by a contract modification order .
if the contractor is dilatory in completing the work the engineer may order all or a portion of the project to be opened to traffic .
in such event the contractor will not be relieved of the liability and responsibility during the period the work is so opened prior to final acceptance .
the contractor shall conduct the remainder of the construction operations to cause the least obstruction to or interference with traffic .
damage attributed to traffic shall be paid for at the contractors expense .
damages not attributable to traffic which might occur on sections opened to traffic shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
the removal of slides that are not caused by the contractors operations shall be done by the contractor on a basis agreed to prior to the slide removal .
contractors responsibility for work .
the contractor shall be responsible for and protect the contract work against injury or damage from all causes whether arising from the execution or nonexecution of the work including but not limited to action of the elements traffic fire theft vandalism or third party negligence until final written acceptance of the project by the engineer .
the contractor shall rebuild repair restore or replace all contract work that is injured or damaged prior to final written acceptance at no cost to the department .
num num the engineer may in writing relieve the contractor of expenses for damage to certain portions of the contract work caused by traffic or the action of the elements .
the following conditions must be met before the engineer will consider any relief num all work on the portion of contract work being considered must be complete under terms of the contract except for seeding mulching landscape items final cleanup and bridge painting or structural coating .
num traffic shall be in its final configuration and location .
portions of contract work that may be considered are described below num a minimum of num mile of roadway or a minimum of num mile of one direction of a divided highway .
num a complete bridge .
this includes all approach roadway safety features that protect traffic from such items as bridge railing and median barrier ends piers and abutments .
num a complete intersection traffic signal system .
num a complete highway lighting system .
loss injury or damage to the contract work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of the contractor including but not limited to acts of god such as earthquake flood tornado high winds or other cataclysmic phenomenon of nature or acts of the public enemy or of governmental authorities shall be restored by the contractor under the provisions of subsection num or num as applicable .
during periods that work is suspended the contractor shall be responsible for the work under the contract and shall prevent damage to the project provide for drainage and shall erect necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities required to maintain the project .
during the suspension period the contractor shall maintain in a growing condition all newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under the contract and shall protect new tree growth and other vegetative growth against injury .
unused furnishing right of way .
the department will be responsible for the securing of all necessary rights of way in advance of construction .
any exceptions will be indicated in the contract .
personal liability of public employees .
the engineer or authorized representatives are acting solely as agents and representatives of the department when carrying out and exercising the power or authority granted to them under the contract .
there shall not be any liability on them either personally or as employees of the department .
num num no waiver of legal rights .
upon completion of the contract the department will make final inspection and notify the contractor of acceptance .
final acceptance shall not preclude the department from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the contract nor from recovering from the contractor or surety or both overpayments sustained because the contractor failed to fulfill the obligations under the contract .
a waiver on the part of the department of any breach of any part of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract shall be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
third party beneficiary .
it is specifically agreed between the parties executing this contract that it is not intended by any of the provisions of any part of the contract to create in the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary hereunder or to authorize any one not a party to this contract to maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the terms or provisions of this contract .
the duties obligations and responsibilities of the parties to this contract with respect to third parties shall remain as imposed by law .
archaeological and paleontological discoveries .
when the contractors operations including materials pits and quarries encounter plant or animal fossils remains of prehistoric or historic structures prehistoric or historic artifacts bottle dumps charcoal from subsurface hearths old pottery potsherds stone tools arrowheads etc .
the contractors affected operations shall immediately cease .
the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer or other appropriate agency for contractor source pits or quarries of the discovery of these materials .
when ordered to proceed the contractor shall conduct affected operations as directed .
additional work except that in contractor source materials pits or quarries under subsection numb will be paid for by the department as provided in subsection num when contract unit prices exist or as extra work as provided in subsection num when no unit prices exist .
delays to the contractor not associated with work in contractor sources because of the materials encountered may be cause for extension of contract time in accordance with subsection num .
if fossils prehistoric or historic structures or prehistoric or historic artifacts are encountered in a contractor source materials pit or quarry all costs and time delays shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
air quality control .
the contractor shall comply with the colorado air quality control act title num article num crs and regulations promulgated thereunder .
water quality control .
the project work shall be performed using practices that minimize water pollution during construction .
all the practices listed in b below shall be followed to minimize the pollution of any state waters including wetlands .
num num a definitions .
num .
areas of disturbance ad .
locations where any activity has altered the existing soil cover or topography including vegetative and non vegetative activities during construction .
num .
construction site boundarylimits of construction loc .
the project area defined by the stormwater construction permit .
num .
discharge of pollutants .
one or more pollutants leaving the loc or entering state waters or other conveyances .
num .
limits of disturbed area lda .
proposed limits of ground disturbance as shown on the plans .
num .
pollutant .
dredged spoil dirt slurry solid waste incinerator residue sewage sewage sludge garbage trash chemical waste biological nutrient biological material radioactive material heat wrecked or discarded equipment rock sand or any industrial municipal or agricultural waste as defined in the colorado code of regulations ccr num ccr num num num .
pollution .
manmade maninduced or natural alteration of the physical chemical biological and radiological integrity of water .
num num crs num .
state waters .
defined in subsection num. b construction requirements .
num .
the contractor shall comply with the colorado water quality control act title num article num crs the protection of fishing streams title num article num crs the clean water act num usc num regulations promulgated certifications or permits issued and to the requirements listed below .
in the event of conflicts between these requirements and water quality control laws rules or regulations of other federal or state agencies the more restrictive laws rules or regulations shall apply .
num .
if the contractor determines construction of the project will result in a change to the permitted activities or lda the contractor shall detail the changes in a written report to the engineer .
within five days after receipt of the report the engineer after coordination with region planning and environmental manager rpem will approve or reject in writing the request for change or detail a course of action including revision of existing permits or obtaining new permits .
num .
if construction activities result in noncompliance of any permit requirement the project will be suspended and the permitting agency notified if required .
the project will remain suspended until the engineer receives written approval by the permitting agency .
num .
the contractor is legally required to obtain all permits associated with specific activities within or off the right of way such as borrow pits concrete or asphalt plant sites waste disposal sites or other facilities .
it is num num the contractors responsibility to obtain these permits .
the contractor shall consult with the engineer and contact the colorado department of public health and environment cdphe or other appropriate federal state or local agency to determine the need for any permit .
num .
the contractor shall conduct the work in a manner that prevents pollution of any adjacent state waters .
erosion control work shall be performed in accordance with section num this subsection and all other applicable parts of the contract .
num .
prior to the environmental preconstruction conference the swmp administrator identified in subsection numc shall identify and describe all potential pollutant sources including materials and activities and evaluate them for the potential to contribute pollutants to stormwater discharges associated with construction activities .
the list of potential pollutants shall be continuously updated during construction .
at a minimum each of the following shall be evaluated for the potential for contributing pollutants to stormwater discharges and identified in the swmp if found to have such potential num all exposed and stored soils .
num vehicle tracking of sediments .
num management of contaminated soils .
num vehicle and equipment maintenance and fueling .
num outdoor storage activities building materials fertilizers chemicals etc .. num significant dust or particle generating processes .
num routine maintenance involving fertilizers pesticides detergents fuels solvents oils etc .
num on site waste management practices waste piles dumpsters etc .. num dedicated asphalt and concrete batch plants .
num concrete truck and equipment washing including the concrete truck chute and associated fixtures and equipment .
num concrete placement and finishing tool cleaning .
num nonindustrial waste sources that may be significant such as worker trash and portable toilets .
num loading and unloading operations .
num other areas or procedures where spills could occur .
the swmp administrator shall record the location of potential pollutants on the site map .
descriptions of the potential pollutants shall be added to the swmp notebook .
num num at or prior to the environmental preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit a spill response plan for any petroleum products chemicals solvents or other hazardous materials in use or in storage at the work site .
see subsection numc for spill response plan requirements .
work shall not be started until the plan has been submitted to and approved by the engineer .
on site above ground bulk storage containers with a cumulative storage shell capacity greater than num u.s. gallons or storage containers having a reasonable expectation of an oil discharge to state waters are subject to the spill prevention control and countermeasure plan spcc rule .
oil of any type and in any form is covered including but not limited to petroleum fuel oil sludge oil refuse oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil .
epa region num is responsible for administering and enforcing the spcc plan requirements in colorado .
prior to start of work the contractor shall submit a spcc form which has been approved by the epa for the project .
num .
the contractor shall obtain a construction dewatering cdw permit from cdphe anytime uncontaminated groundwater including groundwater that is commingled with stormwater or surface water is encountered during construction activities and the groundwater or commingled water needs to be discharged to state waters .
if contaminated groundwater is encountered a remediation permit may be needed from cdphe in accordance with section num .
num .
water from dewatering operations shall not be directly discharged into any state waters unless allowed by a permit .
water from dewatering shall not be discharged into a ditch unless num written permission is obtained from the owner of the ditch .
num it is covered in the approved cdw or remediation permit that allows the discharge .
num a copy of this approval is submitted to the engineer .
a copy of the permit shall be submitted to the engineer prior to dewatering operations commencing .
if the site is covered by a colorado discharge permit system stormwater construction permit cdpsscp and the following conditions are met a separate cdw permit will not be required for discharge to the ground num the source is identified in the stormwater management plan swmp as updated by the swmp administrator .
num the swmp describes and locates the practices implemented at the site to control stormwater pollution from the dewatering of groundwater or stormwater .
num the swmp describes and locates the practices to be used that will ensure that no groundwater from construction dewatering is discharged from the loc as surface runoff or to surface waters or storm sewers .
num num num groundwater and groundwater combined with stormwater do not contain pollutants in concentrations exceeding the state groundwater standards in regulations num ccr num and num .
if surface waters are diverted around a construction area and no pollutants are introduced during the diversion a cdw permit is not required .
if the diverted water enters the construction area and contacts pollutant sources e.g .
disturbed soil concrete washout etc .
the contractor shall obtain a cdw permit for the discharge of this water to state waters or to the ground .
construction dewatering may be discharged to the ground on projects that are not covered by a cdpsscp if the conditions of the cdphes low risk guidance document for discharges of uncontaminated groundwater to land are met .
the conditions of this guidance are num the source of the discharge is solely uncontaminated groundwater or uncontaminated groundwater combined with stormwater and does not contain pollutants in concentrations that exceed water quality standards for groundwater referenced above .
num discharges from vaults or similar structures shall not be contaminated .
potential sources of contamination include process materials used stored or conveyed in the structures or introduced surface water runoff from outside environments that may contain oil grease and corrosives .
num the groundwater discharge does not leave the project boundary limits where construction is occurring .
num land application is conducted at a rate and location that does not allow for any runoff into state waters or other drainage conveyance systems including but not limited to streets curb and gutter inlets borrow ditches open channels etc .
num land application is conducted at a rate that does not allow for any ponding of the groundwater on the surface unless the ponding is a result of implementing bmps that are designed to reduce velocity flow .
if the bmps used result in ponding the land application shall be done in an area with a constructed containment such as an excavation or berm area with no outfall .
the constructed containment shall prevent the discharge of the ponding water offsite as runoff .
num a visible sheen is not evident in the discharge .
num bmps are implemented to prevent any sediment deposited during land application from being transported by stormwater runoff to surface waters or other conveyances .
num all bmps used shall be selected installed implemented and maintained according to good engineering hydrologic and pollution control practices .
the selected bmps shall provide control for all potential pollutant sources associated with the discharge of uncontaminated groundwater to land .
the discharge shall be routed num num in such a way that it will not cause erosion to land surface .
energy dissipation devices designed to protect downstream areas from erosion by reducing the velocity of flow such as hose attachments sediment and erosion controls shall be used when necessary to prevent erosion .
discharged water shall be drained slowly so that it soaks into the ground without running outside the project boundary or causing flooding issues .
the discharge shall be routed in such a way that it will not contact petroleum products or waste .
num .
at least num days prior to commencing dredging or fill operations in a watercourse the contractor shall provide written notification to owners or operators of domestic or public water supply intakes or diversion facilities if these facilities are within num miles downstream from the dredging or fill operations .
notification shall also be given to owners or operators of other intakes or diversions that are located within five miles downstream from the site of the project .
identities of downstream owners and operators can be obtained from colorado division of water resources office of the state engineer .
num .
temporary fill into wetlands or streams will not be allowed except as specified in the contract and permits .
if such work is allowed upon completion of the work all temporary fills shall be removed in their entirety and disposed of in an upland location outside of flood plains unless otherwise specified in the contract .
num .
construction operations in waters of the united states as defined in num cfr part num including wetlands shall be restricted to areas and activities authorized by the u.s. army corps of engineers as shown in the contract .
fording waters will be allowed only as authorized by the u.s. army corps of engineers num permit .
num .
wetland areas outside of the permitted limits of disturbance shall not be used for storage parking waste disposal access borrow material or any other construction support activity .
num .
pollutant byproducts of highway construction such as concrete asphalt solids sludges pollutants removed in the course of treatment of wastewater excavation or excess fill material and material from sediment traps shall be handled stockpiled and disposed of in a manner that prevents entry into state waters including wetlands .
removal of concrete waste and washout water from mixer trucks concrete finishing tools concrete saw and all concrete material removed in the course of construction operations or cleaning shall be performed in a manner that prevents waste material from entering state waters .
a minimum of ten days prior to the start of the construction activity the contractor shall submit in writing a method statement for containing pollutant byproducts to the engineer for approval .
num .
the use of chemicals such as soil stabilizers dust palliatives herbicides growth inhibitors fertilizers deicing salts etc .
shall be in accordance num num with the manufacturers recommended application rates frequency and instructions .
num .
all materials stored onsite shall be stored in a neat orderly manner in their original containers with the original manufacturers label .
materials shall not be stored in a location where they may be carried into state waters at any time .
num .
spill prevention and containment measures conforming to subsection num shall be used at storage and equipment fueling and servicing areas to prevent the pollution of any state waters including wetlands .
all spills shall be cleaned up immediately after discovery or contained until appropriate cleanup methods can be employed .
manufacturers recommended methods for spill cleanup shall be followed along with proper disposal methods .
when required by the colorado water quality control act regulation num ccr num spills shall be reported to the engineer and cdphe in writing .
num .
the contractor shall prevent construction activities from causing grass or brush fires .
num .
the construction activities shall not impair indian tribal rights including but not limited to water rights and treaty fishing and hunting rights .
num .
prior to start of work the contractor shall certify in writing to the engineer that construction equipment has been cleaned prior to initial site arrival .
vehicles and equipment shall be free of soil and debris capable of transporting noxious weed seeds or invasive species onto the site .
additional equipment required for construction shall also be certified prior to being brought onto the project site .
num .
vehicles which have been certified by the contractor as having been cleaned prior to arrival on site may be cleaned on site at an approved area where wash water can be properly contained .
vehicles leaving and reentering the project site shall be recertified .
num .
at the end of each day the contractor shall collect all trash and dispose of it in appropriate containers .
num .
construction waste that is considered a pollutant or contaminant shall be collected and disposed of in appropriate containers .
this material may be stockpiled on the project when it is contained or protected by an appropriate bmp .
c stormwater construction permit .
a colorado discharge permit system stormwater construction permit cdpsscp shall be obtained from cdphe by either the contractor or cdot .
the contract will clearly indicate whether the permit is to be obtained by the contractor or cdot .
num .
contractor obtained stormwater construction permit .
the contractor shall obtain a colorado discharge permit system stormwater construction permit cdpsscp for any project work that disturbs at least num acre of land .
the contractor shall apply for and obtain the permit num num upon award of the contract .
the contractor shall provide a copy of permit certification or the submitted cdpsscp application to the engineer prior to or at the preconstruction conference .
no work shall begin until the cdpsscp permit has been approved by cdphe unless otherwise directed .
a copy of the permit and application to obtain a permit shall be placed in the project swmp notebook .
if a utility company has obtained a permit for the area prior to the contractor being on site then the contractor shall coordinate with the utility company to transfer those areas over to the contractor prior to work commencing .
the contractor shall not commence construction until application for transfer of ownership for all permits certifications and authorizations has been approved by cdphe and submitted to the engineer .
to initiate partial acceptance of the stormwater construction work including seeding and planting required for erosion control the contractor shall request in writing a stormwater completion walkthrough .
the engineer will set up the walkthrough and will include the engineer or designated representative superintendent or designated representative stormwater management plan swmp administrator region water pollution control manager rwpcm and landscape architect representing the region .
unsatisfactory and incomplete erosion control work will be identified in this walkthrough and will be summarized by the engineer in a punch list .
the water quality permit transfer to maintenance punch list may be used as a template in creating the engineers punch list .
the engineer will coordinate with cdot maintenance on regular inspections of the corrective work .
the completed action items associated with the corrective work shall be shown as completed on the punch list .
upon completion of all items shown the contractor shall submit the completed punch list to the engineer for review .
upon written approval of the punch list the contractor shall submit the application for transfer of ownership for all permits certifications and authorizations to the cdphe requesting transfer of ownership of the cdpsscp to cdot maintenance .
when requested by cdot maintenance and approved by the engineer the permit may be transferred by the contractor to the resident engineer instead of cdot maintenance .
until the transfer of the permit has been approved by the cdphe the contractor shall continue to adhere to all permit requirements .
requirements shall include erosion control inspections bmp installation bmp maintenance bmp repair including seeded areas and temporary bmp removal .
all documentation shall be submitted to the engineer and placed in the swmp notebook .
all costs associated with the contractor applying for holding and transferring the cdpsscp permit between parties will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work in accordance with subsection num .
num num num .
cdot obtained stormwater construction permit .
cdot will obtain the colorado discharge permit system stormwater construction permit cdpsscp from the colorado department of public health and environment cdphe prior to the award of contract .
the contractor may be legally required to obtain all other permits associated with specific activities within or off the right of way such as borrow pits concrete or asphalt plant sites waste disposal sites or other facilities .
these permits may include local agency or federal grading or stormwater permits .
it is the contractors responsibility to obtain these permits .
the contractor shall consult with the engineer and contact the colorado department of public health and environment cdphe or other appropriate federal state or local agency to determine the need for any permit .
the contractor shall coordinate with cdot on transferring the respective permit to the contractor upon award of the contract .
the contractor shall submit the application for transfer of ownership for all permits certifications and authorizations for the cdphe permit prior to commencement of construction .
work shall not begin until the cdps scp permit transfer has been approved by cdphe unless otherwise directed .
if a utility company has obtained a permit for the area prior to the contractor being on site then the contractor shall coordinate with the utility company to transfer those areas over to the contractor prior to work commencing .
the contractor shall not commence construction until application for transfer of ownership for all permits certifications and authorizations has been approved by cdphe and submitted to the engineer .
to initiate partial acceptance of the stormwater construction work including seeding and planting required for erosion control the contractor shall request in writing a stormwater completion walkthrough .
the engineer will set up the walkthrough and will include the engineer or designated representative superintendent or designated representative stormwater management plan swmp administrator region water pollution control manager rwpcm and landscape architect representing the region .
unsatisfactory and incomplete erosion control work will be identified in this walkthrough and will be summarized by the engineer in a punch list .
the water quality permit transfer to maintenance punch list may be used as a template in creating the engineers punch list .
the engineer will coordinate with cdot maintenance on regular inspections of the corrective work .
the completed action items associated with the corrective work shall be shown as completed on the punch list .
upon completion of all items shown the contractor shall submit the completed punch list to the engineer for review .
upon written approval of the punch list the contractor shall submit the application for transfer of ownership for all permits certifications and authorizations num num to the cdphe requesting transfer of ownership of the cdpsscp to cdot maintenance .
when requested by cdot maintenance and approved by the engineer the permit may be transferred by the contractor to the resident engineer instead of cdot maintenance .
until the transfer of the permit has been approved by the cdphe the contractor shall continue to adhere to all permit requirements .
requirements shall include erosion control inspections bmp installation bmp maintenance bmp repair including seeded areas and temporary bmp removal .
all documentation shall be submitted to the engineer and placed in the swmp notebook .
all costs associated with the contractor applying for holding and transferring the cdpsscp permit between parties will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work in accordance with subsection num. d measurement and payment .
num .
all the work listed in b above including but not limited to dewatering erosion control for dewatering and disposal of water resulting from dewatering operations including all costs for cdphe concurrences and permits will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num .
the contractor shall be liable for any penalty including monetary fines applied to the department caused by the contractors noncompliance with any water quality permit or certification .
monetary fines shall be deducted from any money due to the contractor .
if the monetary fine is in excess of all the money due to the contractor then the contractor shall pay to the department the amount of such excess .
num .
the contractor will not receive additional compensation or time extensions for any disruption of work or loss of time caused by any actions brought against the contractor for failure to comply with good engineering hydrologic and pollution control practices .
num .
if a spill occurs as a direct result of the contractors actions or negligence the cleanup of such spill shall be performed by the contractor at the contractors expense .
num .
areas exposed to erosion by fire resulting from the contractors operations shall be stabilized in accordance with section num by the contractor and at the contractors expense .
num num section num prosecution and progress subletting of contract .
the contractor shall not sublet sell transfer assign or dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion thereof without written permission of the engineer .
prior to beginning any work by subcontractor the contractor shall request permission from the engineer by submitting a completed sublet permit application cdot form no .
num .
the subcontract work shall not begin until the contractor has received the engineers written permission .
the contractor shall make all project related written subcontracts agreements and purchase orders available to the engineer for viewing upon request and at a location convenient to the engineer .
the contractor will be permitted to sublet a portion of the contract however the contractors organization shall perform work amounting to num percent or more of the total original contract amount .
any items designated in the contract as specialty items may be performed by subcontract .
the cost of specialty items so performed by subcontract may be deducted from the total original contract amount before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the contractors own organization .
the original contract amount includes the cost of material and manufactured products which are to be purchased or produced by the contractor and the actual agreement amounts between the contractor and a subcontractor .
proportional value of a subcontracted partial contract item will be verified by the engineer .
when a firm both sells material to a prime contractor and performs the work of incorporating the materials into the project these two phases shall be considered in combination and as constituting a single subcontract .
the calculation of the percentage of subcontracted work shall be based on subcontract unit prices .
subcontracts or transfer of contract shall not release the contractor of liability under the contract and bond .
notice to proceed .
the contractor shall not commence work prior to the issuance of a notice to proceed .
the notice to proceed will stipulate the date on which contract time commences .
when the contractor proceeds with work prior to that date contract time will commence on the date work actually begins .
the contractor shall commence work under the contract on or prior to the numth day following contract execution or the numth day following the date of award whichever comes later or in accordance with the selected start date allowed in the special provisions .
project schedule .
a definitions .
activity .
an activity is a project element on a schedule that affects completion of the project .
an activity has a description start date finish date duration and one or more logic ties .
num num activity id .
a unique alphanumeric identification code assigned to an activity that remains constant throughout the project .
bar chart .
a simple depiction of a project schedule without relationships or supporting logic of the schedule .
calendar .
defined work periods and no work periods that determine when project activities can occur .
multiple calendars may be used for different activities e.g .
a numday workweek and a numday workweek calendar .
constraint .
a restriction imposed in a schedule which fixes a value that would otherwise be calculated within the schedule .
examples of values that can be fixed by a constraint include start date end date and completion date .
critical path .
the sequence of activities that determines the duration of the project .
critical path method scheduling .
cpm scheduling is a logicbased planning technique using activity durations and relationships between activities to calculate a schedule determining the minimum total project duration .
data date .
the starting point from which to schedule all remaining work .
duration .
the estimated amount of time needed to complete an activity .
float .
the amount of time between the earliest date an activity can start and the latest date when an activity must start or the amount of time between the earliest date an activity can finish and latest date when an activity can finish before the activity becomes critical .
the time between the project schedule completion date and the contract completion date is not considered float .
gantt chart .
a timescaled graphical display of the projects schedule .
lag .
a timevalue assigned to a relationship .
logic .
relationships between activities defining the sequence of work see also predecessor activity and successor activity .
milestone .
an activity with no duration used to represent an event .
openended activity .
an activity that does not have both a predecessor activity and a successor activity .
predecessor activity .
an activity that is defined by schedule logic to precede another activity .
relationship .
the interdependence between activities .
salient feature .
an item of work that is of special interest for cdot in coordinating the project schedule but may not affect the overall completion of the project .
successor activity .
an activity that is defined by schedule logic to follow another activity .
timescaled logic diagram .
gantt chart that illustrates logic links depicting both schedule logic and the time at which activities are performed .
num num b project schedule general the contractor shall use either microsoft project or primavera scheduling software to develop and manage a cpm project schedule to plan schedule and report the progress of the work .
prior to or at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing which scheduling software the contractor shall use to manage the project .
the contractors selection and use of particular scheduling software can not be changed after the first schedule submittal .
if the contractor selects primavera the contractor shall calculate the schedule using the retained logic scheduling option .
the department will not allow use of bar charts for the project schedule .
the contractor shall submit schedules for approval by the engineer .
the purpose of these schedules is to allow the contractor and the department to jointly manage the work and evaluate progress .
the schedules also serve to evaluate the effect of changes and delays on the scheduled project completion .
either party may require a formal schedule review meeting .
the contractors schedule shall consist of a timescaled logic diagram and shall show the logical progression of all activities required to complete the work .
the contractor shall use activity descriptions that ensure the work is easily identifiable .
the contractor shall show the nowork days in the schedule calendars .
the contractor shall use durations for individual construction activities that do not exceed num calendar days unless approved by the engineer .
the contractor may group a series of activities with an aggregate duration of five days or less into a single activity .
nonconstruction activities may have durations exceeding num working days as approved by the engineer .
the contractor may include summary bars in the schedule as long as the detailed activities to complete the work are displayed .
the contractor shall not use the following num negative lags .
num lags in excess of num working days without approval by the engineer .
the contractors written request shall justify the need for the lag .
lags shall be identified .
num starttofinish relationships .
num openended activities every activity shall have at least one predecessor activity and at least one successor activity except for the first and last activities in the network .
if the contractor uses a starttostart relationship to link two activities then both of those two activities should also have successor activities linked by either a finishtostart or a finishtofinish relationship .
num constraints without approval by the engineer .
the contractors written request shall explain why the use of constraints in the schedule is necessary .
num num the project schedule shall show all activities required by all parties to complete the work .
the project schedule shall include subcontracted work delivery dates for critical material submittal and review periods permits and governmental approvals milestone requirements utility work by others and no work periods .
the contractor its subcontractors suppliers and engineers at any tier shall perform the work according to the approved project schedule .
float within the baseline schedule or any other project schedule is not for the exclusive use or benefit of either party but is a project resource available to both parties as needed until it is depleted .
for any schedule submittal that shows completion in less than num percent of the contract time the contractor shall submit planned production rates in the schedule for all activities with float of num days or less .
the engineer may require additional methods statements for activities with float of num days or less .
the engineers review of the schedule will not exceed num calendar days .
the engineer will provide the contractor with one of the following responses within num days after receipt of the project schedule num approved no exceptions taken num approvedasnoted or num revise and resubmit within num days .
the contractor shall not assume that approval of the project schedule relieves the contractor of its obligation to complete all work within the contract time .
c schedule submittals .
the contractor shall include a timescaled logic diagram with all schedule submittals that num is plotted on a horizontal timescale in accordance with the project calendar .
num uses color to clearly identify the critical path .
num is based on early start and early finish dates of activities .
num for schedule updates and schedule revisions shows actual completion dates up to but not including the data date .
num clearly shows the sequence and relationships of all activities necessary to complete the contract work .
num includes an activity block for each activity with the following information num num activity block information activity id activity description original duration total float early start date early finish date late start datenum late finish datenum actual start datenum actual finish datenum calendar used on the activity activity responsibility remaining durationnum duration percent completenum gantt chart timescaled logic diagram numrequired with the preliminary and baseline schedule .
numrequired with the project schedule update and schedule revision .
the contractor shall include the following with all schedule submittals num a job progress narrative report that includes the following i a description of the work performed since the previous months schedule update .
ii a description of problems encountered or anticipated since the previous months schedule submission .
iii a description of unusual labor shift equipment or material conditions or restrictions encountered or anticipated .
iv the status of all pending items that could affect the schedule .
v explanations for milestones forecasted to occur late .
vi scheduled completion date status and any change from the previous months submission .
num num vii an explanation for a scheduled completion date forecasted to occur before or after the contract completion date or contract time .
viii schedule delays num a description of current and anticipated delays including identification of each delayed activity by activity id and description .
num delay type with reference to the relevant specification subsection .
num delay cause or causes .
num effect of the delay on other activities milestones and completion dates .
num identification of the actions needed to avoid a potential or mitigate an actual delay .
num a description of the critical path impact and effect on the scheduled completion date in the previous months schedule update .
ix a list of all added and deleted activities along with an explanation for the change .
x all logic and duration changes along with an explanation for the change .
num a predecessor activity and successor activity report that defines all schedule logic and clearly indicates all logical relationships and constraints .
num an early start report listing all activities sorted by actual startearly start date .
num a float report listing all activities sorted in ascending order of available float .
num a critical path report listing all activities not yet complete with the percent complete sorted by float and then by early start .
num a listing of all nonwork days .
for all required schedule submittals the contractor shall submit two electronic copies on two compact disk usb flash drive or other media as directed by the engineer .
electronic copies of cpm schedules shall be submitted both in the native schedule format and in pdf format .
the contractor shall also provide two printed copies of the cpm schedule and all reports .
each schedule submittal shall be appropriately labeled as a preliminary schedule baseline schedule project schedule update or schedule revision .
num num the title bar shall include the cdot project number subaccount project name contractor name and schedule data date .
if an originally submitted schedule is revised during review the title bar shall also include a revision number revnum revnum etc .
and revision date .
d preliminary schedule .
within num days of award of the contract the contractor may submit a preliminary schedule showing all planned activities from the notice to proceed through the first num days of the project .
if the contractor elects not to submit a preliminary schedule then the contractor shall submit a complete baseline schedule within num days of award of the contract which will be subject to all requirements of a baseline submittal .
the preliminary schedule shall not show any progress and it will be approved by the engineer before work can commence .
the preliminary schedule shall be used as the basis for the baseline schedule .
e baseline schedule .
if the contractor elects to submit a preliminary schedule within num days of the award of contract the contractor shall submit a baseline schedule that includes all work activities completed within contract time .
the contractor shall not show progress in the baseline schedule .
further partial payments will not be made beyond num days after the start of contract time unless the baseline schedule is approved .
when approved the baseline schedule shall become the project schedule .
the contractor shall use all information known by the contractor at the time of bid submittal to develop the baseline schedule .
if the contractor elects to submit a baseline schedule in lieu of a preliminary schedule the baseline schedule shall be approved before work can commence .
f methods statements .
the contractor shall submit a methods statement for each salient feature or as directed by the engineer that describes all work necessary to complete the feature .
the contractor shall include the following information in the methods statement num salient feature name num responsibility for the salient feature work num planned work procedures num the planned quantity of work per day for each salient feature using the same units of measure as the applicable pay item num the anticipated labor force by labor type num the number types and capacities of equipment planned for the work num the planned time for the work including the number of work days per week number of shifts per day and the number of hours per shift .
g project schedule update .
the contractor shall submit a monthly update of the project schedule updated through the cutoff date for the monthly progress pay estimate and a projection for completing all remaining activities .
a num num schedule update may show a completion date that is different than the contract completion date after the baseline schedule is approved .
approval of this schedule shall not relieve the contractor of its obligation to complete the work within the contract time .
in this case the contractor shall provide an explanation for a late scheduled completion date in the job progress narrative report included with the schedule submittal .
when approved the project schedule update will become the project schedule .
the engineer will not issue a monthly progress payment if the engineer has not received the project schedule update .
the engineer will not make monthly progress payments for the months following the project schedule update submission until the engineer approves the project schedule update .
when the project has a maintenance or landscape establishment period the engineer may waive the monthly update requirement .
the contractor shall submit a final project schedule update that shows all work through the final acceptance date .
h weekly planning schedule .
the contractor shall submit in writing a weekly planning schedule that shows the contractors and all subcontractors planned activities for a minimum of two weeks immediately following the date of submittal and actual days worked versus planned for the week prior to the date of submittal .
this schedule shall include the description duration and sequence of work activities and anticipated lane closures for the upcoming two weeks .
the weekly planning schedule may be a timescaled logic diagram or other standard format as approved by the engineer .
subsection numc schedule submittal requirements for reports do not apply to the weekly planning schedule .
i schedule revision .
a schedule revision is required in the event of any major change to the work .
examples of major changes are num significant changes in logic or methods of construction or changes to the critical path num addition deletion or revision of activities required by contract modification order num approval of a contractor submitted value engineering change proposal num delays in milestones or project completion num phasing revisions or num if the engineer determines that the schedule does not reflect the actual work .
this revision shall include a description of the measures necessary to achieve completion of the work within the contract time .
the contractor may also need to submit revised methods statements .
the contractor shall provide a schedule revision within num days of written notification and shall include the diagrams and reports as described in subsection num b schedule general and c schedule submittals .
in this case the contractor shall provide an num num explanation for a late scheduled completion date in the job progress narrative report included with the schedule .
once approved the schedule revision becomes the project schedule .
j payment .
all costs relating to the requirements of this subsection will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment schedule .
the contractor shall prepare a payment schedule which shall show the dollar amount of work the contractor expects to complete including force accounts retainage and expected incentive payments by the progress estimate date each month for the duration of construction .
the payment schedule shall be signed by the contractors authorized agent .
the payment schedule shall show the dollar amount of work the contractor expects to complete for every month on the contract from commencement of work to project acceptance .
the fiscal year july num to june num totals shall also be shown on the payment schedule .
the payment schedule may be prepared using standard spreadsheet software such as ms excel and submitted in electronic format .
a initial payment schedule .
the contractor shall submit the certified initial payment schedule within num days of the award of the contract .
b payment schedule updates .
once each month the contractor shall submit an update to the engineer .
the update shall be in the same format as the initial payment schedule and shall be submitted to the engineer by the first day of each month .
in each update estimated monthly dollar amounts shall be revised to show the dollar amount for actual work accomplished which includes actual progress payments made to the contractor to date and work accomplished but not paid .
each update shall show corrected dollar amounts of work to be completed each month through the expected completion date as shown on the contractors progress schedule .
if the update has any state fiscal year july num to june num payment in excess of the encumbrance amount the department may in its sole discretion approve the update .
if the department does not approve the update the contractor shall either revise the payment schedule or proceed at his own risk .
the risk is either not being paid in a timely manner or not being paid at all for any amounts over the encumbrance amount .
if the contractor proceeds at his own risk then payment for the atrisk work will be dependent upon ratification of this work by the state controllers office .
if the update exceeds the encumbrance amount because of additional compensable work and the department does not approve this update any delay to critical path work related to this additional compensable work will be considered excusable and compensable in accordance with subsection numc if the contractor does not proceed at his own risk .
if the update exceeds the encumbrance amount because of the contractors accelerated schedule and the department does not approve the update the delay for not performing the work associated with the contractors accelerated num num schedule in the scheduled fiscal year will be noncompensable in accordance with subsection numc if the contractor does not proceed at his own risk .
c failure to submit payment schedule .
if the contractor fails to submit the initial payment schedule the contract will not be executed .
if a payment schedule update is not submitted by the required date the engineer will withhold progress payments until such time as the contractor has submitted a current payment schedule .
limitation of operations .
the contractor shall conduct the work in a manner and sequence to assure the least interference with traffic .
the contractor shall not open up work to the prejudice or detriment of work already started .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section of work before starting any additional sections if the opening of a section is essential to public convenience .
character of workers methods and equipment .
the contractor shall employ resources for completing work to full completion in the manner and time required by the contract .
all workers shall have skill and experience to perform the work assigned to them .
any person employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor who does not perform the work in a proper and skillful manner shall at the written request of the engineer be removed by the contractor or subcontractor and shall not be employed on the project without the approval of the engineer .
should the contractor fail to remove this person or persons or fail to furnish skilled and experienced personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until compliance is achieved .
all equipment used on the project shall be of size and mechanical condition to meet requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
equipment used shall not cause injury to the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
when the methods and equipment to be used are not prescribed in the contract the contractor shall use any methods or equipment that will accomplish the contract work in conformity with the contract requirements .
when the methods and equipment to be used are specified in the contract other methods and equipment shall not be used in the performance of the work unless the contractor receives written authorization from the engineer .
if the contractor desires to use a method or equipment other than specified in the contract the contractor may request approval from the engineer .
the request shall include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed to be used and the contractors explanation for the proposed change .
the contractor will be fully responsible for producing work in conformity with contract requirements .
if the substituted methods or equipment do not produce results conforming to contract requirements the contractor shall complete the remaining construction num num with the originally specified methods and equipment .
deficient work shall be removed repaired or replaced to conform with the specified quality by and at the contractors expense .
no increase will be made in the basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time when a change in methods or equipment is authorized .
workplace violence .
if a representative or employee of the contractor or a subcontractor commits an act of workplace violence on the project he shall be sanctioned as provided by the contractors employment policies and where appropriate shall be reported to law enforcement authorities .
at the request of either the contractor or the engineer the engineer and the contractor shall meet to discuss appropriate actions to be taken against the representative or employee .
appropriate action may include removing the representative or employee from the project .
if removal is warranted and the contractor fails to remove the representative or employee the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until compliance is achieved .
determination and extension of contract time .
the contract time is stated in the commencement and completion of work special provision .
the contract time will be used to determine the contract completion date .
the contractor shall not carry on construction operations on saturdays sundays or holidays unless previously arranged and approved .
the contractor shall not perform work on any day of a three or four day holiday weekend when the holiday is new years day memorial day independence day labor day thanksgiving day or christmas day .
construction operations shall stop at num noon the day before the start of the holiday weekend and shall commence the day after the three or four days have passed .
the contractor shall only make emergency repairs and provide proper protection of the work and traveling public on these days .
a time count contract .
when the contract time is on a working day or calendar day basis the engineer will furnish the contractor a weekly statement showing the number of days assessed for the preceding week and the number of days remaining for completion of the contract .
if the contractor is in disagreement with the current weekly statement the contractor shall submit a request for review of the current weekly statement .
such request shall be made within num calendar days of the receipt of the statement and shall detail the reasons the statement is believed to be incorrect .
when final acceptance has been made by the engineer as prescribed in subsection num the daily time charges will cease on working day and calendar day projects .
num .
working day contract .
when the work is on a working day basis one whole day of contract time will be assessed for each working day on which the work can be effectively prosecuted during six hours or more of the day .
onehalf day will be assessed for each working day on which the work can be effectively prosecuted for at least two hours but less than six hours of the day .
contract time will not be assessed when the work num num can be effectively prosecuted for less than two hours .
saturdays sundays and holidays will be assessed as working days when the contractor utilizes such days for prosecuting the work .
num .
calendar day contract .
when the work is on a calendar day basis one calendar day of contract time will be assessed for each calendar day from the date that contract time starts including saturdays sundays and holidays .
less than full time charges may be made on those days when conditions which are beyond the control of and unknown to the contractor make it impossible to prosecute the work on items controlling the completion of the work with full normal efficiency .
less than full time charges may be allowed for inclement weather only when the engineer directs the contractor not to work for the safety of the traveling public .
when less than full time charges are to be assessed the following procedures will be followed one whole day of contract time will be assessed for each calendar day on which the work is prosecuted during six hours or more of the contractors daily working schedule onehalf day will be assessed for each calendar day on which the work is prosecuted for at least two hours but less than six hours of the day contract time will not be assessed when the work is prosecuted for less than two hours .
b completion date contract .
when the contract specifies a completion date all work under the contract shall be completed on or before that date .
no extension of the completion date will be allowed for inclement weather foreseeable causes or conditions under the control of the contractor .
if all work under the contract is not completed on or before the specified completion date contract time will be assessed for each additional calendar day in accordance with subsection num a num. c delay .
any event action or factor that extends the performance period of the contract .
num .
excusable delay a delay that was beyond the contractors control and was not due to the contractors fault or negligence .
the department may grant a contract time extension for an excusable delay .
a. compensable delay a delay that the department not the contractor is responsible for entitling the contractor to a time extension and monetary compensation .
monetary compensation for compensable delays will be made in accordance with subsection num .
b. noncompensable delay an excusable delay that neither the contractor nor the department is responsible for that may entitle the contractor to a contract time extension but no additional monetary compensation .
contract time allowed for the performance of the work may be extended for delays due to force majeure i.e .
acts of god acts of the public enemy terrorist acts fires floods area wide strikes embargoes or unusually severe weather .
num num num .
nonexcusable delay a delay that was reasonably foreseeable or within the control of the contractor for which the department will not grant monetary compensation or a contract time extension .
num .
concurrent delay .
independent delays to critical activities occurring at the same time .
a .
the department will not grant a time extension or additional compensation for the period of time that a nonexcusable delay is concurrent with an excusable delay .
b .
the department may grant time but no compensation for the period of time that a noncompensable delay is concurrent with a compensable delay .
delays in delivery of materials or fabrication scheduling resulting from late ordering financial considerations or other causes that could have been foreseen or prevented will be considered nonexcusable delays .
however delays caused by fuel shortage or delay in delivery of materials to the contractor due to some unusual market condition caused by industrywide strike national disaster areawide shortage or other reasons beyond the control of the contractor which prevent procurement of materials or fuel within the allowable contract time limits will be considered excusable delays .
d extension of contract time .
the contractors assertion that insufficient contract time was specified is not a valid reason for an extension of contract time .
for time extension requests the contractor shall provide a twopart submittal part one shall consist of a written notice of the delay and part two shall consist of the contractors delay documentation and supporting analysis .
part num the contractor shall provide the written notice of delay within seven days of the delay occurrence .
the notice shall describe the delay and include documentation substantiating the nature and cause of the delay .
failure to submit the written notice constitutes a waiver of entitlement to additional time or compensation .
part num this shall be submitted within num days of the written notice .
the contractor shall include all documentation needed to support the time extension request .
in order to request additional contract time for an unexpected delay the contractor shall provide a contemporaneous schedule analysis in accordance with subsection num .
the schedule analysis shall show that the delayed activity or activities were on the critical path or became critical due to the delay .
the engineer will base a determination of an allowable contract time extension on num the current schedule in effect at the time of the alleged delay num the supporting documentation submitted by the contractor num the contemporaneous schedule analysis and num num num any other relevant information available to the engineer .
for a time extension request resulting from a change order the contractor shall demonstrate the delay to the project completion date by num inserting a fragnet containing the change order activities into an unprogressed copy of the schedule that is current at the time of the change order num tying the fragnet into the schedule logic and num recalculating the schedule .
the department will not consider delays to activities which do not affect the performance period of the contract as a basis for a contract time extension .
if the engineer grants a contract time extension the revised contract completion date will be in effect as though it were the original contract date .
a contractors failure to have an approved or approved with comments current project schedule in place will preclude the department from considering a contractors time extension request .
failure to complete work on time .
a daily charge will be made against the contractor for each calendar day including free time that any work remains uncompleted after the elapse of contract time .
this daily charge will be deducted from any money due the contractor .
this deduction will not be considered a penalty but as liquidated damages .
the schedule of liquidated damages set forth below is an amount agreed to by the contractor and the department as reasonably representing additional construction engineering costs incurred by the department if the contractor fails to complete performance within the contract time .
the schedule of liquidated damages will be original contract amount liquidated damages per calendar day from more than to and including num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num due account shall be taken of any adjustment of the contract time for completion of the work granted under the provisions of subsection num .
num num permitting the contractor to continue and finish the work or any part thereof after elapse of contract time will not operate as a waiver on the part of the department of any of its rights under the contract .
deductions assessed as liquidated damages under this subsection shall not relieve the contractor from liability for any damages or costs resulting from delays to other contractors on the project or other projects caused by a failure of the assessed contractor to complete the work according to contract times .
default of contract .
a the engineer may send a written notice of intent to find the contractor in default to the contractor and the surety by certified mail for any of the reasons listed below .
the notice will describe the conditions causing the impending default advise them of the actions required for remedy and state that if the conditions have not been corrected within ten days of receipt of the notice cdot will find the contractor in default .
the department may send a written notice of intent under this part a if the contractor num fails to begin the contract work within the time specified to begin work or num fails to perform the contract work with sufficient resources to assure its timely completion or num discontinues the contract work or num fails to resume discontinued contract work or num becomes insolvent is declared bankrupt commits an act of bankruptcy or insolvency allows a final judgment to remain unsatisfied for a period of ten calendar days makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or num fails to comply with the contract regarding minimum wage payments dbe requirements or eeo requirements or num is a party to fraud .
if the contractor fails to correct the conditions identified in the notice of intent to find the contractor in default within ten calendar days of receipt the department may serve the contractor with an immediate notice of default and take prosecution of the work from the contractor .
copies of the default notice will also be sent by certified mail to the contractor and the surety .
b the engineer may send a written notice of intent to find the contractor in default to the contractor and the surety by certified mail for the reason listed below .
the notice will include a stop work order which will require the contractor to cease work on the contract items that are unacceptable .
the notice will describe the conditions causing the impending default advise the contractor of the actions required for remedy and state that if the conditions have not been corrected within ten days of receipt of the notice cdot will find the contractor in default .
num num the department may send a written notice of intent under this part b if the contractor fails to perform the work to contract requirements or neglects or refuses to correct or remove and replace rejected materials or unacceptable work .
the contractor shall not resume work on the unacceptable contract items until the following conditions have been met num the contractor shall submit a written proposal to the engineer outlining the procedures which will be followed by the contractor to correct the unacceptable conditions and num the engineer and the contractor shall meet to discuss the written proposal and num the engineer will issue written permission for the contractor to commence work .
if the contractor fails to meet these three conditions within ten calendar days of receipt of the notice of intent to find the contractor in default or if at any time after the contractor resumes work the work does not meet contract requirements or the contractor again neglects or refuses to correct or remove and replace rejected materials or unacceptable work the department may serve the contractor with an immediate notice of default and take prosecution of the work from the contractor .
copies of the default notice will also be sent by certified mail to the contractor and the surety .
c in the case of default under either subsection numa or numb num the department will revoke the contractors prequalification .
if the department chooses to rebid the remaining contract work on this project the contractor will not be allowed to submit a bid for this work .
num the department may appropriate or use materials at the project site and contract with others to complete the remaining contract work .
num the department will determine the methods used for completion of the contract .
num resulting costs and charges incurred by the department will be deducted from payments owed the contractor .
if such costs exceed the payment owed the contractor the contractor and surety shall reimburse the department for these costs .
these costs and charges may include but are not limited to cost of contract completion including designing advertising bidding and awarding the remaining work and liquidated damages or disincentives .
d if the notice of default is determined to be in error the rights and obligations of the parties shall be the same as if the contract had been terminated in accordance with subsection num .
damages for improper notice of default may be awarded accordingly .
termination of contract .
a termination notice .
the department may terminate work under the contract num num in whole or in part if the engineer determines that termination is in the departments best interest .
contract termination will be initiated by the engineers written contract termination notice to the contractor .
the notice will specify the effective date .
b canceled commitments .
the contractor after receiving the contract termination notice shall cancel any outstanding commitments for procurement of materials supplies equipment and miscellaneous items .
in addition the contractor shall use reasonable effort to cancel or divert any outstanding subcontract commitments to the extent they relate to any work terminated .
with respect to such canceled commitments the contractor shall num settle all outstanding liabilities and all claims arising out of these canceled commitments .
such settlements will be approved by the engineer and shall be final and num assign to the department all of the rights title and interest of the contractor under the terminated orders and subcontracts as directed .
the department will then have the right to settle or pay any or all claims arising out of the termination of these commitments .
c termination claim .
the contractor shall submit the termination claim to the engineer within num days after the termination notice effective date .
during the num day period the contractor may make a written request for a time extension in preparing the claim .
any time extension must be approved by the engineer .
if the contractor fails to submit the termination claim within the time allowed the engineer may determine the amount due the contractor by reason of the termination .
d payment .
subject to subsection numc above the contractor and engineer may agree upon the whole or any part of the amount to be paid to the contractor because of the termination .
the amount may include reasonable cancellation charges incurred by the contractor .
the amount may also include any reasonable loss upon outstanding commitments for subcontracts which the contractor is unable to cancel provided the contractor has made reasonable effort to divert the commitments to other activities .
the amount agreed upon shall be embodied in a contract modification order and the contractor shall be paid that amount .
payments claimed and agreed to pursuant to termination shall be based on the contract unit prices .
payment for partially completed lump sum items may be made in the proportion that the partially completed work is to the total lump sum item .
where work performed is of a nature that it is impossible to separate the costs of uncompleted work from completed units the contractor will be paid the actual cost incurred for the necessary preparatory work and other work accomplished .
the department may from time to time under terms and conditions it may prescribe make partial payments against costs incurred by the contractor in connection with the contract termination .
the total of such payments shall not exceed the amount as determined by the engineer the contractor will be num num entitled to hereunder .
e disposition of work and inventory .
the contractor shall transfer title and deliver to the department as directed such items which if the contract had been completed would have been furnished to the department including num completed and partially completed work and num materials or equipment produced or in process or acquired in connection with the performance of the work terminated by the notice .
other than the above any termination inventory resulting from the contract termination may with written approval of the engineer be sold or acquired by the contractor under the conditions prescribed by and at prices approved by the engineer .
the proceeds of any such disposition shall be applied to reduce any payments to the contractor under the contract or shall otherwise be credited to the cost of work covered by the contract or paid in a manner as directed .
until final disposition the contractor shall protect and preserve all the material related to the contract which is in the contractors possession and in which the department has or may acquire an interest .
f cost records .
the contractor agrees to make cost records available to the extent necessary to determine the validity and amount of each item claimed .
g contractual responsibilities .
termination of a contract or portion thereof shall not relieve the contractor of contractual responsibilities for the work completed nor shall it relieve the surety of its obligation for and concerning any just claim arising out of the work performed .
num num section num measurement and payment measurement of quantities .
all work completed under the contract will be measured by the engineer according to united states standard measure english units .
a station when used as a definition or term of measurement will be num linear feet .
the method of measurement and computations to be used in determination of quantities of material furnished and of work performed under the contract will be those methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
unless otherwise specified longitudinal measurements for area computations will be made horizontally and deductions will not be made for individual structures having an area of num square feet or less .
unless otherwise specified transverse measurements for area computations will be the neat dimensions shown on the plans or as ordered in writing by the engineer .
structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the plans or as altered to fit field conditions .
items which are measured by linear foot such as pipe culverts guardrail underdrains etc .
will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which the structures are placed unless otherwise shown on the plans .
in computing volumes of excavation and embankment the average end area method or the method incorporated into the departments computer earthwork program will be used .
the term gage when used in connection with the measurement of plates will mean the u.s. standard gage .
when the term gage refers to the measurement of wire it will mean the wire gage specified in astm anum .
the term ton will mean the short ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
materials measured or proportioned by weight shall be weighed on accurate scales .
scales shall be accurate within the allowable tolerances as prescribed by state law .
the scales shall be tested for accuracy by the colorado department of agriculture or an approved colorado department of agriculture vendor httpswww.colorado.govpacificaginspectionscalecompanies at least once each year each time the scales are relocated and as often as the engineer may deem necessary .
scales shall be furnished by the contractor or the contractor may utilize commercial scales .
scales shall be operated according to the colorado department of agricultures regulations .
weighers scales scale tickets scale house and verification of the num num scales accuracy will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the contractor may use either certified hopper scales or certified platform scales .
when platform scales are used to weigh vehicles carrying material paid for by weight each vehicle shall be weighed by a certified weigher .
hopper scales used to directly measure material paid for by weight shall be operated by certified weighers and provide an accurate net weight .
the operator of each vehicle carrying material measured and paid for by weight shall obtain a scale ticket certificate of correct weight from the certified weigher and deliver the ticket to the engineer at the point of delivery of the material .
the scale ticket shall include the following information num project number .
num date .
num ticket number .
num haul unit number .
num gross weight .
num tare weight .
num net weight .
num material type .
num certified weighers name .
vehicles used to haul material being paid for by weight shall bear a plainly legible identification mark .
each of these vehicles shall be weighed empty daily at times directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer in writing a vehicle identification sheet that lists the following for each delivery vehicle to be used on the project num identification mark .
num vehicle length .
num tare weight .
num number of axles .
num the distance between extreme axles .
num information related to legal weight including the permit no .
and permitted weight of each vehicle for which the state has issued an overweight permit .
this information shall be furnished prior to time of delivery of the material and at any subsequent time the contractor changes vehicles combination vehicles axle length relationships or overweight permitting of vehicles .
weighers using hopper scales solely for batching materials not measured and paid for by weight need not be certified .
the engineer will randomly verify the accuracy of the certified weigher on every num num project where the weights are manually entered on the scale ticket .
this verification will consist of at least one comparison check on the project .
additional verification checks may be required as determined by the engineer .
the engineer will randomly select a loaded truck after the truck has been issued a scale ticket by the certified weigher .
the loaded truck will then be reweighed in the presence of the engineer on the same scale and the weight compared with the weight on the scale ticket .
reweighed loads shall be within the tolerance of num pounds plus or minus .
the engineer will also verify the accuracy of computerized scales .
computerized scales are scales that automatically print weights on the scale ticket .
this verification will consist of at least one comparison check when the project requires more than num tons of material to be weighed .
this comparison check shall be made by reweighing a loaded vehicle .
the contractor shall either provide a second certified scale or select a second certified scale in the vicinity to be used for the comparison check .
comparison checks shall be performed using the following procedures num hopper scale .
a loaded truck will be randomly selected by the engineer .
the loaded truck shall be weighed on a certified platform scale to record the gross weight .
the truck shall be unloaded and weighed again on the same scale to record the tare weight .
the tare weight shall be subtracted from the gross weight and compared against the net weight recorded on the scale ticket .
num platform scales .
a loaded truck will be randomly selected by the engineer .
the loaded truck shall be reweighed on a second certified scale and the gross weight shall be compared against the gross weight on the first scale ticket .
should a comparison check reveal a weight difference of more than one percent a second comparison check shall be performed immediately .
if the weight differences of both comparison checks exceed the one percent limit the contractor shall immediately stop weighing and the scale shall be recertified and resealed at the contractors expense .
the necessary adjustments as indicated by the recertification will be made to all scale tickets issued since the last certification or on the entire project whichever occurred later unless the contractor demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer that the defect in the scale was present for a lesser period of time .
if it is necessary to recertify a scale and more than num tons of material remain to be weighed another scale comparison check shall be made .
all comparison checks shall be made at the contractors expense .
materials to be measured by volume in the hauling vehicle shall be hauled in approved vehicles and measured therein at the point of delivery .
vehicles for this purpose may be of any size or type provided the body is shaped so the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
all vehicles shall be loaded to their water level capacity and all loads shall be leveled when the vehicles arrive at the point of delivery .
num num water used in the work will be measured by the m gallon or num u.s. gallons .
the weight of inherent moisture in the material will not be deducted .
water added for the contractors convenience will not be paid for .
water may be measured either by volume or weight .
water meters shall be accurate within a range of num percent .
when water is metered the contractor shall use an approved metering device and shall furnish the engineer a certificate showing the meter has been accurately calibrated within the time allowed in the following schedule num inch num years num inch to num inch num years num inch to num inch num year water meters shall be calibrated when the engineer determines there is reason to believe the meters are not accurate within the allowable tolerance .
if water meter accuracy is found acceptable the cost involved in checking the water meter shall be at the departments expense .
if the water meter accuracy is found unsatisfactory the cost involved in checking the water meter shall be at the contractors expense .
for those materials specified to be measured by the cubic yard an acceptable method of computing volumes of excavation is to determine a weight to volume factor and convert weight to volumes by means of the factor .
the weight to volume factor shall be determined by colorado procedure num as described in the departments field materials manual .
the number of tests used to determine the material weight to volume factor will be determined by the engineer .
the locations where the tests are taken shall be at those locations specified in the method of measurement for the particular bid item i.e .
unclassified excavation in its original position embankment material in its final compacted position etc .
asphalt materials will be measured by the gallon or ton .
volumes will be measured at num f or will be corrected to the volume at num f using astm d num for asphalts or astm d num for tars .
net certified scale weight or weight based on certified volumes in the case of rail shipments will be used as a basis of measurement subject to correction when asphalt material has been lost from the car or the distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
when asphalt materials are shipped by truck or transport net certified weight or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming will be used for computing quantities .
cement will be measured by the ton .
timber will be measured by the number of thousand feet board measure or mfbm actually incorporated in the structure .
measurement will be based on nominal commercial widths and thicknesses .
the term lump sum when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the work described in the contract .
num num when a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will include all necessary fittings and accessories .
rental of equipment will be measured in hours of actual working time and necessary traveling time of the equipment within the limits of the project .
if special equipment has been ordered by the engineer in connection with force account work travel time and transportation to the project will be measured .
if equipment has been ordered held on the job on a standby basis by the engineer and is not otherwise utilized by the contractor standby rental rates for the equipment will be paid at the rates specified in subsection num .
when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit etc .
and these items are identified by gage unit weight section dimensions etc .
the identification will be considered to be nominal weight or dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved will be accepted .
scope of payment .
the contractor shall receive and accept compensation provided for in the contract as full payment for furnishing all materials and for performing all work under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner and for all risk loss damage or expense of whatever character arising out of the nature of the work or the prosecution thereof subject to the provisions of subsection num .
work or materials for which there are pay items and which are to be paid for separately will be included in the appropriate pay item in the summary of approximate quantities on the plans .
work or materials that are essential to the project but for which there are no pay items will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the project .
payment for any pay item listed in the summary of approximate quantities on the plans having additional items shown within parentheses shall be full compensation for all work necessary to complete the item as designated .
compensation for altered quantities .
when the accepted quantities of work vary from the quantities in the contract the contractor shall accept as payment in full payment at the original contract unit prices for the accepted quantities of work done .
allowance will not be made except as provided in subsections num and num for any increased expense loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the contractor resulting either directly from such alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation of overhead expense among the contract items or from any other cause .
if any such alteration directly causes the loss of any work or materials already furnished by the contractor under the terms of the original contract reimbursement for such work or of salvaging such materials will be at actual cost .
any such materials may at the option of the department be purchased at the num num actual cost to the contractor as evidenced by certified invoices .
compensation for changes and force account work .
differing site conditions changes and extra work performed under section num will be paid for as stipulated in the order authorizing the work .
compensation will be at unit prices or lump sum or the department may require the contractor to do the work on a force account basis to be compensated in the following manner a labor .
for all labor and foremen in direct charge of the specific operations the contractor will receive the actual rate of wage normally paid for each and every hour that the labor and foremen are actually engaged in the work as documented by certified payrolls .
the contractor will receive the actual costs paid to or in behalf of workers by reason of subsistence and travel allowances health and welfare benefits pension fund benefits or other benefits when the amounts are required by a collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract or generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work .
an amount equal to num percent of the actual wages and fringe benefits paid directly to the employees will also be paid to the contractor .
this num percent will not be applied to subsistence travel allowance or to fringe benefits paid to a third party or a trustee .
b materials .
for materials accepted by the engineer and incorporated in the work the contractor shall receive the actual cost of such materials including transportation charges paid exclusive of equipment rentals as hereinafter set forth to which num percent will be added .
c owned or leased equipment .
for the use of any machinery or equipment approved by the engineer which is owned or leased directly by the contractor or subcontractors or by entities that are divisions affiliates subsidiaries or in any other way related to the contractor or subcontractors or their parent companies the contractor will be paid in the manner hereinafter specified .
rental rates will be from the current edition of the rental rate blue book of rental rates for construction equipment and will be used as follows num num num .
determination of the rental rate to be used will be as follows hourly rate rr adj bbnumrfeoc standby rate sr adj bbnumrfnum where rr hourly rental rate sr standby rate adj bb blue book monthly rate adjusted for year of manufacture rf regional factor of num eoc estimated hourly operating costs from blue book num .
the number of hours to be paid for will be the number of hours that the equipment is actually used on a specific force account activity .
num .
overtime shall be compensated at the same rate indicated in subsection numcnum .
above .
num .
the eoc will be used for each hour that the equipment is in operation on the force account work .
such costs do not apply to idle time regardless of the cause .
num .
idle time for equipment will not be paid for except where the equipment has been held on the project site on a standby basis at the direction of the engineer .
such payment will be made at the standby rate established in subsection numcnum .
above .
the engineer must approve the payment of standby rates for equipment before the costs are incurred .
payment for standby time will not be made on any day the equipment operates for eight or more hours .
for equipment accumulating less than eight hours operating time on any normal work day standby payment will be limited to only that number of hours that when added to the operating time for that day equals eight hours .
additionally payment for standby time will not be made in any consecutive num day period that the equipment operates for num or more hours .
for equipment accumulating less than num hours operating time in any consecutive num day period standby payment will be limited to only that number of hours that when added to the operating time for that consecutive num day period equals num hours .
standby payment will not be made in any case on days not normally a work day .
num .
the rates established above include the cost of fuel oil lubrication supplies incidental tools valued at less than num necessary attachments repairs overhaul and maintenance of any kind depreciation storage overhead profit insurance all costs including labor and equipment of moving equipment onto and away from the site and all incidentals except as allowed in subsection numcnum .
num .
the rental rate for small tools shall be num per hour .
small tools are num num defined as any tool which would be valued between num and num if purchased new .
num .
transportation charges for each piece of equipment to and from the site of the work will be paid provided num the equipment is obtained from the nearest source num charges are restricted to those units of equipment not already available or required on the project and num the equipment is used solely for the force account work .
num .
fast use expendable parts not included in the rental rate blue book will be paid at certified invoice cost plus num .
such parts not totally expended on the force account work will be prorated based on actual use .
num .
payable time periods will not include num time elapsed while equipment is broken down num time spent in repairing equipment or num time elapsed after the equipment is no longer needed .
if a piece of equipment that is not in the blue book is needed rates shall be agreed to in writing before the equipment is used .
d rental equipment .
use of rental equipment not owned or leased by the contractor or subcontractors will be paid for by certified invoice cost .
the eoc will also be paid if not included in the rental rate .
the use of and rates for rental equipment shall be approved by the engineer prior to use .
proration of rental rates to an hourly rate for equipment not used solely for the force account shall be based on num hours per month num hours per week or num hours per day as applicable .
the cost of moving the rental equipment onto and away from the job will also be paid when the equipment is used solely for the force account work .
an amount equal to ten percent of the total due to the contractor for rental equipment cost will be added to compensate the contractor for related overhead costs .
e administrative compensation .
administrative compensation will be paid to the contractor for work performed on a force account basis by a subcontractor utility railroad waste disposal company or specialty firm .
the compensation will be a percentage of the value of the force account work performed in accordance with the following to num num over num to num num plus num of excess over num over num num plus num of excess over num the percentages will be calculated after certified invoices are furnished by the contractor .
compensation for administrative loading expenses will be applied to each individual billing for each force account not to exceed one administrative loading per billing nor one billing per force account per month .
f records .
the contractors representative and the engineer shall on a daily num num basis agree in writing on the quantities of labor equipment and materials used for work completed on a force account basis .
g statements .
payment will not be made for work performed on a force account basis until the contractor has furnished the engineer with triplicate itemized statements of the cost of the force account work detailed as follows num labor classification hours rate and extension for each labor class or pay rate within a class .
num equipment type hours rate and extension for each unit of equipment .
num quantities of materials prices extensions and transportation charges .
num administrative compensation when applicable .
statements shall be accompanied and supported by certified invoices for all materials and rental equipment including transportation charges .
if materials used on the force account work are not specifically purchased for the work but are taken from the contractors stock the contractor shall furnish a written statement certifying that the materials were taken from stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
h alternative method of documenting force account work .
the following method of documenting the amount of force account work done may be used in lieu of the method described in subsections numf and g above when agreed to by both the engineer and the contractor .
the engineer will keep a daily record of the labor equipment and material used on approved force account work .
the contractors representative shall review and initial the record each day to ensure that the record is accurate and complete and that the costs were actually incurred .
the contractor shall furnish certified copies of invoices for the cost of all materials used including transportation charges .
if materials used on force account work are not specifically purchased for the work but are taken from the contractors stock the contractor shall furnish a written statement certifying that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation charges claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
the engineer will calculate the cost of the force account work each month and include payment on the monthly progress estimate .
i the additional percentages stated in a through h above constitute full compensation for all items of expense not specifically designated including general superintendence use of incidental tools field and office overhead and profit .
the total payment made as provided above shall constitute full compensation for such work .
eliminated items .
should any items contained in the contract be found unnecessary for the proper completion of the work the engineer will notify the contractor in writing to eliminate the item .
such action will not invalidate the num num contract .
the contractor by contract modification order will be reimbursed for actual work done and all costs incurred including mobilization of materials and equipment prior to the elimination of the items .
partial payments .
partial payments will be made once each month as the work progresses when the contractor is performing satisfactorily under the contract .
payments will be based upon progress estimates prepared by the engineer of the value of work performed materials placed in accordance with the contract and the value of the materials on hand in accordance with subsection num .
the amount of the progress estimate paid to the contractor will be subject to the following a standard amount retained .
the department will make a deduction from the progress estimate in the amount considered necessary to protect the interests of the state pursuant to section num crs .
the amount to be retained will be num percent of the value of the completed work exclusive of mobilization and payments for materials on hand to a maximum of num  percent of the original contract amount .
no further amount will be retained if the contractor makes satisfactory progress in the contract work .
the amount retained will be in effect until such time as final payment is made with the following exception which requires the contractors written request and consent of the surety upon completion and acceptance of the project after the project quantities are finalized and the contractor has submitted the necessary forms the engineer may make reduction in the amount retained .
the contractor shall request release of retainage on work that has been partially accepted in accordance with subsection numa .
the contractor shall provide a certified invoice to the engineer stating the percentage of the original contract amount constituted by the partially accepted work .
the calculated percentage will be multiplied by the maximum retainage amount allowed to determine the retainage to be released .
b securities in lieu of standard amount retained .
when the original contract amount exceeds num the contractor may withdraw all or any portion of the standard amount retained if acceptable securities are assigned to the department and deposited as set forth in section num crs and the implementing regulations .
the securities shall at all times have a market value at least equal in value to the sums withdrawn .
if at any time the department determines that the market value of the securities has fallen below the sums withdrawn the contractor shall deposit additional acceptable securities in an amount sufficient to reestablish a total deposit of securities equal in value to the sums withdrawn .
this security substitution shall not apply if a part of the contract price is paid from federal or other sources and the federal or other source has requirements which are inconsistent with this subsection .
c subcontractor and supplier claims .
in addition to a standard amount retained the department will withhold funds for all claims against the contractor filed by subcontractors and suppliers pursuant to sections num num and num crs .
num num d no payment .
a partial payment will not be made when the total value of the work done since the last estimate amounts to less than num. e prompt payment .
the contractor shall pay subcontractors and suppliers for all work which has been satisfactorily completed within seven calendar days after receiving payment for that work from the department .
for the purpose of this section only work shall be considered satisfactorily complete when the department has made payment for the work .
the contractor shall include in all subcontracts a provision that this requirement for prompt payment to subcontractors and suppliers must be included in all subcontracts at every tier .
the contractor shall ensure that all subcontractors and suppliers at every tier are promptly paid .
if the contractor or its subcontractors fail to comply with this provision the engineer will not authorize further progress payment for work performed directly by the contractor or the noncompliant subcontractor until the required payments have been made .
the engineer will continue to authorize progress payments for work performed by compliant subcontractors .
f retainage by the contractor .
the contractor may withhold retainage of each progress estimate on work performed by subcontractors .
if during the prosecution of the project a subcontractor satisfactorily completes all work described on cdot form no .
num as amended by changes directed by the engineer the following procedure will apply num .
the subcontractor may make a written request to the contractor for the release of the subcontractors retainage .
num .
within ten working days of the request the contractor shall determine if all work described on form num has been satisfactorily completed and shall inform the subcontractor in writing of the contractors determination .
num .
if the contractor determines that the subcontractor has not achieved satisfactory completion of all work described on form num the contractor shall provide the subcontractor with written notice stating specifically why the subcontract work is not satisfactorily completed and what has to be done to achieve completion .
a copy of this written notice shall be provided to the engineer .
num .
if the contractor determines that the subcontractor has achieved satisfactory completion of all work described on form num the contractor shall release the subcontractors retainage within seven calendar days .
num .
in determining whether satisfactory completion has been achieved the contractor may require the subcontractor to provide documentation such as certifications and releases showing that all laborers lowertiered subcontractors suppliers of material and equipment and others involved in the subcontractors work have been paid in full .
the contractor may also require any documentation from the subcontractor that is required by the subcontract or by the contract between the contractor and the department or by law such as affidavits of wages paid material num num acceptance certifications and releases from applicable governmental agencies to the extent that they relate to the subcontractors work .
num .
within num calendar days after receiving the contractors request the engineer will make inspection of all work described on form num .
the engineer will measure and furnish the final quantities to the contractor of the items completed by the subcontractor .
agreement on these final quantities by the contractor will not constitute the acceptance of the work described on form num by the engineer .
num .
if the subcontractor performs only a portion of an item of work the contractor shall release retainage in accordance with the procedures stated above and when the subcontractor has completed all of the work included in the subcontract however final measurement of quantities will not be made until the item of work and all of the work on the associated form num has been completed .
num .
if additional quantities of a particular item of work are required at a later date after final measurement has been made the contractor shall perform this work in accordance with contract requirements and at unit bid prices .
for this subsection only satisfactory completion of all work described on cdot form no .
num is when all tasks called for in the subcontract as amended by changes directed by the engineer have been accomplished and documented as required by the department .
the requirements stated above do not apply to retainage withheld by the department from monies earned by the contractor .
the department will continue to process the release of that retainage based upon the completion date of the project as defined in the commencement and completion of work special provision .
num .
if during the prosecution of the project a portion of the work is partially accepted in accordance with subsection numa the contractor shall release all subcontractors retainage on the portion of the partially accepted work performed by subcontractors .
prior to the department releasing the contractors retainage on work that has been partially accepted in accordance with subsection numa the contractor shall submit to the engineer a certified statement for each subcontractor that has participated in the partially accepted work .
the statement shall certify that the subcontractor has been paid in full for its portion of the partially accepted work including release of the subcontractors retainage .
the statement shall include the signature of a legally responsible official for the contractor and the signature of a legally responsible official for the subcontractor .
num .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for all additional costs involved in paying retainage to the subcontractors prior to total project completion .
num num g good cause exception .
if the contractor has good cause to delay or withhold a subcontractors progress payment the contractor shall notify the subcontractor in writing within seven calendar days after receiving payment from the department .
the notification shall specify the amount being withheld and provide adequate justification for withholding the payment .
the notice shall also clearly state what conditions the subcontractor must meet to receive payment .
good cause shall include but not be limited to the failure of the subcontractor to make timely submission of required paperwork .
h monthly reporting .
for cdot projects by the numth of each month the contractor shall record all payments to subcontractors by completing an audit in the bnumgnow system .
if the contractor has good cause for delay as described in subsection numg the contractor shall include the justification in its monthly audit .
once the prime enters a payment to a subcontractor or supplier the subcontractor or supplier will receive a notice to confirm payment .
the subcontractor or supplier shall have fifteen days from the notice to confirm payment or report an issue .
if a subcontractor or supplier is also a payor the subcontractor or supplier shall also report all prompt payment to its subcontractors .
if the subcontractor or supplier does not report a prompt payment issue within fifteen days from the contractors monthly reporting the subcontractor waives cdots assistance in resolving the prompt payment issue and the monthly audit will be closed .
this provision should not be construed to limit the subcontractors contractual remedies .
i fuel cost adjustments .
contract cost adjustments will be made to reflect increases or decreases in the monthly average prices of gasoline diesel and other fuels from the average price for the month preceding the month in which bids were received for the contract .
these cost adjustments are not changes to the contract unit prices bid .
when bidding the contractor shall specify on the form num whether the cost adjustment will apply to the contract .
after bids are submitted the contractor will not be given any other opportunity to accept or reject this adjustment .
if the contractor fails to indicate a choice on the form num the cost adjustment will not apply to the contract .
if the fuel cost adjustment is accepted by the contractor the adjustment will be made in accordance with the following criteria num .
cost adjustments will be based on the fuel price index established by the department and calculated as shown in subsection numinum.d below .
the index will be the monthly average of the rates posted by the oil price information service opis for denver no .
num diesel .
the rate used will be the opis average taken from the opis standard rack table for ultra low sulfur wlubricity gross prices uls column expressed in dollars per gallon and rounded to two decimal places .
num .
cost adjustments will be made on a monthly basis subject to the following conditions a .
adjustment will be based on the pay quantities on the monthly partial pay estimate for each of the pay items listed in the table below for which fuel factors have been established .
adjustment will be made num num only when the pay item is measured by the pay unit specified in the table item pay unit fuel factor ff numremoval of asphalt mat planing square yard num galsyinch depth numexcavation muck unclassified embankment borrow cubic yard num galcy numrock excavation cubic yard num galcy numstructure excavation and backfill applies only to quantities paid for by separate bid item no adjustment will be made for pay items that include structure excavation backfill such as rcpcip cubic yard num galcy numaggregate base course class___ cubic yard num galcy numaggregate base course class___ ton num gal.ton numprocessing lime treated subgrade square yard num galsy numfull depth reclamation square yard num galsy numhot mix asphalt hma grading __ ton num galton numstone matrix asphalt grading __ ton num galton numheating and scarifying treatment square yard num galsy numheating and repaving treatment square yard num galsy numheating and remixing treatment square yard num galsy numcold bituminous pavement recycle square yard num galsyinch depth num concrete pavement ___inch square yard num galsyinch thickness numplace concrete pavement square yard num galsyinch thickness hot mix asphalt patching is not subject to fuel cost adjustment .
use the thickness shown on the plans .
b .
a fuel cost adjustment will be made only when the current fuel price index varies by more than num percent from the price index at the time of bid and only for that portion of the variance in excess of num percent .
fuel cost adjustments may be either positive or negative dollar amounts .
c. fuel cost adjustments will not be made for any partial estimate falling wholly after the expiration of contract time .
num num d. adjustment formula ep greater than bp fa ep num bpqff ep less than bp fa ep num bpqff where bp average fuel price index for the calendar month prior to the calendar month in which bids are opened ep average fuel price index for the calendar month prior to the calendar month in which the partial estimate pay period ends fa adjustment for fuel costs in dollars ff fuel usage factor for the pay item q pay quantity for the pay item on the monthly partial pay estimate note when the pay item is based on area and the rate of fuel use varies with thickness q should be determined by multiplying the area by the thickness .
for example for num square yards of numinch concrete pavement q should be num .
example bids are opened on july num .
the bp will be the average of the daily postings for june num through june num .
for an estimate cutoff date selected by the contractor at the preconstruction conference of the numth of the month a february estimate will include hma quantities q measured from the numst of january through the numth of february the ff will be num galton and the ep index used to calculate fa will be the average of the daily postings for january num through january num as established by cdot .
e. fuel cost adjustment will not be made for the quantity of any item that is left in place at no pay .
f. fuel cost adjustments will not be made to items of work added to the contract by change order after the award of the contract .
the fuel cost adjustment will be the sum of the individual adjustments for each of the pay items shown .
no adjustment will be made for fuel costs on items other than those shown .
the factors shown are aggregate adjustments for all types of fuels used including but not limited to gasoline diesel propane and burner fuel .
no additional adjustments will be made for any other type of fuel .
num num fuel cost adjustments resulting in an increased payment to the contractor will be paid for under the planned force account item fuel cost adjustment .
fuel cost adjustments resulting in a decreased payment to the contractor will be deducted from monies owed the contractor .
j asphalt cement cost adjustments .
contract cost adjustments will be made to reflect increases or decreases in the monthly average price of asphalt cement from the average price for the month preceding the month in which bids were received for the contract .
these cost adjustments are not a change to the contract unit prices bid .
num .
cost adjustments will be based on the asphalt cement price index established by the department and calculated as shown below .
the index will be the average for the month of the daily hardisty wcs spot price .
this will be calculated by applying the monthly hardisty wcs differential as published on httpwww.fhr.comrefiningcrude_oil.aspx from the west texas intermediate wti daily spot price as published on httpwww.up.comcustomerssurchargewtipricesindex.htm .
the daily prices and the average index number for the month will be posted as soon as they are available on the cdot website at httpwww.coloradodot.infobusinessdesignsupportconstruction specifications num .
cost adjustments will be made on a monthly basis subject to the following conditions a .
adjustment will be based on the pay quantities on the monthly partial pay estimate for the following two pay items when measured by the ton and asphalt cement is included in the pay items item no .
item pay unit num hot mix asphalt grading __ asphalt ton num stone matrix asphalt grading __ asphalt ton hot mix asphalt patching is not subject to asphalt cement cost adjustment .
b .
a cost adjustment will be made only when the asphalt cement price index varies by more than num percent from the asphalt cement price index at the time of bid and only for that portion of the variance in excess of num percent .
cost adjustments may be either positive or negative dollar amounts .
c. asphalt cement cost adjustments will not be made for any partial estimate falling wholly after the expiration of contract time .
num num d. adjustment formula ep greater than bp acca ep num bppa q ep less than bp acca ep num bp pa q where bp average asphalt cement price index for the calendar month prior to the calendar month in which bids are opened ep average asphalt cement price index for the calendar month prior to the calendar month in which the partial estimate pay period ends acca asphalt cement cost adjustment pa percent of the paving mixture that is asphalt cement .
asphalt cement content will be determined by the weighted average of all asphalt cement content percentages obtained from the field acceptance tests for that item use decimal in formula e.g .
num ..
if reclaimed asphalt pavement rap reclaimed asphalt shingles ras or both is used the percent of virgin asphalt cement added to the mix will be determined by subtracting the percent of asphalt cement in the rap ras or both from the percent of asphalt cement in the mix as calculated from revision of section num reclaimed asphalt pavement and revision of section num reclaimed asphalt shingles .
q increased pay quantity for all num items shown above on the monthly partial pay estimate in tons .
example bids are opened on july num .
the bp will be the average of the daily postings for june num through june num .
for an estimate cutoff date selected by the contractor at the preconstruction conference of the numth of the month a february estimate will include hma quantities measured from the numst of january through the numth of february and the ep index used to calculate acca will be the average of the daily prices for january num through january num as established by cdot e. cost adjustment will not be made for the quantity of any item that is left in place at no pay or for material removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num num f. cost adjustments will not be made to items of work added to the contract by change order after the award of the contract .
g. the asphalt cement cost adjustment will be the sum of the individual adjustments for each of the pay items shown above .
no adjustment will be made for asphalt cement costs on items other than those shown above .
h. asphalt cement cost adjustments resulting in an increased payment to the contractor will be paid for under the planned force account item asphalt cement cost adjustment .
asphalt cement cost adjustments resulting in a decreased payment to the contractor will be deducted from monies owed the contractor .
k maximum partial payments .
partial payments will not be made in excess of the encumbrance amount except at the sole discretion of the department .
work performed in excess of the encumbrance amount without written approval of the department shall be performed at the contractors risk .
if the contractor proceeds at his own risk then payment for the atrisk work will be dependent upon ratification of this work by the state controllers office .
payment for material on hand stockpiled material .
payments may be made to the contractor for materials to be incorporated into the work as evidenced by invoices or cost analyses of material produced on the project subject to the following num the material has been fabricated or processed and is ready for installation into the project and conforms to the requirements of the contract .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with a monthly accounting of all materials stockpiled on the project for which stockpiled payment is being requested and certification of compliance that the materials conform to the requirements of the contract .
this monthly accounting shall include the specific location of materials the amounts of materials stockpiled the amounts of materials incorporated into the work and the net amounts of materials for which stockpile material payment is being requested .
payment for stockpiled structural steel unfabricated milled plate may be made subject to the following additional conditions i the plan quantity of structural steel shall exceed one million pounds .
ii the structural steel shall have been delivered to the contractors fabrication plant .
iii the material conforms to the requirements of the contract .
iv payment shall not exceed num percent of the certified invoice cost of the structural steel .
num num num the material is stored on the project on state owned property or at an acceptable secured location within the state of colorado .
in the latter case the contractor shall provide a document signed by the owner and lessee of the property establishing that the department has a vested interest in and the right of access to and possession of the material .
the material shall be clearly identified for the cdot project .
if the material is structural steel either completely fabricated or unfabricated milled plate it is stored on the project stored on state owned property or identified and stored separately from all other lots of similar material in acceptable storage places .
in the latter case the contractor shall provide a document signed by the owner and lessee of the property establishing that the department has vested interest in and the right of access to and possession of the structural steel .
when the structural steel is stockpiled outside the state of colorado the contractor shall reimburse the department for all costs incurred to verify the quantity of the material conformance to contract requirements and proper storage .
num the contractor provides the engineer with a written cost analysis which confirms that the balance of funds in the corresponding items is sufficient to complete the installation .
partial payments will not exceed num percent of the contract unit price for the item or num percent of the certified invoice cost of the stockpiled material whichever is less .
num the contractor shall provide the engineer with a certified invoice .
payment for stockpiled materials will not relieve the contractor of responsibility for loss or damage to the material .
payment for living plant materials perishable materials or materials which will not become an integral part of the finished project will not be made under this subsection .
reserved acceptance and final payment .
when the project has been accepted as provided in subsection num the engineer will prepare the final estimate of the quantities of the various classes of work performed .
after approval of the final estimate by the contractor payment of the entire sum found to be due after deducting all previous payments and all amounts to be retained or deducted under the provisions of the contract will be made .
all prior estimates and payments except for those made in accordance with subsection numfnum .
will be subject to correction in the final estimate and payment .
compensation for compensable delays .
if the engineer determines that a delay is compensable in accordance with either subsection num num num or num monetary compensation will be determined in accordance with this subsection .
num num a these categories represent the only costs that are recoverable by the contractor .
all other costs or categories of costs are not recoverable num actual wages and benefits including fica paid for additional labor not otherwise included in num below num costs for additional bond insurance and tax num increased costs for materials num equipment costs calculated in accordance with subsection numc for contractor owned equipment and based on invoice costs for rented equipment num costs of extended job site overhead num costs of salaried employees not otherwise included in num or num above incurred as a direct result of the delay num claims from subcontractors and suppliers at any level the same level of detail as specified herein is required for all such claims num an additional num percent will be added to the total of items num through num as compensation for items for which no specific allowance is provided including profit and home office overhead .
b in adjustment for costs as allowed above the department will have no liability for the following items of damages or expense num profit in excess of that provided in a above num loss of profit num additional cost of labor inefficiencies in excess of that provided in a above num home office overhead in excess of that provided in a above num consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency num indirect costs or expenses of any nature in excess of that provided in a above num attorneys fees claim preparation fees and expert fees .
all costs claimed must be documented and accompanied by a claim certification form obtained from the department .
num num construction details division num earthwork section num clearing and grubbing description this work consists of clearing grubbing removing and disposing of vegetation and debris within the limits of the right of way easement areas borrow pits and other areas shown in the contract or required by the work .
vegetation and objects designated to remain shall be preserved free from injury or defacement .
construction requirements the engineer will designate all trees shrubs plants and other objects to remain .
every object that is designated to remain and is damaged shall be repaired or replaced as directed at the contractors expense .
clearing and grubbing shall extend to the toe of fill or the top of cut slopes unless otherwise designated .
all surface objects trees stumps roots and other protruding obstructions not designated to remain shall be cleared and grubbed .
in areas to be rounded at the tops of backslopes stumps shall be removed to at least num feet below the surface of the final slope line .
except in areas to be excavated all holes resulting from the removal of obstructions shall be backfilled with suitable material and compacted in accordance with subsection num .
burning of perishable material will not be permitted without the written approval of the engineer .
if permitted perishable material shall be burned under the constant care of the contractor at times and in a manner that will not endanger the surrounding vegetation adjacent property or objects designated to remain .
burning shall be done in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances .
no material or debris shall be disposed of within the project limits without the written permission of the engineer .
material or debris that is disposed of within the project limits shall be buried to a depth of at least num feet and the surface shall be reshaped to match the adjacent ground line .
the contractor shall make all arrangements to obtain written permission from property owners for disposal locations outside the limits and view of the project .
copies of this written agreement shall be furnished to the engineer before the disposal area is used .
num num all cleared merchantable timber shall be removed from the project and shall become the property of the contractor .
branches on trees or shrubs shall be removed as directed .
branches of trees extending over the roadbed shall be trimmed to give a clear height of num feet above the roadbed surface .
all trimming shall be done in accordance with good tree surgery practices .
the contractor shall clear and grub the areas within the excavation or embankment grading limits and shall include the removal from the ground of brush roots sod grass residue of agricultural crops sawdust and other vegetable matter .
see subsection nume for disturbed area limits .
method of measurement measurement will be by one of the following methods a area basis .
the work to be paid for will be the number of acres acceptably cleared and grubbed including scalping within the limits shown on the plans or staked by the engineer .
b lump sum basis .
when the contract contains a clearing and grubbing lump sum item no measurement will be made .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of clearing and grubbing will be paid for at the contract unit prices as follows a area basis .
the quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per acre for each pay item that appears in the bid schedule .
b lump sum basis .
when the bid schedule contains a lump sum item the lump sum price so bid will be paid and shall be full compensation for clearing and grubbing the entire project .
clearing and grubbing beyond the limits designated under this item will be paid for as extra work in accordance with subsection num .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit clearing acre lump sum grubbing acre lump sum clearing and grubbing acre lump sum c exclusions .
when the bid schedule does not contain an estimated quantity or a lump sum item for clearing and grubbing the work will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num removal of structures and obstructions description this work consists of the removal and disposal of trees slope and ditch protection abandoned utility services curb gutter pipes sidewalk structures bridges or parts of bridges railroad appurtenances traffic control devices impact attenuators guardrail fences foundations detours pavements pavement markings and all other obstructions that are not designated or permitted to remain .
it shall also include salvaging stockpiling and loading salvable materials sandblasting plugging structures cleaning culverts and sawing and cutting to facilitate controlled breaking and removal of concrete and asphalt to a neat line .
except in areas to be excavated the resulting trenches holes and pits shall be backfilled .
this work also consists of plugging and abandoning water wells as designated in the contract .
materials removed and not designated in the contract to be salvaged or incorporated into the work shall become the property of the contractor .
construction requirements general .
the contractor shall raze remove and dispose of all structures and obstructions which are identified on the project except utilities structures and obstructions removed under other contractual agreements and salvable material designated to remain the property of the department .
basements and other cavities left by structure removal shall be filled to the level of the surrounding ground with suitable material and if within the construction limits shall be compacted in accordance with subsection num .
bridges culverts and other drainage structures shall not be removed until satisfactory arrangements have been made to accommodate traffic and drainage .
blasting or other operations used to remove existing structures or obstructions which may damage new construction shall be completed prior to placing the new work .
where portions of structures are to be removed the portions designated to remain shall be prepared to fit the new construction and shall be protected from damage .
all damage to structures designated to remain in place shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
method of repair shall be approved by the engineer .
sawing of concrete shall be done to a true line with a vertical face unless otherwise specified .
the minimum depth of a saw cut in concrete shall be num inches or to the depth of the reinforcing steel whichever occurs first .
removed concrete and asphalt material may be used to construct embankments in num num accordance with subsection num .
where culverts or sewers are to be left in place and plugged the ends of concrete or masonry culverts shall be filled with suitable material .
the ends of corrugated metal pipe culverts shall be crushed .
culvert and sewer ends are to be sufficiently filled or crushed to prevent future settlement of embankments .
plugging of culverts shall include removal of headwalls and other appurtenances where necessary to accommodate the work .
procedures for abandoning water wells shall conform to the revised and amended rules and regulations of the state of colorado division of water resources board of examiners of water well construction and pump installation contractors board .
the state engineer who acts for the board is located at num centennial bldg .
num sherman st. denver co num phone num .
the contractor shall properly plug and abandon the designated wells and file an abandonment report for each .
an abandonment report shall be prepared using form gwsnum obtained from the board at the above address .
the report shall describe the well location and how it was plugged .
this report shall be submitted to the board with a copy given to the project engineer within num days after performing the work .
existing guardrail shall not be removed unless the need for the guardrail has been eliminated or the hazard has been protected or delineated .
the duration and manner of protection or delineation shall be submitted in writing for approval by the engineer .
salvable material .
all salvable material designated in the contract to remain the property of the department shall be removed without damage in sections or pieces which may be readily transported and shall be stockpiled by the contractor at specified locations within the project limits .
the contractor shall safeguard salvable materials and shall be responsible for the expense of repairing or replacing damaged or missing material until it is incorporated into the work or is loaded onto department equipment by the contractor .
signs and traffic signals .
removal of signs shall include removal of posts footings pedestals sign panels and brackets .
concrete adhering to salvable sign posts shall be removed.removal of sign panel shall include removal of the panel and its attachment hardware from the existing installation and adjusting the spacing of the remaining panels .
the removal of traffic signal items shall include poles mast arms signal heads span wires footings all attachment hardware and other incidental materials .
removal of signal pole or pedestal pole shall include pole span wire cable signal heads overhead sign support wire footings and pedestrian push buttons .
removal of traffic signal controller and cabinet shall include removal of the footing and all auxiliary equipment contained within the cabinet .
num num pavement markings .
pavement markings shall be removed from the pavement to the maximum extent possible by methods that do not materially alter or damage the surface or texture of the pavement to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the proposed method of pavement marking removal shall be designated by the contractor at the preconstruction conference and approved by the engineer .
operations that do not produce the desired result damage the pavement or may constitute a hazard to the traveling public will not be permitted .
materials deposited on the pavement as a result of removal of pavement markings shall be promptly removed so as not to interfere with traffic or roadway drainage .
pavement markings designated to be removed shall be removed before any change is made in traffic patterns .
temporary marking tape sections longer than one foot shall be removed before placement of the final pavement course .
all tape shall be removed on sections where tape conflicts with revised traffic lanes prior to opening of new lanes to traffic .
a removal of temporary pavement marking on final alignment .
temporary pavement marking paint on the approved final alignment shall be removed completely from the roadway surface at locations of permanent pavement markings as shown on the plans .
the removal location shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint and other foreign contaminants prior to application of final pavement marking .
the contractor shall not remove more pavement marking paint than what can be replaced with permanent pavement marking during the same working day or working period .
if a storm or other event prevents the contractor from completing the placement of permanent marking the contractor shall halt the removal operation and place raised flexible pavement markers where temporary pavement markings have been removed but the permanent markings have not been placed .
raised flexible pavement markers shall be installed with one marker at numfoot centers .
raised flexible pavement markers shall remain in place while the pavement is drying prior to the permanent marking application .
permanent marking application shall resume when the pavement is dry and has had no moisture for a minimum of num hours .
b removal of temporary pavement marking on transitions .
removal of pavement marking paint on temporary transitional alignments shall be performed by grinding or waterblasting .
the removal shall result in num percent removal of the paint and a wide swath of ground pavement surrounding the former location of the temporary paint .
the width of the swath shall be as follows the center of the swath shall be the location of the paint line num num detours .
the contractor shall completely remove the detour and dispose of the materials in accordance with the contract .
pavements sidewalks curbs .
all concrete pavement sidewalks structures curbs gutters etc .
designated for removal shall be disposed of in accordance with subsection num .
concrete pavement to be broken and left in place shall be broken so the largest fragment does not exceed num square yard in surface .
portions of structures .
unless otherwise directed the substructures of existing structures shall be removed down to the natural stream bottom and those parts outside of the stream shall be removed down num foot below natural ground surface .
where such portions of existing structures lie wholly or in part within the limits of a new structure they shall be removed as necessary to accommodate the construction of the proposed structure .
reinforcing steel projecting from the structure designated to remain shall be cleaned and aligned to the new construction .
required dowels shall be securely grouted with approved grout .
when concrete is removed all exposed reinforcing steel designated to remain in place shall be cleaned by sandblasting to sound steel free of oil dirt concrete fragments or laitance loose rust scale and other coatings that would destroy or inhibit the bond with the new concrete .
adequate measures shall be taken by the contractor to protect the steel from contamination or corrosion .
reinforcing steel contaminated as a result of the contractors failure to provide adequate protection shall be resandblasted at the contractors expense with no allowance for contract time extension .
a protective device shall be placed between the sandblasting operations and the traveling public .
removal of asphalt mat planing .
the contractor shall not commence planing operations until the hot mix asphalt hma mix design cdot form num has been approved and signed .
prior to beginning planing operations the contractor shall submit a planing plan for approval by the engineer .
this plan shall include as a minimum num the number and types of planers to be used .
num the width and location of each planing pass .
num the number and types of brooms to be used and their locations with respect to the planers .
the contractor shall have at least one back up broom on the project at all times in case one of the operating brooms breaks down .
each planer shall conform to the following the planer shall have sufficient power traction and stability to maintain an accurate depth of cut .
the propulsion and guidance system of the planer shall be maintained in such condition that the planer may be operated to straight and true lines .
num num operation with broken or missing teeth will not be allowed .
worn teeth shall be replaced if the planer does not produce a uniform surface .
the planer shall be capable of picking up the removed asphalt in a single operation .
a selfloading conveyer shall be an integral part of the planer .
windrows will not be allowed .
all planed areas shall be broomed with a pick up broom unless otherwise specified before being opened to traffic .
a sufficient number of brooms shall be used immediately after planing to remove all planed material remaining on the roadway .
if the contractor fails to adequately clean the roadway work shall cease until the engineer has approved the contractors revised written proposal to adequately clean the roadway .
at the completion of each days work vertical edges caused by planing that are greater than num inch in height shall be longitudinal tapered to not less than a num slope transverse tapered to not less than a num slope .
the roadway shall be left in a safe and usable condition at the end of each work day .
all required pavement markings removed by the planing shall be restored before the roadway is opened to traffic .
all planing shall be completed parallel to the travel lanes unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
all planing shall be completed full width before resurfacing commences .
clean culvert .. culverts designated in the contract to be cleaned shall be cleaned by removing all sedimentation and debris from within the culvert and all appurtenant structures .
method of measurement when the contract provides payment for removal of obstructions on a lump sum basis this payment will include all stipulated structures and obstructions encountered within the right of way in accordance with this section .
when the contract provides payment for the removal of specific items on a unit basis measurement will be by the unit .
removal of pavement marking will be measured in square feet completed and accepted .
sandblasting of pavement that is to be covered with pavement marking material will be measured as the same area as measured for the pavement marking for which the sandblasting is required .
removal of asphalt mat planing will be measured by the area in square yards completed to the required depth and accepted .
sandblasting reinforcing steel will be measured by the square yard of deck surface .
multiple layers of reinforcing steel within a common area of the deck exposed and num num requiring sandblasting will not be measured separately .
clean culvert will be measured by the number of culverts acceptably cleaned as designated on the plans irrespective of the kind or size involved .
abandon well will be measured by the actual number plugged abandoned and the abandonment report submitted .
removal of temporary pavement marking on transitions will be measured by the actual square feet of the swath that is removed for the required width .
removal of pavement marking for the permanent alignment will be measured as the actual in square feet of pavement marking that is removed .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment shall be full compensation for sawing removing disposal excavation and subsequent backfill and salvage of materials removed their custody preservation storage and disposal as provided herein .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit removal of structures and obstructions lump sum removal of each linear foot square yard cubic yard removal of asphalt mat planing square yard removal of pavement marking square foot removal of pavement marking num inch square foot removal of pavement marking num inch square foot plug each clean culvert each abandon well each sandblasting square foot sandblasting reinforcing steel square yard when the contract does not include pay items for removal of structures and obstructions the removal will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for abandon well will be full compensation for all labor and materials num num required to complete the work including preparing and submitting the abandonment report .
temporary raised flexible pavement markers used in accordance with subsection numa will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num excavation and embankment description general .
this work consists of excavation hauling disposal placement and compaction of all material encountered within the limits of the work including construction of dikes and excavation for ditches and channels necessary for the construction of the roadway in accordance with the contract .
materials all excavation will be defined as unclassified excavation stripping removal of unsuitable material rock excavation borrow or potholing as described below a unclassified excavation .
unclassified excavation shall consist of the excavation of all materials of whatever character required for the work obtained within the right of way including surface boulders and excavation for ditches and channels that is not removed under some other item .
b stripping .
stripping shall consist of removing overburden or other specified material from borrow pits and the replacement of overburden or other specified material over the disturbed area of the site or pit after the underlying material has been removed .
c removal of unsuitable material .
removal of unsuitable material shall consist of the removal of soils or mixtures of soil and organic matter identified in the contract or as directed by the engineer that would be detrimental to the roadway or embankment if left in place in its existing condition .
d rock excavation .
rock excavation shall consist of removal of igneous metamorphic and sedimentary rock which can not be excavated without blasting or with the use of rippers including all boulders or other detached stones having a volume of  cubic yard or more .
unless specified in the contract rock excavation is material that meets one of the following field test criteria to be conducted by the contractor num .
ripping test material that can not be broken down by one pass with a single tooth ripper mounted on a crawler type tractor in low gear with a minimum net flywheel power rating of num horsepower or material that can not be broken down with a num pound tracked excavator using a bucket with rock teeth .
num .
seismic test material that has a seismic velocity of num feet per second or greater .
the contractor shall submit the qualifications of the individual performing or interpreting the seismic testing to the engineer a minimum of num days prior to testing .
the ripping test will be used to resolve differences if seismic velocities fall below num feet per second .
num num num .
handling test any boulder or detached stone having a volume of  cubic yard or more that can not be readily broken down with the excavation equipment described above in num. e borrow .
borrow shall consist of approved material obtained from outside the right of way required for the construction of the project .
f potholing .
potholing shall consist of exposing and verifying the location of existing utilities at locations as directed .
embankment material shall consist of approved material acquired from excavations or borrow pits and hauled and placed in embankments .
approval of embankment material is contingent on the material meeting the atterberg limit and gradation requirements specified in the contract .
approval of the embankment material in the upper num feet of embankment below the subgrade elevation is contingent on the material meeting one of the following as specified in the contract num the specified resistance value when tested by the hveem stabilometer or the equivalent resilient modulus .
num the specified atterberg limit and gradation requirements .
num the specified resistance value when tested by the hveem stabilometer or equivalent resilient modulus and the specified atterberg limit and gradation requirements .
embankment material shall be classified into one of the material groups listed below and placed and compacted in accordance with the appropriate methods specified in subsection num .
if any material does not meet the criteria for one of the following classifications it shall be processed on site to meet the requirements for one of the material groups listed below or disposed of at the contractors expense .
num soil embankment soil embankment shall have all particle sizes less than num inches .
the material shall be classified in accordance with aashto m num and placed and compacted in accordance with subsection numa .
num rock embankment rock embankment shall meet all of the following requirements i a minimum of num percent of the material shall be retained on the num mm no .
num sieve .
ii more than num percent of the material shall be retained on the num mm  inch sieve .
iii the material shall meet the classification of an aashto anum soil type .
iv all particle sizes shall be less than num inches .
v particles retained on the nummm no .
num sieve shall not be composed of nondurable bedrock types .
num num rock embankment may be placed without moisture density control as described in subsection numb .
num rock fill rock fill shall meet all of the following requirements i a minimum of num percent of the material shall be retained on a num mm numinch sieve .
ii the maximum dimension of any particle shall not exceed num inches .
iii the material shall be wellgraded as determined on visual inspection .
iv the material shall contain less than num percent by volume of material passing the num m no .
num sieve based on visual inspection .
v particles retained on the num mm no .
num sieve shall not be composed of nondurable bedrock types .
rock fill can be placed without moisture density control as described in subsection numb .
nondurable bedrock shall be identified and classified using colorado procedure cpl num .
any material classified as soillike nondurable sn as defined in the procedure shall be pulverized broken down and processed to numinch maximum particle sizes before incorporation into embankment fill .
these materials shall be placed and compacted as soil embankment in accordance with subsection numa .
nondurable bedrock particles in excess of num inches shall not be placed into embankment fill .
if recycled concrete or asphalt are to be incorporated into embankment fill the maximum dimension permitted for concrete is num inches and the maximum dimension permitted for asphalt is num inches .
embankment material imported onto the project will be tested for water soluble sulfates using cpl num method b .
the average of three consecutive tests shall show that the sulfate content is not greater than that corresponding to the sulfate exposure level specified in the contract .
no single test shall have a sulfate content more than num percent greater than that corresponding to the sulfate exposure level specified in the contract .
when there is a single failing test the remaining sample shall be split into four equal portions .
the cdot region lab shall receive one portion the contractor shall receive one portion and the remaining two portions shall go to the cdot central lab .
the cdot region lab the cdot central lab and the contractors lab shall retest the sample .
if the results from the three labs are within num percent of each other the results will be averaged .
the averaged result will be used for determining contract compliance .
if the results from the labs are not within num percent of each other the remaining split sample shall be sent to an independent laboratory for testing using cpl num .
the independent laboratory shall be mutually agreed upon by the department and the contractor .
the independent labs test result will be used for determining contract compliance .
if the water soluble sulfate content is less than that corresponding to the sulfate exposure level specified in the contract cdot will bear all costs associated with num num the independent lab test .
if the soluble sulfate content is greater than that corresponding to the sulfate exposure level specified in the contract all costs associated with independent lab testing shall be at the contractors expense .
embankment represented by failing tests shall be removed from the project and replaced at the contractors expense .
imported material used for backfilling pipes storm sewer cross culverts side drains etc shall be tested for compatibility with the selected pipe material .
when nonreinforced concrete pipe or reinforced concrete pipe is used the imported material shall be tested for sulfate and ph .
when corrugated steel pipe bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe or precoated corrugated steel pipe is used the imported material shall be tested for sulfates chlorides ph and resistivity .
when aramid fiber bonded corrugated steel pipe or corrugated aluminum pipe is used the imported material shall be tested for ph and resistivity .
when plastic pipe is selected the imported material does not need to be tested for sulfates chlorides ph or resistivity .
sulfates chlorides ph and resistivity shall be determined by the following procedures num water soluble sulfates using cpl num method b num chlorides using cpl num num resistivity using astm gnum num ph using astm gnum the average of three consecutive tests shall show the imported materials sulfate chloride ph and resistivity is not greater than the limits corresponding to the pipe class in table num or num for the pipe class specified in the contract .
no single test shall have a result more than num percent greater than that corresponding to the limit in table num or table num for sulfates chlorides and resistivity .
no single test shall have a result more than num percent outside the limit in table num for ph .
the remaining sample material from a single failing test shall be split into three equal portions .
cdot shall receive one portion the contractor shall receive one portion and the remaining portion shall be retained by the project .
cdot and the contractors lab shall retest the failed sample if the results from those tests are within num percent of each other the results will be averaged .
the averaged result will be used for contract compliance .
if the results from the labs are not within num percent of each other the remaining sample portion shall be sent to an independent laboratory for testing using the testing requirements specified above .
the independent laboratory shall be mutually agreed upon by the department and the contractor .
the independent labs test result will be used for contract compliance .
if the imported materials sulfates chlorides and resistivity are less than the limits and the ph is within the limits in table num or num cdot will bear all costs associated with the independent lab test .
if the imported materials sulfates chlorides and resistivity is greater than the limits and the ph is outside the limits num num in table num or num all costs associated with independent lab testing shall be at the contractors expense .
embankment represented by failing tests shall be removed from the project and replaced at the contractors expense .
table num sulfate chloride and ph of imported material soil pipe class sulfate chloride sonum cl ph max max num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or num table num resistivity and ph of imported material soil side resistivity r ohm cm ph num num num num construction requirements general .
the excavations and embankments shall be finished to smooth and uniform surfaces conforming to the typical sections specified .
variation from the subgrade plan elevations specified shall not be more than num foot .
where asphalt or concrete surfacing materials are to be placed directly on the subgrade the subgrade plane shall not vary more than num foot .
materials shall not be wasted without written permission of the engineer .
excavation operations shall be num num conducted so material outside of the slope limits will not be disturbed .
prior to beginning grading operations all necessary clearing and grubbing in that area shall have been performed in accordance with section num .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least five working days prior to beginning excavation .
the contractor shall not excavate beyond the dimensions and elevations shown in the contract .
archaeological and paleontological materials encountered during the work shall be handled in accordance with subsection num .
all excavation activities in areas where asbestos is encountered or expected to be encountered shall conform to the colorado department of public health and environments asbestoscontaminated soil guidance document or the state of colorados asbestos contaminated soil statewide management plan acs whichever is more recent at the time of advertisement and in accordance with subsection numd and the air quality control commission regulation no .
num part b or section num of the solid waste regulation num ccr num as applicable .
excavation shall be one or more of the following a rock .
unless otherwise specified rock shall be excavated to a minimum depth of num foot and a maximum depth of num foot below subgrade within the limits of the roadbed .
rock removed in excess of num foot below subgrade will not be paid for .
backfilling of the depth in excess of num foot below subgrade shall be at the contractors expense .
approved embankment material shall be used to bring the rockexcavated areas to subgrade elevations within the tolerances specified in subsection num .
undrained pockets shall not be left in the rock surface and depressions shall be drained at the contractors expense .
when required for rock excavation controlled blasting shall be conducted in accordance with the contract .
b unclassified .
excess or unsuitable excavated material including rock and boulders that can not be used in embankments may be placed on the side slopes of the nearest fill if approved .
unless otherwise specified by the engineer intercepting ditches shall be made above the top of cut slopes and carried to outlets near the ends of the cuts .
in order to blend the intersection of cut slopes with the slope of the adjacent natural ground surfaces in a uniform manner the tops of all cut slopes except those in solid rock shall be flattened and rounded in accordance with typical sections and details specified .
earth overburden lying above solid rock cuts shall be treated in the same manner as earth cuts .
the department reserves the right to change cut slopes during the progress of excavation .
num num c unsuitable material .
unsuitable materials encountered in the subgrade roadway or embankment foundation that are determined to be detrimental to the roadway or embankment shall be removed to the depth and extents directed by the engineer .
the excavated area shall be backfilled to the finished graded section with approved material .
materials that contain organics or that can not be dried or moisture conditioned then compacted to the required density shall be disposed of and shall not be reused as embankment fill .
materials that dont contain organics and that can be dried or moisture conditioned and compacted to the required density may be reused as embankment fill as approved by the engineer .
d borrow .
if the contractor places more borrow than is specified or approved and causes a waste of roadway excavation the quantity of waste will be deducted from the borrow volume .
all borrow areas shall be bladed and shaped to permit accurate measurements after excavation is completed .
the finished borrow areas shall be graded to a smooth and uniform surface and shall be finished so water will not collect or stand therein unless otherwise specified .
e stripping .
overburden shall be removed to the depth required for the production of acceptable material and at least num feet beyond area being excavated .
f potholing .
all necessary potholing as determined by the contractor and agreed to by the engineer shall be completed under this item with appropriate equipment as approved .
the contractor shall acquire necessary permits locate utilities excavate all materials of whatever character required to expose the utilities survey the location of the utilities and backfill the excavation to existing grade lines with the excavated or other approved materials .
backfilling shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall use extreme caution during this work .
all damage to existing utility lines or adjacent facilities shall be repaired promptly at the contractors expense .
general embankment construction requirements .
when contractor process control is required the contractors process control representative shall be certified with western alliance for quality transportation construction waqtc embankment and base testing and cdots excavation embankment and soil inspection certification course .
embankment construction shall include preparation of the areas upon which embankments are to be placed construction of dikes and placing and compacting approved material within roadway areas including holes pits and other depressions within the roadway area .
only approved materials shall be used in the construction of embankments and fills .
num num all sod vegetable and other organic matter stumps and roots shall be removed from the surface upon which the embankment is to be placed in accordance with section num .
unless a thickness is otherwise specified in the contract the upper num inches of the ground surface will be considered top soil and shall be removed in accordance with section num prior to placement of embankment fill .
the cleared surface shall be completely broken up by plowing or scarifying to a minimum depth of num inches or as specified in the contract the moisture content increased or reduced as necessary and compacted to the specified embankment density for the material type present .
when embankment is placed on a slope that is steeper than numhnumv as measured in the steepest direction the existing slope shall be benched as the embankment is placed in layers .
a numfoot deep key shall be excavated at the base of the existing slope and backfilled with approved and compacted material .
the embankment shall be placed in layers from that key .
each horizontal cut shall begin at the intersection of the original ground and the vertical sides of the previous bench .
excavated material from benching may be placed and compacted with the embankment material at the contractors expense .
during the course of construction embankment side slopes shall be built a minimum of num inches wider than the final grade indicated in the contract to allow for compaction equipment to compact the full width of the embankment .
once the specified level of compaction is achieved the side slopes shall be trimmed back to final grade .
excess material placement and removal to satisfy this requirement shall be at the contractors expense .
if embankment can be placed on only one side of structures such as retaining walls abutments wing walls piers or culvert headwalls compaction shall be accomplished without initiating movement or deformation of the structure and without placing excessive pressure against the structure .
when noted in the contract the fill adjacent to the abutment of a bridge shall not be placed higher than the bottom of the backwall until the superstructure is in place .
when embankment is placed on both sides of a concrete wall or box type structure the embankment shall be brought up equally on both sides of the structure .
where embankment is to be placed and compacted and end dumping is used the slopes of the original ground or embankment shall be deeply plowed or scarified before starting end dumping .
embankment fill other than anum soil types shall not be placed within standing water unless otherwise noted in the contract .
during the construction of the embankment the top surface shall be maintained so that it is well drained at all times .
frozen materials shall not be used in construction of embankments .
frozen material will be identified by the visual observation of ice crystals within the foundation or embankment material or by measuring the temperature of the ground surface .
num num materials incorporated into embankment fill shall be placed and compacted according to the following requirements a soil embankment .
all soil embankment shall be placed in horizontal layers not to exceed num inches in loose lift thickness .
each layer shall be compacted prior to the placement of subsequent layers .
spreading equipment shall be used to obtain uniform thickness prior to compaction .
as the compaction progresses continuous mixing leveling and manipulating shall be done to assure uniform moisture and density .
additional work involved in drying soil embankment to the required moisture content shall be included in the contract price paid for excavating or furnishing the material with no additional compensation .
soil embankment that is classified as anum material may be used to bridge across standing water or swampy ground within the embankment foundation and may be placed in lift thicknesses greater than num inches when used for this purpose if approved by the engineer .
soil embankment with less than or equal to num percent retained on the inch sieve shall be tested for compaction using cp num .
materials classified as aashto anum anum anum and anum soils shall be compacted at num percent of optimum moisture content omc and to at least num percent of maximum dry density determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
all other soil types shall be compacted to num percent of the maximum dry density determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
soils with num percent fines or less shall be compacted at num percent of omc .
soils with greater than num percent fines shall be compacted at a moisture content equal to or above omc to achieve stability of the compacted lift .
stability is defined as the absence of rutting or pumping as observed and documented by the contractors process control representative and as approved by the engineer .
if the soils can not be compacted and prove to be unstable at a moisture content equal to or above omc then the required moisture content for compaction may be reduced below omc if approved by the engineer .
prior to placing any soil embankment with greater than num percent retained on the inch sieve the contractor shall construct a test strip to the dimensions specified in the contract or as directed by the engineer .
the test strip may be incorporated into the final embankment .
the contractor shall determine the moisture conditioning necessary to achieve compaction and shall determine the equipment and number of passes necessary to achieve adequate compaction .
the contractor shall use compressiontype or vibratory rollers on granular materials and sheepsfoot rollers on cohesive soils .
adequate compaction shall be demonstrated by the absence of rutting pumping or deflection following a proof roll of the test strip using any piece of construction equipment that exerts a minimum numkip per axle load .
the proof roll will be observed and accepted by the engineer .
once the test strip passes a proof roll the contractor may resume embankment construction num num using the same moisture conditioning and compaction methods that were used to construct the test strip .
placement moisture conditioning and compaction of every lift of soil embankment with greater than num percent retained on the inch sieve shall be observed by the contractors process control representative and accepted by the engineer .
adequate compaction of each lift shall be demonstrated as the absence of rutting pumping or deflection as construction equipment is routed over a lift following the compactive efforts that were used and accepted for the respective test strip .
the engineer may request a proof roll at any time to document the condition of a lift .
significant changes in the material being hauled for soil embankment with greater than num percent retained on the inch sieve will require construction of a new test strip and demonstration of adequate compaction methods using a proof roll .
nondurable bedrock shall be watered to promote slaking and break down and pulverized or processed to a maximum particle size of num inches .
these materials shall be placed and compacted as soil embankment except they shall be compacted with a heavy tamping foot roller weighing at least num tons .
each tamping foot shall protrude from the drum a minimum of num inches .
each embankment layer shall receive a minimum of four passes with the tamping foot roller .
the roller shall be operated at a uniform speed not exceeding num miles per hour .
no additional compensation will be made for additional roller passes to achieve specified density requirements .
nondurable bedrock shall not be used to bridge over standing water or swampy ground within an embankment foundation .
nondurable bedrock shall also not be placed within num feet of the final subgrade elevation .
b rock embankment and rock fill .
rock embankment shall be placed in horizontal layers not to exceed num inches in loose lift thickness .
the lift thickness can be increased when bridging over standing water or swampy ground in the embankment foundation as directed by the engineer .
each layer shall be compacted prior to the placement of subsequent layers .
spreading equipment shall be used to obtain uniform thickness prior to compaction .
rock fill shall be placed in horizontal layers not to exceed a loose lift thickness equivalent to the average particle size up to a maximum permitted lift thickness of num inches .
particles with a maximum dimension of num inches are permitted however rocks larger than the lift thickness shall be separated enough to allow compaction equipment to operate in between .
material shall be placed to fill in voids between larger stones with finer particle sizes and to avoid nesting .
spreading equipment shall be used to obtain uniform thickness prior to compaction .
if the use of leveling equipment is not practical the engineer may permit rock fill material to be cast or end dumped .
in such num num cases sufficient hand or machine work will be required to construct a compact stable fill and to finish the slopes to a neat and smooth appearance .
rock fill shall not be placed within num feet of the final subgrade elevation .
when a rock fill is placed over any structure the structure shall be covered with a minimum of num feet of compacted soil embankment or rock embankment material before the rock fill is placed .
the contractor shall determine the moisture conditioning necessary to achieve compaction for rock embankment or rock fill .
vibratory or compressiontype rollers shall be used to compact these materials .
at a minimum compression type rollers weighing num tons shall complete num passes over the entire width of a lift at a speed not to exceed num miles per hour .
vibratory rollers shall exert a minimum dynamic force of num pounds of impact per vibration and achieve a minimum num vibrations per minute .
vibratory rollers shall complete a minimum of num passes over the entire width of a lift at a speed not to exceed num miles per hour .
prior to placing rock embankment or rock fill the contractor shall construct a test strip to the dimensions specified in the contract or as directed by the engineer .
the test strip may be incorporated into the final embankment .
adequate compaction of the rock embankment or rock fill test strip shall be demonstrated by the absence of rutting pumping or deflection following a proof roll of the test strip using any piece of construction equipment that exerts a minimum numkip per axle load .
the proof roll will be observed and accepted by the engineer .
once the test strip passes a proof roll the contractor can resume rock embankment or rock fill construction with the same moisture conditioning and compaction methods as the test strip was constructed .
placement moisture conditioning and compaction of every lift of rock embankment and rock fill shall be observed by the contractors process control representative and accepted by the engineer .
adequate compaction of each lift shall be demonstrated as the absence of rutting pumping or deflection as construction equipment is routed over a lift following the compactive efforts that were used and accepted for the respective test strip .
the engineer may request a proof roll at any time to document the condition of a lift .
significant changes in the characteristics of material being hauled for rock embankment or rock fill will require construction of a new test strip and demonstration of adequate compaction methods using a proof roll .
if the contractor wishes to deviate from the minimum equipment and compactive efforts specified above for rock embankment or rock fill the contractor must first demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed methods with a test strip and passing proof roll .
in addition proof rolls are required for every lift placed for the first num cubic yards of rock embankment or rock fill placed .
the proof rolls used to demonstrate adequate compaction of the first num cubic yards placed will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be performed at the contractors expense .
num num c use of recycled concrete and asphalt .
recycled concrete and asphalt may be incorporated into embankment material and shall be processed placed and compacted in accordance with subsection numa or b depending on the overall classification of the embankment material once the recycled material is incorporated .
rebar shall not extend more than one inch beyond the edges of recycled concrete particles .
recycled concrete or asphalt shall not be placed in the upper num feet of the final subgrade elevation or within num feet of the final finished side slopes unless otherwise noted in the contract .
proof rolling .
proof rolling with pneumatic tire equipment shall be performed using a minimum axle load of num kips per axle .
a weigh ticket from an approved scale shall be furnished by the contractor to substantiate this weight .
the subgrade shall be proof rolled after the required compaction has been obtained and the subgrade has been shaped to the required cross section .
the proof roller shall be operated in a systematic manner so that a record may be readily kept of the area tested and the working time required for the testing .
areas that are observed to have soft spots in the subgrade where deflection is not uniform or is excessive as determined by the engineer shall be ripped scarified dried or wetted as necessary and recompacted to the requirements for density and moisture at the contractors expense .
after recompaction these areas shall be proof rolled again and all failures again corrected at the contractors expense .
upon approval of the proof rolling the sub base base course or initial pavement course shall be placed within num hours .
if the contractor fails to place the sub base base course or initial pavement course within num hours or the condition of the subgrade changes due to weather or other conditions proof rolling and correction shall be performed again at the contractors expense .
blading .
blading shall consist of furnishing motor graders of the specified horsepower rating with operators for shaping roadway shoulders or other areas as designated by the engineer .
when scarifying is specified the motor grader shall be equipped with an independently operated v type scarifier and attachments .
dozing .
dozing shall consist of furnishing crawlertype tractors of the specified horsepower rating complete with operators and bulldozer blades .
rippers if specified will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
method of measurement items paid for by volume be the quantities designated in the contract .
exceptions will be made when field changes are ordered or when it is determined that there are discrepancies in the contract in an amount of at least plus or minus two percent of the plan quantity .
num num a excavation .
the original crosssections will be used for determination of volumes of excavated material removed unless changes have been directed .
these measurements will include authorized excavation of rock shale or other unsuitable material .
all accepted stripping will be measured in stockpiled locations by crosssectioning .
when the excavation conforms to the staked lines and grades the original crosssections and the staked sections shall be used for the determination of volumes excavated .
volumes will be computed from the crosssections by the average end area or other acceptable method .
when topsoil or wetland topsoil is included as a separate pay item and is specified the measured volume of excavation will be reduced by the volume of topsoil or wetland topsoil removed from the area shown as excavation in the contract .
measurements will include overbreakage in rock excavation from the back slopes to an amount not to exceed in any half station of num feet num percent of the actual quantity required for that half station .
b embankment .
if provided in the contract embankment material will be measured in its final compacted position in the roadway .
measurement will be made upward from the original ground line without any allowance for subsidence due to compaction of the base under the embankment .
the original crosssections will be used for determination of volumes of embankment material placed unless changes have been directed .
the measured volume of embankment material will be increased by the volume of topsoil or wetland topsoil removed from the area below the original ground line and under the embankment c rock fill .
rock fill will be measured as the volume in cubic yards in its final position unless otherwise specified and shall be limited to the elevations specified .
d blading and dozing .
the quantity measured for blading and dozing will be the number of hours that each motor grader or bulldozer is actually used as ordered .
a minimum of four hours for any half shift or part thereof will be paid for unless the equipment is inoperative due to breakdown or other causes determined to be the contractors responsibility .
time involved in moving onto or off the project will not be measured and paid for .
time will be paid for moving motor graders or bulldozers from one location on the project to another if directed but time will not be allowed for moves which are made for the convenience of the contractor .
payment for a minimum of four hours will not be allowed in cases where the motor grader bulldozer or operator is assigned to work on other pay items connected with the project .
num num e potholing .
potholing will be measured by the total number of hours that excavation and backfilling equipment is actually used as directed .
all other related work including removal of existing pavement backfilling shoring and labor will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
f proof rolling .
proof rolling will be measured by the actual number of hours that the pneumatic equipment is used as a proof roller .
the time to be measured under this item will be the number of hours that each piece of equipment is actually used as ordered .
proof rolling will be measured and paid for only once for each test strip required during construction for final verification of subgrade prior to placement of subbase base coarse or pavement or for each incident where the engineer directs it through the course of construction .
additional proof rolling that is required due to failure of embankment fill due to the contractors failure to place sub base base course or initial pavement course within num hours of the initial proof roll or due to the condition of the subgrade changing due to weather or additional proof rolls deemed necessary due to the contractors choice to deviate from minimum equipment and compaction efforts specified herein shall be at the contractors expense .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
stripping cubic yard blading hour dozing hour num num potholing hour proof rolling hour water will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
compaction will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for replacement of unsuitable material shall be as follows if excavated material can be reused as embankment fill by moisture conditioning and compaction replacement shall be included in the cost for unsuitable material .
if the material can not be reused as embankment fill payment for replacement of unsuitable material shall be for the volume that is placed in the excavated area at the respective unit price for the material that is approved by the engineer and used .
payment for unclassified excavation complete in place embankment material complete in place or borrow complete in place shall be full compensation for all work necessary to complete the item including construction of embankments reworking of existing materials to satisfy benching requirements unclassified excavation borrow compaction compaction of bases of cuts and fills all work in available materials pits and disposal of excess excavated material .
reducing the size of the claystone particles removing the oversized particles and disposal of the oversized particles will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
ripping tests or seismic tests used to evaluate whether a material meets the criteria for rock excavation will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
pavement replacement if required due to potholing shall be accomplished measured and paid for in accordance with appropriate sections of the specifications .
pneumatic tire equipment and load required to achieve the desired weight of proof rolling equipment will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num excavation and backfill for structures description this work consists of the excavation and backfill or disposal of all material required for the construction of structures .
the excavation and disposal of excavated material for ditches and channels shall be accomplished in accordance with section num .
all excavation and backfill for structures below the designed slope or subgrade line provided in the contract shall be included under this item .
unless otherwise specified structure excavation shall include all pumping bailing draining and incidentals required for proper execution of the work .
materials general .
a structure backfill .
num .
structure backfill class num and class num .
class num and class num structure backfill shall be composed of nonorganic mineral aggregates and soil from excavations borrow pits or other sources .
material shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
class of material shall be as specified in the contract or as designated .
structure backfill class num with mechanical reinforcement shall be used to backfill bridge abutments unless otherwise shown on the plans .
imported material used as structure backfill for pipes storm sewer cross culverts side drains etc .
shall meet the requirements of the class specified and the requirements of subsection numanum .
the contractor may substitute structure backfill flowfill conforming to subsection numanum for structure backfill class num or structure backfill class num to backfill culverts and sewer pipes .
num .
structure backfill flowfill .
flowfill shall be a selfleveling low strength concrete material composed of cement fly ash aggregates water chemical admixtures andor cellular foam for airentrainment .
flowfill shall have a slump of num to num inches when tested in accordance with astm cnum or a minimum flow consistency of num inches when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
flowfill shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
flash fill shall not be used in lieu of flow fill .
num num flowfill placed in areas that require future excavation such as utility backfill shall have a removability modulus rm of num or less .
removability modulus rm is calculated as follows rm wnum x num x cnum num where w unit weight pcf c numday compressive strength psi materials for structure backfill flowfill shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections fine aggregatenum num num coarse aggregatenum num num portland cement num fly ashnum num num water num air entraining admixture num chemical admixtures num num fine aggregate not meeting the requirements of subsection num may be used if testing indicates acceptable results for strength and air content .
num coarse aggregate not meeting the requirements of subsection num may be used if testing indicates acceptable results for strength and air content .
num fly ash not meeting the requirements of subsection num may be used if testing indicates acceptable results for strength and air content .
num for industrial byproduct aggregates foundry sand bottom ash etc .. and fly ash not meeting the requirements of subsection num the contractor shall submit a report from the supplier documenting the results of testing in accordance with the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp described in num cfr num .
the report shall include the results of tclp testing for heavy metals and other contaminants .
materials shall not exceed the tclp limits of num cfr num for heavy metals cellular foam shall conform to astm cnum and astm cnum recycled broken glass glass cullet is acceptable as part or all of the aggregate .
aggregate including glass must conform to the required gradations .
all containers used to produce the cullet shall be empty prior to processing .
chemical pharmaceutical insecticide pesticide or other glass containers containing or having contained toxic or hazardous num num substances shall not be allowed and shall be grounds for rejecting the glass cullet .
the maximum debris level in the cullet shall be num percent .
debris is defined as any deleterious material which impacts the performance of the structure backfill flowfill including all nonglass constituents .
the contractor may use aggregate which does not meet the above specifications if the aggregate conforms to the following gradation sieve size percent passing num mm num inch num num m no .
num num numthe amount of material passing the num m no .
num screen may exceed num percent if testing indicates acceptable results for strength and air content .
the contractor shall submit a structure backfill flowfill mix design for approval prior to placement .
the mix design shall include the following laboratory test data num astm cnum air content .
num astm dnum unit weight .
num astm cnum slump or astm dnum flow consistency .
num astm dnum numday compressive strength .
num removability modulus rm .
num .
imported structure backfill for pipes .
imported material used as structure backfill for pipes storm sewer cross culverts side drains etc shall be tested for compatibility with the selected pipe material .
when nonreinforced concrete pipe or reinforced concrete pipe is used the imported material shall be tested for sulfate and ph .
when corrugated steel pipe bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe or precoated corrugated steel pipe is used the imported material shall be tested for sulfates chlorides ph and resistivity .
when aramid fiber bonded corrugated steel pipe or corrugated aluminum pipe is used the imported material shall be tested for ph and resistivity .
when plastic pipe is selected the imported material does not need to be tested for sulfates chlorides ph and resistivity .
sulfates chlorides ph and resistivity shall be determined by the following procedures num water soluble sulfates using cpl num method b .
num chlorides using cpl num .
num num num resistivity using astm gnum .
num ph using astm gnum .
the average of three consecutive tests shall show the imported materials sulfate chloride ph and resistivity is not greater than the limits corresponding to the pipe class in table num or num for the pipe class specified on the plans .
no single test shall have a result more than num percent greater than that corresponding to the limit in table num or table num for sulfates chlorides and resistivity .
no single test shall have a result more than num percent outside the limit in table num for ph .
the remaining sample material from a single failing test shall be split into three equal portions .
cdot shall receive one portion the contractor shall receive one portion and the remaining portion shall be retained by the project .
cdot and the contractors lab shall retest the failed sample if the results from those tests are within num percent of each other the results will be averaged .
the averaged result will be used for contract compliance .
if the results from the labs are not within num percent of each other the remaining sample portion will be sent to an independent laboratory for testing using the testing requirements specified above .
the independent laboratory shall be mutually agreed upon by the department and the contractor .
the independent labs test result will be used for contract compliance .
if the imported materials sulfates chlorides and resistivity are less than the limits and the ph is within the limits in table num or num cdot will bear all costs associated with the independent lab test .
if the imported materials sulfates chlorides and resistivity is greater than the limits and the ph is outside the limits in table num or num all costs associated with independent lab testing shall be at the contractors expense .
structure backfill represented by failing tests shall be removed from the project and replaced at the contractors expense .
table num sulfate chloride and ph of imported material soil pipe class sulfate chloride sonum cl ph max max num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or num num num soil side resistivity r ohm cm ph num num num num b bed course material .
material shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
upon approval aggregate base course conforming to the requirements of subsection num may be used in lieu of bed course material .
c filter material .
class a class b and class c filter material shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
class of material shall be as specified or designated .
construction requirements structure excavation and structure backfill .
unsuitable foundation material shall be removed and wasted in a manner acceptable to the engineer and the excavated material will be paid for as structure excavation .
excavation and backfill for areas in excess of num feet below designed elevation will be paid for as provided in subsections num and num .
unsuitable foundation material which is suitable for embankments and suitable surplus excavated material shall be used in the construction of embankments .
unsuitable material removed below designed elevation shall be replaced with approved material .
if asbestos containing material acm is suspected or found the acm and the suspected acm shall be managed in accordance with the air quality control commission regulation no .
num part b or section num of the solid waste regulation num ccr num which ever applies .
all work conducted on site shall be in accordance with the colorado department of public health and environments asbestos contaminated soil guidance document or the state of colorados asbestos contaminated soil statewide management plan acs whichever is more recent at the time of advertisement and in accordance with subsection numd .
rock hardpan or other unyielding material encountered in trenches for culvert pipe or conduit shall be removed below the designed grade for a minimum depth of num inches .
this extra depth excavation shall be backfilled with loose structure backfill class num or other approved material .
the base of structure backfill shall be scarified to a depth of num inches and compacted with moisture and density control prior to placement of any structural element or structure backfill .
the type of compaction shall be the same as that required for structure backfill class num as specified below .
num num backfill shall consist of approved materials uniformly distributed in layers brought up equally on all sides of the structure .
each layer of backfill shall not exceed num inches and shall be compacted to the required density before successive layers are placed .
structure backfill class num shall be compacted to a density of at least num percent of maximum dry density determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
backfill shall be compacted at num percent of optimum moisture content omc .
structure backfill class num shall be compacted to a density of at least num percent of maximum dry density .
the maximum dry density and omc for anum anum .
a num and anum materials will be determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
the maximum dry density and omc for all other materials will be determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
materials shall be compacted at numpercent of optimum moisture content omc .
materials having greater than num percent passing the num m no .
num sieve shall be compacted at num to num percent above omc .
pipes culverts sewers and other miscellaneous structures outside the roadway prism and not subjected to traffic loads shall be backfilled in layers as described above but shall be compacted to the density of the surrounding earth .
the excessive use of water during backfilling operations will not be permitted .
compaction equipment or methods that produce horizontal or vertical earth pressures which may cause excessive displacement or overturning or may damage structures shall not be used .
backfill material shall not be deposited against newly constructed masonry or concrete structures until the concrete has developed a compressive strength of numfc except in cases where the structures support lateral earth pressure .
concrete compressive strength for structures supporting lateral earth pressure shall conform to subsection numo .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters .
backfill at the inside of bridge wingwalls and abutments shall be placed before curbs or sidewalks are constructed over the backfill and before railings on the wingwalls are constructed .
unless otherwise indicated in the contract or directed all sheeting and bracing used in making structure excavation shall be removed by the contractor prior to backfilling .
structure backfill placed at bridge piers in waterways and water channels that does not support embankments pavements or slope protection will not require compaction .
structure backfill flowfill shall not be compacted .
the maximum layer thickness for structure backfill flowfill shall be num feet unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall not place num num structure backfill flowfill in layers that are so thick that they cause damage to culverts pipes and other structures or that they cause formwork or soil failures during placement .
structure backfill flowfill shall have an indention diameter less than num inches and the indention shall be free of visible water when tested in accordance with astm dnum by the contractor prior to placing additional layers of structure backfill flowfill.testing structure backfill flowfill in accordance with astm dnum will be witnessed by the engineer .
damage resulting from placing structure backfill flowfill in layers that are too thick or from not allowing sufficient time between placements of layers shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
the contractor shall secure culverts pipes and other structures to prevent floating and displacement of these items during the placement of the structure backfill flowfill .
prior to the placement of structure backfill flowfill the contractor shall sample the structure backfill flowfill in accordance with astm dnum .
the contractor shall test the structure backfill flowfill unit weight in accordance with astm dnum .
the contractor shall test the structure backfill flowfill for slump in accordance with astm cnum or for flow consistency according to astm dnum .
the contractor shall sample and test the first three loads of structure backfill flowfill for each placement and then randomly once every num cubic yards .
sampling and testing will be witnessed by the engineer when structure backfill flowfill is placed in areas that require future excavation the unit weight of the placed structure backfill flowfill shall not exceed the unit weight of the approved mix design by more than num pounds per cubic foot .
structure backfill flowfill shall not be allowed to freeze during placement and until it has set sufficiently according to astm dnum .
frozen structure backfill flowfill shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
when the contractor substitutes structure backfill flowfill for structure backfill class num or class num the trench width may be reduced to provide a minimum num inch clearance between the outside diameter of the culvert and the trench wall .
bed course material .
construction requirements for bed course material for sidewalks and curbing shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and num .
filter material .
construction requirements for filter material for subsurface drains shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num .
filter material shall be placed behind bridge abutments wingwalls and retaining walls as provided in the contract and in accordance with the following requirements num num when provided in the contract wall drain outlets shall be backed with sacked filter material conforming to the gradation requirements for coarse aggregate no .
num or no .
num set forth in table num .
filter material shall be placed in horizontal layers along with and by the same methods specified for structure backfill .
method of measurement structure excavation structure backfill and bed course material will not be measured but will be the quantities designated in the contract .
when field changes are ordered or when there are errors on the plans quantities will be measured as follows a for bridges and irregular shaped structures quantities will be computed to neat lines num inches outside and parallel to the outline of the revised foundation plan or as shown on the plans .
b for pipes a profile will be made along the bottom of the center line extending num inches beyond the end of the structure including end sections .
material excavated between this profile and a profile num foot above the top of the pipe will not be measured for payment but shall be included in the bid price for the pipe .
in excavation sections the area above the profile num foot above the top of the pipe and below the limits of roadway excavation will be multiplied by the width shown on the plans to obtain the volume of structure excavation measured for payment .
in embankment sections the area above the profile num foot above the top of the pipe and below the natural ground will be multiplied by the width shown on the plans to obtain the volume of structure excavation measured for payment .
c backfill and filter material will be the calculated volume of material lying within the prism shown on the plans from which shall be deducted the volume occupied by the structure .
d bed course material will be the calculated volume of material lying within the prism shown on the plans .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit structure excavation cubic yard structure backfill class cubic yard structure backfill flowfill cubic yard num num bed course material cubic yard filter material class cubic yard compaction water and all other work necessary to complete the above items will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
structure backfill including bed course material for pipes and end sections will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
where only end section work is required the structure excavation quantity and the structure backfill quantity will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
when the contractor substitutes structure backfill flow fill for structure backfill class num or class num there will be no adjustment in the price or the quantity paid for structure excavation or structure backfill as a result of reducing the trench width .
num num shoring description this work consists of shoring specific areas designated in the contract .
materials and construction requirements the contractor shall locate size design and construct shoring which provides all necessary rigidity and supports the loads imposed to facilitate construction as shown on the plans .
when the height of shoring exceeds num feet above the base of the excavation shoring drawings shall be provided by the contractor to the engineer for information only .
the drawings shall be prepared signed and sealed by the contractors engineer .
these drawings shall be approved and signed by the contractor and provided to the engineer at least ten days prior to start of work .
shoring shall be constructed in conformity with the shoring drawings provided to the engineer .
prior to placing construction or traffic loads on the supported earth the contractors engineer shall certify in writing that shoring materials and construction have been inspected and that all shoring materials and construction are in conformity with the shoring drawings .
a copy of this certification shall be submitted in an appropriate form for the engineers records .
if the embankment construction traffic or any other surcharge is in excess of what the original shoring was designed for and is to be placed adjacent to any shoring the contractor shall provide a signed letter from the contractors engineer prior to the load placement stating that the shoring will support the additional load .
shoring drawings shall include the following information num the size and grade of all structural materials .
num design notes including design assumptions and construction details .
num where applicable restrictions on heavy equipment placement at specific locations adjacent to the shoring .
num areas determined by the contractors engineer where dewatering of the shored excavation will be required and a description of the requirements i.e .
head added by the pump flow rate minimum pump size etc .
and methods to be used for dewatering .
num all other information determined by the contractors engineer to be pertinent to the design and successful construction of the shoring .
method of measurement shoring will not be measured but will be paid for as a single lump sum for each area described on the plans .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of shoring measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit shoring area ___ lump sum payment for shoring will be full compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to design construct and remove the shoring .
other incidental shoring that is not included as a pay item will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num topsoil description this work consists of salvaging and stockpiling topsoil and excavating suitable topsoil from stockpiles contractor sources available sources or from the approved natural ground cover to place on designated areas .
it shall include the placing of topsoil upon constructed cut and fill slopes after grading operations are completed .
materials topsoil shall consist of loose friable soil from the zone of major root development free of subsoil refuse stumps woody roots rocks brush noxious weed seed and reproductive plant parts from current state and county weed lists heavy clay hard clods toxic substances or other material which would be detrimental to its use on the project .
wetland topsoil material shall consist of the moist organic soil including any existing wetland vegetation and seeds to be excavated from areas as shown on the plans or as directed .
construction requirements wetland topsoil material shall be excavated from the designated area to a maximum depth of num inches or as otherwise designated and placed within num hours in the specified area .
the contractor shall prepare the relocation site to elevations specified and approved by the engineer prior to excavating the wetlands .
if the engineer determines that this is not possible then the contractor shall stockpile the material in an approved area to remain undisturbed until the relocation site has been prepared .
storage time within the stockpile shall be as short as possible .
wetland topsoil material shall be placed over the prepared relocation areas to a depth of num inches or as otherwise designated .
topsoil within the limits of the roadway shall be salvaged prior to beginning hauling excavating or fill operations by excavating and stockpiling the material at designated locations in a manner that will facilitate measurement minimize sediment damage and not obstruct natural drainage .
topsoil shall be placed directly upon completed cut and fill slopes whenever conditions and the progress of construction will permit .
topsoil shall be placed at locations and to the thickness provided in the contract and shall be keyed and tracked to the underlying material without creating a compacted surface by the use of harrows bulldozers rollers or other equipment suitable for the purpose .
num num salvaged topsoil exceeding the quantity required under the contract shall be disposed of at locations acceptable to the engineer .
method of measurement topsoil salvaged from the roadway and placed in stockpiles shall be measured in the stockpile in cubic yards by the method of average end areas and paid for as stockpile topsoil .
topsoil salvaged from the roadway taken from stockpiles or from approved pits hauled and placed directly upon completed cut and fill slopes shall be measured at its source in cubic yards as described in subsection num and paid for as topsoil .
topsoil generated from the roadway and placed in windrows will be measured at its source in cubic yards as described in subsection num and paid for as stockpile topsoil .
when it is subsequently placed upon the completed cut and fill slopes the same quantity will be paid for as topsoil except that adjustment in quantity shall be made if the total windrowed quantity is not utilized .
wetland topsoil material excavated from areas within the rightofway and placed in stockpiles will be measured in the stockpile by the method of average end areas and paid for as stockpile wetland topsoil .
wetland topsoil material excavated from areas within the rightofway or from stockpiles hauled and placed directly on a relocated site will be measured at its source in cubic yards as described in subsection num and paid for as wetland topsoil .
topsoil secured from the contractors source will be measured in place by measuring random depths of topsoil and computing the volume by multiplying the area times the average depth basis of payment num num section num erosion control description this work consists of constructing installing maintaining and removing when required best management practices bmps during the life of the contract to prevent or minimize erosion sedimentation and pollution of any state waters as defined in subsection num including wetlands .
the contractor shall coordinate the construction of temporary bmps with the construction of permanent bmps to assure economical effective and continuous erosion and sediment control throughout the construction period .
when a provision of section num or an order by the engineer requires that an action be immediate or taken immediately it shall be understood that the contractor shall at once begin effecting completion of the action and pursue it to completion in a manner acceptable to the engineer and in accordance with the colorado discharge permit system stormwater construction permit cdpsscp requirements .
materials erosion control materials are subject to acceptance in accordance with subsection num .
erosion control materials shall be subject to the following approval process material approval process notes erosion bales weed free coc the contractor shall provide a transit certificate number or a copy of the transit certificate as supplied from the producer .
silt fence coc silt berm apl erosion log type num and num coc silt dikes coc prefabricated concrete washout structures above ground apl prefabricated vehicle tracking pad apl aggregate bag coc storm drain inlet protection type i ii and iii apl coc certificate of compliance apl approved product list num num the material for bmps shall conform to the following a erosion bales material for erosion bales shall consist of certified weed free hay or straw .
the hay or straw shall be certified under the colorado depart ment of agriculture weed free forage certification program and inspected as regulated by the weed free forage act title num article num crs .
each certified weed free erosion bale shall be identified by blue and orange twine binding the bales .
the contractor shall not place certified weed free erosion bales or remove their identifying twine until the engineer has inspected them .
the contractor may obtain a current list of colorado weed free forage crop producers who have completed certification by contacting the colorado department of agriculture weed free forage program num interlocken pkwy broomfield co num contact weed free forage coordinator at num num .
also available at www.colorado.govagcsd .
bales shall be approximately num cubic feet of material and weigh at least num pounds .
stakes shall be wood and shall be num inch by num inch nominal .
b silt fence .
silt fence posts shall be wood with a minimum length of num inches .
wood posts shall be num inch by num inch nominal .
geotextile shall be attached to wood posts with three or more staples per post .
silt fence geotextile shall conform to the following requirements physical requirements for silt fence geotextiles property wire fence supported requirements selfsupported requirements geotextile elongation num test method grab strength lbs num minimum num minimum astm dnum permittivity secnum num num astm dnum ultraviolet stability minimum num strength retained minimum num strength retained astm dnum silt fence reinforced .
silt fence posts shall be metal studded tee tpost with a minimum length of num inches .
metal posts shall be studded tee with .num inch minimum wall thickness .
wire fabric reinforcement for the silt fence geotextile shall be a minimum of num gauge with a maximum mesh spacing of num inches .
geotextile shall be attached to welded wire fabric with ties or nylon cable ties at num inches on center at top middle and bottom wire .
welded wire fabric shall be attached to the post with a minimum three num gauge wire ties per post .
vinyl or rubber safety caps shall be installed on all tpost .
num num c temporary berms .
temporary berms shall be constructed of compacted soil .
d temporary slope drains .
temporary slope drains shall consist of fiber mats plastic sheets stone concrete or asphalt gutters half round pipe metal or plastic pipe wood flume flexible rubber or other materials suitable to carry accumulated water down the slopes .
outlet protection riprap shall conform to section num .
erosion control geotextile shall be a minimum class num conforming to subsection num. e silt berm .
silt berm shall consist of an ultraviolet uv stabilized high density polyethylene shall be triangular in shape and shall have the following dimensions width num num inches height num num inches weight num num lbs.sq .
ft .
percent open area num num securing spikes shall be num to num inch x num inch diameter minimum .
f rock check dam .
rock check dams shall be constructed of stone .
stone shall meet the requirements of section num. g sediment trap .
in constructing an excavated sediment trap excavated soil may be used to construct the dam embankment provided the soil meets the requirements of subsection num .
outlet protection riprap shall be the size specified in the contract and shall conform to section num .
erosion control geotextile shall be a minimum class num conforming to subsection num. h erosion logs .
erosion logs shall be one of the following types unless otherwise shown on the plans num erosion log type num shall be curled aspen wood excelsior with a consistent width of fibers evenly distributed throughout the log .
the casing shall be seamless photodegradable tube netting .
the curled aspen wood excelsior shall be fungus free resin free and free of growth or germination inhibiting substances .
num erosion log type num shall consist of a blend of num percent weed free compost and num percent wood chips .
the compostwood blend material shall pass a num mm num inch sieve with a minimum of num percent retained on the num mm  inch sieve and comply with subsection num for the remaining compost physical properties .
the compostwood chip blend may be pneumatically shot into a geotextile cylindrical bag or be premanufactured .
the geotextile bag shall consist of hdpe or polypropylene mesh knitted not extruded with openings of  to  inch num num erosion log type num and type num shall have minimum dimensions as shown in table num based on the specified diameter of the log .
table num nominal dimensions of erosion logs diameter type num inches diameter type num inches length feet weight minimum poundsfoot stake dimensions inches min .
max .
num num num num num num by num nominal by num num num num num num num by num nominal by num num num num num num num by num nominal by num stakes to secure erosion logs shall consist of pinewood or hardwood .
i silt dikes .
silt dikes shall be premanufactured triangular shaped urethane foam covered with a woven geotextile fabric .
the fabric aprons shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond each side of the triangle .
each silt dike shall have the following dimensions dimension length center height num to num inches base num to num inches section length num to num feet section width including fabric extensions num feet staples shall be num gauge and at least num inches long .
j concrete washout structure .
the contractor shall construct a washout structure that will contain washout from concrete placement and construction equipment cleaning operations .
embankment required for the concrete washout structure may be excavated material provided that this material meets the requirements of section num for embankment .
a prefabricated concrete washout structure shall be used only when specified in the contract .
it shall consist of a watertight container designed to contain liquid and solid waste from concrete washout .
k vehicle tracking pad .
aggregate for the vehicle tracking pad shall be crushed natural aggregate with at least two fractured faces that meets the following gradation requirements num num sieve size percent by weight passing square mesh sieves num mm num inch num num mm num inch num num mm  inch num recycled crushed concrete or asphalt shall not be used for vehicle tracking pads .
erosion control geotextile shall be class num and conform to the requirements of prefabricated vehicle tracking pads if specified in the contract shall have the subsection num.following properties .
minimum overall dimensions of the modular systems shall be width of pad along edge of roadway num feet length of pad num feet weight min .
lbs.sq .
ft. num crush strength min .
psi num l aggregate bag .
aggregate bags shall consist of crushed stone or recycled rubber filled fabric with the following properties diameter inches weight minimum pounds per foot num num num num num num rubber used in bags shall be clean num percent free of metal and particulates .
crushed stone contained in the aggregate bags shall conform to subsection num table num for class c. the aggregate bag shall consist of a woven geotextile fabric with the following properties num num property requirement test method grab tensile strength num lbs .
min .
astm dnum trapezoid tear strength num lbs .
min .
astm dnum mullen burst num psi astm dnum ultraviolet resistance num astm dnum m storm drain inlet protection .
storm drain inlet protection shall consist of aggregate filled fabric with the following dimensions storm drain inlet protection properties protection types numtype i type ii numtype iii diameter num in .
num in .
na minimum section length num ft. num ft. num ft. apron insert num in .
or sized to grate num in or sized to grate numtype i protection shall be used with inlet type r. numtype ii protection shall be used with combination inlet .
option a or b numtype iii protection shall be used with vane grate inlet only .
option a or b note options a and b are shown on standard plan mnum .
the storm drain inlet protection type i ii and iii shall consist of a woven geotextile fabric with the following properties property test method unit requirement grab tensile strength astm dnum lbs .
minimum numxnum mullen burst strength astm dnum lbs .
num trapezoid tear strength astm dnum lbs .
minimum numxnum percent open area coenum num water flow rate astm dnum gal.min .
sq .
ft. num ultraviolet resistance astm dnum num curb roll for storm drain inlet protection type i and ii shall have an approximate weight of num to num pounds per linear foot of device .
the device shall be capable of conforming to the shape of the curb .
aggregate contained in the storm drain inlet device shall consist of gravel or crushed stone conforming to subsection num table num for class c. num num storm drain inlet protection type iii shall have insert containment option a or insert without storage capacity option b .
construction requirements project review schedule and erosion control management .
prior to construction an onsite environmental preconstruction conference shall be held .
the conference shall be attended by num the engineer .
num the superintendent .
num the contractors swmp administrator .
num supervisors or foremen of subcontractors working on the project .
num the region water pollution control manager rwpcm .
num cdot personnel e.g .
cdot landscape architect who prepared or reviewed the stormwater management plan swmp .
at this conference the attendees shall discuss the swmp cdpsscp sensitive habitats on site wetlands other vegetation to be protected and the enforcement mechanisms for not meeting the requirements of this specification .
prior to beginning construction the contractor shall evaluate the project site for storm water draining into or through the site .
when such drainage is identified bmps i.e .
control measures shall be used if possible to divert stormwater from running onsite and becoming contaminated with sediment or other pollutants .
the diversion may be accomplished with a temporary pipe or other conveyance to prevent water contamination or contact with pollutants .
runon water that can not be diverted shall be treated as construction runoff and adequate bmps shall be employed .
the swmp administrator shall evaluate all nonstormwater coming onto the site such as springs seeps and landscape irrigation return flow .
if such flow is identified bmps shall be used to protect offsite water from becoming contaminated with sediment or other pollutants .
the swmp administrator shall review existing inlets and culverts to determine if inlet protection is needed due to water flow patterns .
prior to beginning construction inlets and culverts needing protection shall be protected and the location of the implemented bmp added to the swmp site map .
prior to construction the contractor shall implement appropriate bmps for protection of wetlands sensitive habitat and existing vegetation from ground disturbance and other pollutant sources in accordance with the approved project schedule as described in subsection numb .
num num when additional bmps are required and approved by the engineer the contractor shall implement the additional bmps and the swmp administrator shall record and describe them on the swmp site map .
the approved bmps will be measured and paid for in accordance with subsections num and num. a project review .
the contractor may submit modifications to the contracts bmps in a written proposal to the engineer .
the written proposal shall include the following information num reasons for changing the bmps .
num diagrams showing details and locations of all proposed changes .
num list of appropriate pay items indicating new and revised quantities .
num schedules for accomplishing all erosion and sediment control work .
num effects on permits or certifications caused by the proposed changes .
the engineer will approve or reject the written proposal in writing within num working days after the submittal .
the engineer may require additional control measures prior to approving the proposed modifications .
additional modifications and additional bmps will be paid for at the contract unit price for the specific items involved .
if no items exist they will be paid for as extra work in accordance with subsection num. b erosion and sediment control activities .
the erosion and sediment control activities shall be included in the weekly meeting update .
the project schedule shall specifically indicate the sequence of clearing and grubbing earthwork operations and construction of temporary and permanent erosion control features and stabilization .
the project schedule shall include erosion and sediment control work for haul roads borrow pits storage and asphalt or concrete batch sites and all areas within the project limits .
if during construction the contractor proposes changes which would affect the contracts bmps the contractor shall propose revised bmps to the engineer for approval in writing .
if necessary the swmp administrator shall update proposed sequencing of major activities in the swmp .
revisions shall not be implemented until the proposed measures have been approved in writing by the engineer .
c erosion control management ecm .
erosion control management for this project shall consist of erosion control inspection and the administration of the stormwater management plan swmp .
all ecm staff shall have working knowledge and experience in construction and shall have successfully completed the transportation erosion control supervisory certificate training tecs as provided by the department .
the superintendent will not be permitted to serve in an ecm role .
the erosion control inspector and the stormwater administrator may be the same person in projects involving less than num acres of disturbed area .
num .
stormwater management plan swmp administration .
the swmp plan shall be maintained by a swmp administrator .
the swmp administrator shall have completed the tecs certification training provided by the num num department .
in the case of a project requiring only one tecs the swmp administrator may also be the erosion control inspector for the project .
the name of the swmp administrator shall be recorded on swmp plan section num .
b .
the swmp administrator shall have full responsibility to maintain and update the swmp plan and identify to the superintendent critical action items needed to conform to the cdpsscp as follows num complete the swmp notebook as described in subsection num d. num participate in the environmental preconstruction conference .
num attend weekly meetings .
num attend all headquarter and region water quality control inspections .
the contractor and the contractors swmp administrator will be notified a minimum of five days in advance of each inspection by the region or headquarter water quality staff .
num coordinate with the superintendent to implement necessary actions to reduce anticipated or presently existing water quality or erosion problems resulting from construction activities .
num coordinate with the superintendent to ensure that all labor material and equipment needed to install maintain and remove bmps are available as needed .
num during construction update and record the following items on the swmp site map as changes occur i limits of construction loc .
ii areas of disturbance ad .
iii limits of disturbance lda .
iv limits of cut and fill .
v areas used for storage of construction materials equipment soils or wastes .
vi location of any dedicated asphalt or concrete batch plants .
vii location of construction offices and staging areas .
viii location of work access routes during construction .
ix location of borrow and waste .
x location of temporary interim and permanent stabilization .
xi location of outfalls .
xii arrows showing direction of surface flow .
num num xiii structural and nonstructural bmps .
xiv lda and loc lines as defined in subsection num .
num amend the swmp whenever there are additions deletions or changes to bmps .
swmp revisions shall be recorded immediately .
items shall be dated and initialed by the swmp administrator .
specifically amendments shall include the following i a change in design construction operation or maintenance of the site which would require the implementation of new or revised bmps or ii changes when the swmp proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activity .
iii changes when bmps are no longer necessary and are removed .
num complete vegetative survey transects when required in accordance with cdot erosion control and stormwater quality guide .
num start a new site map before the current one becomes illegible .
all site maps shall remain in the swmp notebook .
num document all inspection and maintenance activities .
the swmp and documentation shall be kept on the project site .
num when adding or revising bmps on the swmp add a narrative explaining what when where why and how the bmp is being used and add a detail to the swmp notebook .
i how to install and inspect the bmp .
ii where to install the bmp .
iii when to maintain the bmp .
num if using existing topography vegetation etc .
as a bmp label it as such on the swmp site map add a narrative as to when where why and how the bmp is being used .
num indicate bmps in use or not in use by recording them on standard plans mnum mnum and mnum in the swmp notebook .
num record on the swmp the approved method statement for containing pollutant byproducts .
num update the potential pollutants list in the swmp notebook and spill response plan throughout construction .
num num num .
erosion control inspection .
erosion control inspection shall be performed by tecs certified staff assigned as erosion control inspector eci to the project .
one eci is required for every num acres of total disturbed area which is currently receiving temporary and interim stabilization measures as defined in subsection nume .
an eci shall not be responsible for more than num acres on the project .
accepted permanent stabilization methods as defined in subsection nume will not be included in the num acres .
eci duties shall be as follows num coordinate with the swmp administrator on reporting the results of inspections .
num review the construction site for compliance with the stormwater construction permit .
num inspect with the superintendent and the engineer or their designated representatives the stormwater management system at least every seven calendar days .
poststorm event inspections shall be conducted within num hours after the end of any precipitation or snow melt event that may cause surface erosion .
if no construction activities will occur following a storm event poststorm event inspections shall be conducted prior to commencing construction activities but no later than num hours following the storm event .
the occurrence of delay in inspections shall be documented in the inspection report .
form num shall be used for all num day inspections and inspections following storm events .
the contractor shall notify the erosion control inspector when a storm event occurs .
failure to perform inspections on time will result in liquidated damages in accordance with subsection num .
inspections are not required at sites when construction activities are temporarily halted when snow cover exists over the entire site and melting conditions do not pose a risk of surface erosion .
this exception shall be applicable only during the period where melting conditions do not exist and applies to the routine num day headquarters and region inspections as well as the poststorm event inspections .
the following information shall be documented on form num for use of this exclusion dates when snow cover occurred date when construction activities ceased and date melting conditions began .
the order of precedence for required inspections shall be as follows i headquarter water quality inspections ii region water quality inspections num num iii poststorm event inspections iv num day inspections when one of the listed inspections is performed the inspections listed below it need not be performed on that day if the required cdot and contractor personnel participated in the inspection .
for example a num day inspection is not required on the same day a headquarters or region inspection is conducted .
a sheet shall be placed in the inspections area of the swmp notebook to refer to the date inspection was performed .
num follow all other agency stormwater requirements and inspections unless a waiver or other agreement has been made .
num immediately report to the contractors superintendent and the swmp administrator the following instances of noncompliance i noncompliance which may endanger health or the environment .
ii spills or discharges of hazardous substance or oil which may cause pollution of waters of the state .
iii discharge of stormwater which may cause an exceedance of a water quality standard .
iv upset conditions that occur on site .
num document spills leaks or overflows that result in the discharge of pollutants on the form num .
the eci shall record the time and date weather conditions reasons for spill and how it was remediated .
d documentation available on the project .
the following contract documents and references will be made available for reference at the cdot field office during construction num .
swmp notebook .
the engineer will provide a swmp notebook at the preconstruction conference which is and shall remain the property of cdot .
cdot will initially provide the documentation for the first four items when available .
the contractor shall provide the contents required for items num through num .
the notebook shall be stored in the cdot field office or at another onsite location approved by the engineer .
the swmp administrator shall modify and update the notebook as needed to reflect actual site conditions prior to the change or as soon as practicable but in no case more than num hours after the change .
the following contract documents and reports shall be kept maintained and updated in the notebook under the appropriate items by the swmp administrator num num num swmp plan sheets notes tabulation sequence of major activities area of disturbance existing soil data existing vegetation percent cover potential pollutant sources receiving water nonstormwater discharges and environmental impacts .
num site map and plan title sheet construction site boundaries ground surface disturbance limits of cut and fill flow arrows structural bmps nonstructural bmps springs streams wetlands and surface water .
also included on the sheets is the protection of trees shrubs and cultural resources .
num specifications standard and project special provisions related to stormwater and erosion control .
num standard plans mnum mnum and mnum .
num bmp details not in standard plan mnum nonstandard details .
num weekly meeting sign in sheet .
num calendar of inspections calendar of inspections marking when all inspections take place .
num form num weekly meeting notes and inspection report num region and headquarter water quality reports and form nums relating to water quality .
num description of inspection and maintenance methods description of inspection and maintenance methods implemented at the site to maintain all bmps identified in the swmp and items not addressed in the design .
num spill response plan reports of reportable spills submitted to cdphe .
num list and evaluation of potential pollutants list of potential pollutants as described in subsection num and approved method statement for containing pollutant byproducts .
num other correspondence e.g .
agreements with other msnums approved deferral request cdphe audit documentation water quality permit transfer to maintenance punch list and other miscellaneous documentation .
num tecs certifications of the swmp administrator and all ecis kept current through the life of the project .
num environmental preconstruction conference conference agenda with a certification of understanding of the terms and conditions of num num the cdpsscp and swmp .
the certification shall be signed by all attendees .
a certification shall also be signed by all attendees of meetings held for new subcontractors beginning work on the project that could adversely affect water quality after the environmental pre construction conference has been held .
num all project environmental permits all project environmental permits and associated applications and certifications including cdpsscp senate bill num usace numtemporary stream crossings dewatering biological opinions and all other permits applicable to the project including any separate cdpsscp obtained by the contractor for staging area on private property asphalt or concrete plant etc .
num photographs documenting existing vegetation project photographs shall be time stamped on paper with a maximum of four colored images per num  inch by num inch sheet andor a digital copy of all photographs on cdromflash drive in jpg format documenting existing vegetation prior to construction commencing .
on the bottom of each photograph shall be a description using station number or mile post where the photograph was taken .
num permanent water quality plan sheets plan sheets and specifications for permanent water quality structures and riprap .
the engineer will incorporate the documents and reports available at the time of award .
the contractor shall provide and insert all other documents and reports as they become available during construction .
the swmp administrator shall finalize the swmp for cdot maintenance use upon completion of the project .
swmp completeness shall be approved by the engineer .
corrections to the swmp shall be made at the contractors expense .
num .
reference materials .
the following reference materials shall be used num cdot erosion control and stormwater quality guide .
num cdot erosion control and stormwater quality field guide .
e weekly meetings the engineer the superintendent and the swmp administrator shall conduct a weekly meeting with supervisors involved in construction activities that could adversely affect water quality .
the meeting shall follow an agenda prepared by the engineer or a designated representative and have a sign in sheet on which the names of all attendees shall be recorded .
the swmp administrator shall take notes of water quality comments and action items at each weekly meeting and place the agenda and sign in sheet in the swmp notebook .
at this meeting the following shall be discussed and documented on form num num num num requirements of the swmp .
num problems that may have arisen in implementing the site specific swmp or maintaining bmps .
num unresolved issues from inspections and concerns from last inspection num bmps that are to be installed removed modified or maintained .
num planned activities that will affect stormwater in order to proactively phase bmps .
num recalcitrant inspection findings .
all subcontractors who were not in attendance at the environment pre construction conference shall be briefed on the project by the engineer superintendent and the swmp administrator prior to start of work .
the swmp administrator shall record the names of these subcontractors as an addendum to the list of attendees and add it to the swmp notebook .
best management practices for stormwater .
the swmp administrator shall modify the swmp to clearly describe and locate all bmps implemented at the site to control potential sediment discharges .
vehicle tracking control shall be used at all vehicle and equipment exit points from the site to prevent sediment exiting the limits of construction loc of the project site .
access shall be provided only at locations approved by the engineer .
the swmp administrator shall record vehicle tracking control pad locations on the swmp site map .
new inlets and culverts shall be protected during their construction .
appropriate protection of each culvert and inlet shall be installed immediately .
when riprap is called for at the outlet of a culvert it shall be installed within num hours of completion of each pipe .
the contractor shall remove sediment millings debris and other pollutants from within the newly constructed drainage system in accordance with the cdpsscp prior to use at the contractors expense .
all removed sediment shall be disposed of outside the project limits in accordance with all applicable regulations .
concrete products wasted on the ground during construction including but not limited to excess concrete removed from forms spills slop and all other unused concrete are potential pollutants that shall be contained or protected by an approved bmp at a preapproved containment area .
the concrete shall be picked up and recycled in accordance with num ccr num cdphe regulations pertaining to solid waste sites and facilities at regular intervals as directed .
the uses of recycled concrete from permitted recycling facilities shall be in accordance with section num. a unforeseen conditions .
the contractor shall design and implement erosion and sediment bmps for correcting conditions unforeseen during the design of the project or for emergency situations that develop during construction .
the departments erosion control and stormwater quality guide shall be used as a reference document for the purpose of designing erosion and sediment num num bmps .
measures and methods proposed by the contractor shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the engineer prior to installation .
b other agencies .
if cdphe us army corps of engineers usace or the environmental protection agency epa reviews the project site and requires additional measures to prevent and control erosion sediment or pollutants the contractor shall cease and desist activities resulting in pollutant discharge and immediately implement these measures .
if the work may negatively affect another msnum the contractor shall cease and desist activities resulting in the discharge and shall implement appropriate measures to protect the neighboring msnum including installing additional measures .
implementation of these additional measures will be paid for at contract unit prices .
c work outside the right of way .
disturbed areas including staging areas which are outside cdot row and outside easements acquired by cdot for construction are the responsibility of the contractor .
these areas may be subject to a separate cdpsscp or other permits .
the contractor shall acquire these permits and submit copies to the engineer prior to any disturbance .
these permits shall be acquired and all erosion and sediment control work performed at the contractors expense .
these areas are subject to inspections by cdot or any other agency as agreed upon in writing.construction implementation .
the contractor shall incorporate bmps into the project as outlined in the accepted schedule .
d stabilization .
once earthwork has started the contractor shall maintain erosion bmps until permanent stabilization of the area has been completed and accepted .
clearing grubbing and slope stabilization measures shall be performed regularly to ensure final stabilization .
failure to properly maintain erosion control and stabilization methods either through improper phasing or sequencing will require the contractor to repair or replace sections of earthwork at his expense .
the contractor shall schedule and implement the following stabilization measures during the course of the project num .
temporary stabilization .
at the end of each day the contractor shall stabilize disturbed areas by surface roughening vertical tracking or a combination thereof .
disturbed areas are locations where actions have been taken to alter the existing vegetation or underlying soil of a site such as clearing grading road bed preparation soil compaction and movement and stockpiling of top soils .
other stabilization measures may be implemented as approved .
the maximum area of temporary stabilization shall not exceed num acres num .
interim stabilization .
as soon as it is known with reasonable certainty that work will be temporarily halted for num days or more stockpiles and disturbed areas shall be stabilized using one or more of the specified following methods num num num application of num tons per acres of mechanically crimped certified weed free hay or straw in combination with an approved organic mulch tackifier .
num placement of bonded fiber matrix in accordance with section num .
num placement of mulching hydraulic wood cellulose fiber mulch with tackifier in accordance with section num .
num application of sprayon mulch blanket in accordance with section num .
magnesium chloride potassium chloride and sodium chloride or other salt products shall not be used as a stabilization method .
num .
summer and winter stabilization .
summer and winter stabilization is defined as stabilization during months when seeding will not be permitted .
as soon as the contractor knows shutdown is to occur interim stabilization shall be applied to the disturbed area .
protection of the interim stabilization method is required .
reapplication of interim stabilization may be required as directed .
num .
permanent stabilization .
permanent stabilization is defined as the covering of disturbed areas with seeding mulching with tackifier soil retention coverings and such nonerodible methods as riprap road shouldering etc .
or a combination thereof as required by the contract .
other permanent stabilization techniques may be proposed by the contractor in writing and shall be used when approved in writing by the engineer .
permanent stabilization shall begin within num hours after topsoil placement soil conditioning or combination thereof starts and shall be pursued to completion .
num .
final stabilization .
final stabilization is achieved when all ground disturbing activities at the site have been completed and uniform vegetative cover has been established with an individual plant density of at least num percent of predisturbance levels or equivalent permanent physical erosion reduction methods have been employed .
e maintenance .
erosion and sediment control practices and other protective measures identified in the swmp as bmps for stormwater pollution prevention shall be maintained in effective operating condition until the cdpsscp has been transferred to cdot .
bmps shall be continuously maintained in accordance with good engineering hydrologic and pollution control practices including removal of collected sediment when silt depth is num percent or more of the height of the erosion control device .
when possible the contractor shall use equipment with an operator rather than labor alone to remove the sediment .
maintenance of erosion and sediment control devices shall include replacement of such devices upon the end of their useful service life as recommended by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
maintenance of rock check dams and vehicle tracking pads shall be limited to removal and num num disposal of sediment or addition of aggregate .
damages resulting from failure to maintain bmps shall be repaired at the contactors expense .
complete site assessment shall be performed as part of comprehensive inspection and maintenance procedures to assess the adequacy of bmps at the site and the necessity of changes to those bmps to ensure continued effective performance .
where site assessment results in the determination that new or replacement bmps are necessary the bmps shall be installed to ensure continuous effectiveness .
when identified bmps shall be maintained added modified or replaced as soon as possible immediately in most cases .
approved new or replaced bmps will be measured and paid for in accordance with subsections num and num .
devices damaged due to the contractors negligence shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
from the time seeding and mulching work begins until project acceptance the contractor shall maintain all seeded areas .
damage to seeded areas or to mulch materials shall be immediately restored .
damage to seeded areas or to mulch materials due to contractor negligence shall be immediately restored at the contractors expense .
restoration of other damaged areas will be measured and paid for under the appropriate bid item .
temporary bmps may be removed upon completion of the project as determined by the water quality partial acceptance walkthrough .
if removed the area in which these bmps were constructed shall be returned to a condition similar to that which existed prior to its disturbance .
removed bmps shall become the property of the contractor .
if a project delay occurs the contractor shall continue erosion and sediment control operations beyond the original contract time .
sediment removed during maintenance of bmps and material from street sweeping may be used in or on embankment provided it meets the requirements of section num and is distributed evenly across the embankment .
whenever sediment collects on the paved surface the surface shall be cleaned .
street washing will not be allowed .
storm drain inlet protection shall be in place prior to shoveling sweeping or vacuuming .
sweeping shall be completed with a pickup broom or equipment capable of collecting sediment .
sweeping with a kick broom will not be allowed .
material from pavement saw cutting operations shall be cleaned from the roadway surface during operations using a vacuum .
a bmp such as a berm shall be placed to contain slurry from joint flushing operations until the residue can be removed from the soil surface .
aggregate bags erosion logs or other permeable bmps shall not be used .
residue shall not flow into driving lanes .
it shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with subsection numbnum .
material containment and removal will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num bmps shall be constructed in accordance with standard plans mnum and mnum and with the following.seeding mulching sodding soil retention blanket .
seeding mulching sodding and soil retention blanket installation shall be performed in accordance with sections num num and num. b erosion bales .
the bales shall be anchored securely to the ground with wood stakes .
c silt fence .
silt fence shall be installed in locations specified in the contract prior to any grubbing or grading activity .
d temporary berms .
berms shall be constructed to the dimensions shown in the contract and sufficiently compacted to prevent erosion or failure .
if the berm erodes or fails it shall be immediately repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
e temporary diversion .
diversions shall be constructed to the dimensions shown in the contract and graded to drain to a designated outlet .
the berm shall be sufficiently compacted to prevent erosion or failure .
if the diversion erodes or fails it shall be immediately repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
f temporary slope drains .
temporary slope drains shall be installed prior to installation of permanent facilities or growth of adequate ground cover on the slopes .
all temporary slope drains shall be securely anchored to the slope .
the inlets and outlets of temporary slope drains shall be protected to prevent erosion .
g silt berm .
prior to installation of silt berms the contractor shall prepare the surface of the areas in which the berms are to be installed such that are they free of materials greater than num inches in diameter and are suitably smooth for the installation of the silt berms as approved .
silt berms shall be secured with spikes .
the contractor shall install the silt berm in a manner that will prevent water from going around or under the silt berm .
silt berms shall be installed on top of soil retention blanket .
h rock check dam .
rock shall be installed at locations shown on the plans .
rock check dams shall conform to the dimensions shown on the plans .
i rip rap outlet protection .
geotextile used shall be protected from cutting or tearing .
overlaps between two pieces of geotextile shall be num foot minimum .
riprap size shall be as shown on the plans .
j storm drain inlet protection .
prior to installation the contractor shall sweep the surface of the area in which the storm drain inlet protection devices are to be installed such that the pavement is free of sediment and debris .
the ends of the inlet protection type num and type num shall extend a minimum of num foot past each end of the inlet .
the contractor shall remove all accumulated sediment and debris from the num num surface surrounding all storm drain inlet protection devices after each rain event or as directed .
the contractor shall remove accumulated sediment from each type ii and iii containment area when it is more than one third full of sediment or as directed .
the contractor shall protect storm drain facilities adjacent to locations where pavement cutting operations involving wheel cutting saw cutting sand blasting or abrasive water jet blasting are to take place .
k sediment trap .
sediment traps shall be installed to collect sediment laden water and to minimize the potential of pollutants leaving the project site .
locations shall be as shown on the plans or as directed .
sediment traps shall be constructed prior to disturbance of upslope areas and shall be placed in locations where runoff from disturbed areas can be diverted into the trap .
the area under the embankment shall be cleared grubbed and stripped of any vegetation and roots .
fill material for the embankment shall be free of roots or other vegetation organic material large stones and other objectionable material .
sediment shall be removed from the trap when it has accumulated to one half of the wet storage depth of the trap and shall be disposed of in accordance with subsection numf .
l erosion logs .
erosion logs shall be embedded num inches into the soil .
stakes shall be embedded to a minimum depth of num inches .
at the discretion of the engineer a shallower depth may be permitted if rock is encountered .
the contractor shall maintain the erosion logs during construction to prevent sediment from passing over or under the logs .
m silt dikes .
prior to installation of silt dikes the contractor shall prepare the surface of the areas in which the silt dikes are to be installed such that they are free of materials greater than two inches in diameter and are suitably smooth for the installation of the silt dikes as approved by the engineer .
n concrete washout structure .
the concrete washout structure shall meet or exceed the dimensions shown on the plans and be used in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
work on this structure shall not begin until written acceptance is provided by the engineer .
concrete washout structure shall conform to standard plan mnum and shall meet the following requirements num the structure shall contain all washout water .
num num num stormwater shall not carry wastes from washout and disposal locations .
num the site shall be located a minimum of num horizontal feet from state waters and shall meet all requirements for containment and disposal as defined in subsection num .
num the site shall be signed as concrete washout .
num the site shall be accessible to appropriate vehicles .
num freeboard capacity shall be included in the structure design to reasonably ensure the structure will not overtop during or because of a precipitation event .
num the contractor shall prevent tracking of washout material out of the washout structure .
num solvents flocculents and acid shall not be added to wash water .
num the structure shall be surrounded on three sides by a compacted berm .
num the structure shall be fenced with orange plastic construction fencing to provide a barrier to construction equipment and to aid in identification of the concrete washout area .
num concrete waste liquid and solid shall not exceed  the storage capacity of the washout structure .
prefabricated concrete washout structures shall meet the following requirements num structure shall contain all washout water .
num structure shall be located num horizontal feet away from state waters and shall be confined so that no potential pollutants will enter state waters and other sensitive areas as defined in the contract .
locations shall be as approved by the engineer .
the site shall be delineated with orange plastic fence or other means and signed as concrete washout .
num the site shall be accessible to appropriate vehicles .
num freeboard capacity shall be included in structure design to reasonably ensure the structure will not overtop during or because of a precipitation event .
num solvents flocculants and acid shall not be added to wash water .
num concrete waste liquid and solid shall not exceed  the storage capacity of the washout structure .
num num num prefabricated structures can not be moved when they contain liquid unless otherwise approved .
num the concrete washout structure shall be completed and ready for use prior to concrete placement operations .
num washout areas shall be checked and maintained as required .
on site permanent disposal of concrete washout waste is not allowed .
all liquid and solid wastes including contaminated sediment and soils generated from concrete washout shall be hauled away from the site and disposed of properly at the contractors expense .
o vehicle tracking pad vtp .
vehicle tracking pads shall be constructed to the minimum dimensions shown in the contract unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
construction of approved vehicle tracking pads shall be completed before any disturbance of the area .
the contractor shall maintain each vehicle tracking pad during the entire time that it is in use for the project .
the vehicle tracking pad shall be removed at the completion of the project unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
additional aggregate may be required for maintenance and will be paid for under pay item maintenance aggregate vehicle tracking pad .
p detention pond .
permanent detention ponds shown on the construction plans may be used as temporary bmps if all the following conditions are met num the pond is designated as a construction bmp in the swmp .
num the pond outfall and outlet are designed and implemented for use as a bmp during construction in accordance with good engineering hydrologic and pollution control practices .
the stormwater discharges from the outfall shall not cause degradation or pollution of state waters and shall have bmps as appropriate .
num all silt shall be removed and the pond returned to the design grade and contour prior to project acceptance .
q aggregate bag .
aggregate bags shall be placed on a stable surface consisting of pavement grass or gravel .
aggregate bags shall be placed to conform to the surface without gaps .
discharge water shall not cause erosion .
r surface roughening .
surface roughening creates horizontal grooves along the contour of the slope .
roughening may be accomplished by furrowing scarifying ripping or disking the soil surface to create a num to num inch minimum variation in soil surface .
surface roughening will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
s vertical tracking .
vertical tracking involves driving a tracked vehicle up and down the soil surface and creating horizontal grooves and ridges along the num num contour of the slope .
sandy soils or soils that are primarily rock need not be tracked .
vertical tracking will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
materials handling and spill prevention .
the swmp administrator shall clearly describe and record on the swmp all practices implemented at the site to minimize impacts from procedures or significant material that could contribute pollutants to runoff .
areas or procedures where potential spills can occur shall have a spill response plan in place as specified in subsections numb num or numc .
construction equipment fuels lubricants and other petroleum distillates shall not be stored or stockpiled within num horizontal feet of any state waters or more if the contractor determines necessary .
equipment fueling and servicing shall occur only within approved designated areas .
a bulk storage structures for petroleum products and other chemicals shall have impervious secondary containment or equivalent adequate protection so as to contain all spills and prevent any spilled material from entering state waters .
secondary containment shall be capable of containing the combined volume of all the storage containers plus at least num percent freeboard .
for secondary containment that is used and may result in accumulation of stormwater within the containment a plan shall be implemented to properly manage and dispose of all accumulated stormwater which is deemed to be contaminated e.g .
has an unusual odor or sheen .
b lubricant leaks .
the contractor shall inspect equipment vehicles and repair areas daily to ensure petroleum oils and lubricants pol are not leaking onto the soil or pavement .
absorbent material or containers approved by the engineer shall be used to prevent leaking pol from reaching the soil or pavement .
the contractor shall have onsite approved absorbent material or containers of sufficient capacity to contain any pol leak that can reasonably be foreseen .
the contractor shall inform all spill response coordinators in accordance with the spill response plan if unforeseen leakage is encountered .
all materials resulting from pol leakage control and cleanup shall become the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the site .
control cleanup and removal of byproducts resulting from pol leaks shall be performed at the contractors expense .
c spill response plan .
a spill response plan shall be developed and implemented to establish operating procedures for handling potential pollutants and preventing spills .
the response plan shall contain the following information num identification and contact information of each spill response coordinator .
num locations of areas on the project site where equipment fueling and servicing operations are permitted .
num location of cleanup kits .
num num num quantities of chemicals and locations stored on site .
num label system for chemicals and safety data sheets sds for products .
num clean up procedures to be implemented in the event of a spill that does not enter state waters or ground water .
num procedures for spills of any size that enter surface waters or ground water or have the potential to do so .
cdots erosion control and stormwater quality guide contains spill notification contacts and phone numbers required in the spill response plan .
num a summary of the employee training provided .
information in items num through num shall be updated in the swmp notebook when they change .
stockpile management .
material stockpiles shall be located num horizontal feet away from state waters and shall be confined so that no potential pollutants will enter state waters and other sensitive areas as defined in the contract .
locations shall be approved by the engineer.erodible stockpiles including topsoil shall be contained with acceptable bmps at the toe or within num feet of the toe throughout construction .
bmps shall be approved by the engineer .
the swmp administrator shall describe detail and record the sediment control devices on the swmp .
limits of disturbance .
the contractor shall limit construction activities to those areas within the limits of disturbance shown on the plans and cross sections .
construction activities in addition to the contract work shall include the onsite parking of vehicles or equipment onsite staging onsite batch plants haul roads or work access and all other activities which would disturb existing soil conditions .
staging areas within the lda shall be as approved by the engineer .
construction activities beyond the limits of disturbance due to contractor negligence shall be restored to the original condition by the contractor at the contractors expense .
the swmp administrator shall tabulate additional disturbances not identified in the cdpsscp application and indicate changes to locations and quantities on the swmp .
the contractor shall report the changes and additional disturbances to the engineer water quality control division of cdphe and all other involved agencies .
the contractor shall pursue stabilization of all disturbances to completion .
failure to perform erosion control .
failure to implement the stormwater management plan is a violation of the cdpsscp and cdot specifications .
cdot is obligated to implement enforcement mechanisms in accordance with cdots msnum permit cosnum for stormwater management and erosion control best management practices .
penalties may be assessed to the contractor by the appropriate agencies .
penalties will be assessed by the department as liquidated damages for failure to meet the permit .
all fines assessed to the num num department for the contractors failure to implement the swmp will be deducted from moneys due the contractor in accordance with subsection numd num .
the contractor will be subject to liquidated damages for incidents of failure to perform erosion control as required by the contract .
liquidated damages will be applied for failure to comply with the cdpsscp and these specifications including the following num failure to include erosion control in the project schedule or failure to include erosion control in each schedule update as specified in subsection numb .
num failure of the contractor to perform the inspections required by subsection numc num .
num failure of the contractor to implement necessary actions required by the engineer as required by subsection numc .
num failure to amend the swmp and implement bmps as required by subsection num .
num failure to keep documentation and records current .
num failure to construct or implement erosion control or spill containment measures required by the contract or failure to construct or implement them in accordance with the contractors approved schedule as required by subsection numc .
num failure to limit temporary stabilization to num or fewer acres as required by subsection num e. num failure to replace or perform maintenance on an erosion control feature after notice from the engineer or from a water quality inspection as required by subsection numf .
num failure to remove and dispose of sediment from bmps as required .
num failure to install and properly utilize a concrete washout structure for containing washout from concrete placement operations .
num failure to perform stabilization as required by subsection nume .
num failure of the superintendent or designated representative to attend inspections as required by subsection numc and record findings in the appropriate form .
num failure to prevent discharges not composed entirely of stormwater from leaving the construction site .
num failure to provide the survey of permanent water quality bmps when required on the project in accordance with num .
num num the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of each incident of failure to perform erosion control in accordance with the cdpsscp and these specifications including items num through num above by issuing a form num .
correction shall be made as soon as possible but no later than num hours from the date of notification to correct the failure .
the contractor will be charged liquidated damages in the amount of num for each day after the num hour period has expired that one or more of the incidents of failure to perform the requirements for each form num remains uncorrected .
liquidated damages will begin at midnight of the date the num hours has expired .
this deduction will not be considered a penalty but will be considered liquidated damages based on estimated additional construction engineering costs .
the liquidated damages will accumulate for each cumulative day that one or more of the incidents remain uncorrected .
the number of days for which liquidated damages are assessed will be cumulative for the duration of the project that is the damages for a particular day will be added to the total number of days for which liquidated damages are accumulated on the project .
the liquidated damages will be deducted from any monies due the contractor .
if all other failures are not corrected within num hours after liquidated damages have begun to be assessed the engineer will issue a stop work order in accordance with subsection num .
work shall not resume until the engineer has approved a written corrective action plan submitted by the contractor that includes measures to prevent future violations and a schedule for implementation .
if the contractor requires more than num hours to perform the corrective work from the date on the form num the contractor shall submit a request for deferment .
the deferment request shall be in writing and shall include the specific failure temporary measures until final correction is made the methodology which will be employed to make the correction and interim milestones to completing the work .
the region water pollution control manager rwpcm engineer the swmp administrator and the contractor shall concur on this deferral and set a proposed date of completion .
if approved the contractor shall complete the corrective measures by midnight of the proposed completion date .
if corrective work is not corrected by the completion date the engineer will issue a stop work order .
liquidated damages will apply retroactively back to the num hours after the form num date of notification .
liquidated damages will be assessed until the corrective work has been completed and accepted .
deferment of work to correct failures to perform erosion control will not affect the contractors other contractual responsibilities notifications for other non compliance nor the final completion date of the project .
liquidated damages for other noncompliance notifications will continue to apply during the deferment period in addition to liquidated damages associated with the deferment .
based on the submittal date of the approved deferment liquated damages and a stop work order may not be mandated to the contractor .
disagreements regarding the suggested corrective action for a bmp compliance issue between the project engineer swmp administrator and superintendent shall be discussed with the resident engineer and region water pollution control manager .
if after the discussions the project engineer and the contractor are still num num in disagreement and the contractor believes that additional compensation is owed the contractor will follow the decision of the project engineer keep track of the costs and negotiate further with the project engineer .
if after pursuing the issue the contractor is unable to reach agreement with the project engineer then the contractor can follow the dispute process outlined in subsection num .
if the contractors corrective action plan and schedule are not submitted and approved within num hours of the initial notice the engineer will issue a stop work order and have an onsite meeting with the superintendent swmp administrator and the superintendents supervisor .
this meeting will also be attended by the resident engineer the region water pollution control manager and the region program engineer .
this meeting will identify and document needed corrective actions and a schedule for completion .
if after the meeting the unacceptable work is not remedied within the schedule as agreed to in the meeting the engineer will take action to effect compliance with the cdpsscp and these specifications by utilizing cdot maintenance personnel or other noncontractor forces and deduct the cost from any moneys due or to become due to the contractor pursuant to subsection num .
delays due to these stop work orders shall be considered non excusable .
the stop work order shall be in place until the project is in cdps scp compliance .
if the contractor remains nonresponsive to requirements of the onsite meeting the engineer will start default or contract termination procedures in accordance with subsections num and num .
cdot will proceed with corrective or disciplinary action in accordance with the rules for prequalification debarment bidding and work on transportation road highway and bridge public projects .
when a failure meets any one of the following conditions the engineer will immediately issue a stop work order in accordance with subsection num irrespective of any other available remedy num it may endanger health or the environment .
num it consists of a spill or discharge of hazardous substances or oil which may cause pollution of the waters of the state .
num it consists of a discharge which may cause a violation of a water quality standards .
items to be completed prior to requesting partial acceptance of water quality work .
a reclamation of washout areas .
after concrete operations are complete washout areas shall be reclaimed in accordance with subsection numn at the contractors expense .
b survey .
when permanent water quality bmps permanent bmp are required on the project the contractor shall survey the bmps to confirm that they conform to the configuration and grade shown on the plans .
the survey shall conform to section num .
the results of the survey shall be submitted as microstation or autocad drawing files and pdf files showing both designed and final elevations and configurations .
paper versions of the drawings shall be submitted with the stamp and seal of the contractors surveyor .
num num the engineer and the cdot hydraulics engineer for the region will perform a walkthrough of the permanent bmps to confirm conformance to material requirements locations and dimensions of the permanent bmps .
permanent bmps not meeting the contract requirements will be identified in writing by the engineer and shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
correction surveys shall be performed at the contractors expense to confirm the locations and dimensions of each permanent bmp .
final asbuilt plans of the permanent bmps shall be provided to the engineer and the cdot region and headquarter permanent water quality control specialist for their records .
c locations of temporary bmps .
the engineer will identify locations where modification cleaning or removal of temporary bmps are required and will provide these in writing to the contractor .
upon completion of work required the swmp administrator shall modify the swmp to provide an accurate depiction of bmps to remain on the project site .
method of measurement erosion control management will be measured as the actual number of days of ecm work performed onsite regardless of the number of ecis required including erosion control inspections documentation meeting participation swmp administration and the preparation of the swmp notebook .
erosion bales will be measured by the actual number installed and accepted .
silt fence silt berms erosion logs aggregate bags silt dikes temporary berms rock check dams temporary diversions and temporary slope drains will be measured by the actual number of linear feet that are installed and accepted .
measured length will not include required overlap .
concrete washout structure will be measured by the actual number of structures that are installed and accepted .
storm drain inlet protection will be measured by linear foot or actual number of devices that are installed and accepted .
sediment trap quantities will be measured by the actual number installed and accepted .
removal of trash that is not generated by construction activities will be measured by the actual number of hours that contractor workers actively remove trash from the project .
each week the contractor shall submit to the engineer a list of workers and the hours spent collecting such trash .
removal of accumulated sediment from traps basins areas adjacent to silt fences and erosion bales and other clean out excavation of accumulated sediment and the disposal of such sediment will be measured by the number of hours that equipment labor or both are used for sediment removal .
num num vehicle tracking pads will be measured by the actual number constructed and accepted .
additional aggregate required for maintaining vehicle tracking pads will be measured as the actual number of cubic yards installed and accepted .
basis of payment ecm and bmps will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit aggregate bag linear foot oncrete washout structure each erosion bales weed free each erosion control management day erosion log type num ____ inch linear foot erosion log type num ______inch linear foot prefabricated concrete washout structure each prefabricated vehicle tracking pad each maintenance aggregate vehicle tracking pad cubic yard removal and disposal of sediment equipment hour removal and disposal of sediment labor hour removal of trash hour rock check dam each sediment basin each sediment trap each silt berm linear foot silt dike linear foot silt fence linear foot silt fence reinforced linear foot storm drain inlet protection type__ linear foot storm drain inlet protection type__ each sweeping sediment removal hour temporary berm linear foot temporary diversion linear foot temporary slope drain linear foot vehicle tracking pad each num num payment for erosion control management ecm will be full compensation for all labor materials and equipment necessary for the swmp administrator and erosion control inspectors to perform all the work described in this specification .
this includes assembling items num num in subsection numdnum and required updates to the swmp notebook on site .
the swmp administrator and ecis commute times will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
modifications to the swmp notebook due to construction errors or survey errors by the contractor shall be made at the contractors expense .
temporary erosion control will be measured and paid for by the bmps used .
surface roughening and vertical tracking will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for each bmp item will be full compensation for all work and materials required to furnish install maintain and remove the bmp when directed .
payment for removal and disposal of sediment equipment will be full compensation for use of the equipment including the operator .
payment for removal and disposal of sediment labor will be full compensation for use of the labor .
payment for concrete washout structure whether constructed or prefabricated will be full compensation for all work and materials required to install maintain and remove the item .
maintenance and relocation as required of these structures throughout the duration of the project will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
silt berm spikes will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
when required soil retention blankets will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
silt dike staples will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
sprayon mulch blankets required by the contract including those used in both interim and final stabilization will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
payment for storm drain inlet protection will be full compensation for all work materials and equipment required to complete the item including surface preparation maintenance throughout the project and removal upon completion of the work .
aggregate will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
sweeping when used as a bmp as shown in the contract will be measured by the number of hours that a pickup broom or equipment capable of collecting sediment authorized by the engineer is used to remove sediment from the roadway or other paved surfaces .
each week the contractor shall submit to the engineer a statement detailing the type of sweeping equipment used and the number of hours it was num num used to pick up sediment .
the operator will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
stakes anchors connections geotextile riprap and tie downs used for temporary slope drains will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for vehicle tracking pad will be full compensation for all work materials and equipment required to construct maintain and remove the entrance upon completion of the work .
aggregate and geotextile will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
if additional aggregate for maintenance of vehicle tracking pads is required it will be measured by the cubic yard in accordance with section num and will be paid for under this section as maintenance aggregate vehicle tracking pad .
seeding sod mulching soil retention blanket and riprap will be measured and paid for in accordance with sections num num num and num .
geotextile erosion control class num will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
all work and materials required to perform the permanent bmp survey and furnish the electronic files shall be included in the original unit price bid for surveying .
surveying will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
payment will be made for bmps replaced as approved by the engineer .
temporary erosion and sediment bmps required due to the contractors negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent controls as a part of the work as scheduled or ordered by the engineer or for the contractors convenience shall be performed at the contractors expense .
if the contractor fails to complete construction within the contract time payment will not be made for section num pay items for the period of time after expiration of the contract time .
these items shall be provided at the contractors expense .
num num section num watering and dust palliatives description this work consists of applying water to soils or aggregates for moisture and density control landscaping prewetting an excavation area and dust palliatives .
it also includes applying magnesium chloride dust palliative for the control of dust and the stabilization of soil and aggregate surfaced roads .
materials water applied for moisture and density control as dust palliative and for prewetting shall be free from injurious matter .
water for landscaping shall be free from oil acids alkalis salts or any substance injurious to plant life .
when the water source proposed for use by the contractor is not of known quality and chemical content samples of the water shall be submitted for approval prior to use .
magnesium chloride dust palliative shall consist of a magnesium chloride base agent water and other enhancing or nondetrimental ions .
the chemical analysis shall conform to the following chemical constituents percent by weight magnesium chloride mgclnum num to num enhancing or nondetrimental ions num to num water num to num construction requirements moisture and density control .
sprinkling equipment shall deliver uniform and controlled distribution of water without ponding or washing .
water for finishing operations shall be uniformly applied by spraying across the full width of the course .
prewetting .
prewetting material in excavation areas prior to its removal for placement in embankments will be allowed when approved .
the contractor shall furnish a prewetting layout for each area to be prewetted including nozzle size spacing number of lines and other equipment to be used .
the contractor shall obtain the approval of the engineer for each prewetting layout prior to each prewetting operation .
dust palliative .
the contractor shall furnish and apply a dust palliative on portions of the roadway and on haul roads at the locations and in the amounts as provided in the contract .
dust palliative shall consist of water .
application of water shall be done with acceptable sprinkling equipment at an appropriate rate as approved by the engineer .
num num magnesium chloride dust palliative shall be applied as follows scarify the top num inches of the existing road surface and wet with water to approximately four percent moisture content or as directed .
apply the magnesium chloride dust palliative in two applications of num gallon per square yard in each application .
allow to soak for num minutes after each application .
roll the surface with a pneumatic tire roller as specified in the contract .
do not permit traffic on the treated surface until approved .
landscaping .
the contractor shall furnish water for seeding mulching planting transplanting sodding herbicide treatment and any other landscaping work when called for on the plans or when designated .
method of measurement water will be measured by the number of thousand gallons m gallon used and accepted .
measurement of water may be made in the vehicle at point of delivery or by meter .
when water is to be metered for measurement the contractor shall provide and use an approved metering device .
magnesium chloride dust palliative will be measured by the number of gallons applied and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of water measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per m gallon .
the accepted quantities of magnesium chloride dust palliative measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit water m gallon water landscaping m gallon dust palliative magnesium chloride gallon water required for all items of work will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work except that water for dust palliative and water ordered for the benefit or safety of the public will be measured and paid for separately in accordance with the contract .
if the area for landscape work is irrigated by a departmentowned system the contractor may use the water from this source .
water used from a department source will not be measured and paid for .
num num section num reset structures description this work consists of removing relaying resetting or adjusting structures and related materials .
all designated items shall be carefully removed and stored reinstalled or adjusted in a manner that will avoid loss or damage .
construction requirements general .
relaid pipe and conduit and reset structures shall be cleaned of foreign material prior to reinstallation .
except in areas to be excavated all holes resulting from the removal of structures shall be neatly backfilled .
methods shall conform to those required in the specifications for the various types of construction involved .
materials in good condition from removed structures may be reused .
salvable material as designated in the contract that is not reused shall remain the property of the department and the contractor shall be held responsible for safekeeping of all materials until receipted by the department .
materials damaged stolen or lost prior to receipt by the department shall be repaired or replaced as determined by the engineer at no cost to the department .
unserviceable material as determined by the engineer shall be replaced with new material of similar dimensions and the material costs will be paid for in accordance with subsection numb except as otherwise provided in this section .
all new materials and replacement parts shall conform to the requirements of the contract for the appropriate items .
light standard .
light standards shall be reset on new concrete foundation pads complete with conduit and wiring in accordance with the departments standard plans at locations indicated in the contract .
fences and gates .
where fences except snow fence are reset the contractor shall supply and install any new materials required to restore the fence to acceptable condition except for new posts .
the contractor shall supply new posts as needed for the reset fence in accordance with section num .
wire in the old fence shall be salvaged and used in the reset fence .
where snow fences are reset panels shall be removed from their existing location and reset at the new location .
gates designated to be reset shall be removed and restored for service at the new locations .
num num right of way fence shall be reset approximately num inches inside the boundary of the highway right of way shown on the plans .
anchorages footings or fence appurtenances shall not extend beyond the limits of the highway right of way without the written consent of the abutting property owner .
guardrail .
where guardrail is reset the contractor shall supply and install any new materials needed to restore the guardrail to acceptable condition .
new materials shall include additional posts blocks and hardware needed to complete the intermediate post installations as shown on the departments standard plans .
posts with similar tops shall be installed in groups as directed .
installation of fiattop posts alternately with other top shapes will not be permitted .
posts may be cut rotated or turned upside down to eliminate unacceptable tops .
if the posts are cut the contractor shall treat the exposed surface with two coats of an approved preservative .
adjust guardrail shall be the work necessary to adjust the height to the standard num inches in accordance with standard plan mnum and filling the resulting voids under the posts with a lean concrete mixture consisting of one part cement and ten parts sand .
mailbox .
mailboxes complete with supporting structures are to be removed and temporarily reset at points near their original location to be accessible for mail delivery service .
upon completion of surfacing operations the boxes shall again be reset at the locations designated .
a supporting structure may contain one or more mailboxes .
new permanent mailbox support posts and mounting brackets shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the departments standard plans .
ground sign .
signs and posts designated to be reset shall be removed cleaned and reset at designated locations including all work necessary to provide the existing posts with breakaway devices where required .
sign structure .
sign structures shall be sandblasted and repainted prior to reinstallation .
traffic signal .
traffic signals designated to be reset shall be removed along with existing poles and electrical equipment .
new concrete footings shall be installed along with any new electrical equipment necessary to restore the structure to service at the new location .
equipment and materials shall be cleaned prior to being reset .
adjust structure .
adjusting structures shall apply but not be limited to manhole rings and covers inlet gratings and frames water valve boxes water meters gate posts and other structures and facilities .
construction operations shall consist of raising lowering moving or removing masonry or concrete adding brickwork masonry or concrete and resetting grates frames or rings and covers to fit the new construction .
structures in the traveled roadway shall be adjusted to a tolerance of  to  inch below the surface of the roadway .
work on water num num services shall be subject to inspection and testing by the owners .
damage to any fire hydrant or any part of the water system by the contractor shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
flashing beacon .
reset flashing beacon shall consist of providing a new concrete foundation or footing adjustments of post and breakaway device as required and providing all electrical equipment and materials necessary to restore the installation to service at the new location .
the contractor shall provide necessary connections from the nearest power source or from the source designated on the plans to the new location .
method of measurement the quantity to be measured where items are reset or adjusted on an each basis shall be the actual number of those items restored for service at new location completed and accepted .
concrete foundation pads will be measured and paid for as concrete foundation pad in accordance with section num .
concrete footings for ground signs and overhead sign structures if required will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
steel post extensions if required will be measured and paid for as steel sign post in accordance with section num of the type shown on the plans .
the quantity to be measured where items are reset or adjusted on a linear foot basis shall be the actual number of linear feet of the items completed and accepted measured end to end except guardrail and snow fence .
guardrail will be measured as the actual number of linear feet completed and accepted as shown on the departments standard plans .
snow fence shall be measured end to end of the anchor posts .
the quantity to be measured for relay pipe shall be the number of linear feet of relaid pipe including end sections measured end to end in place completed and accepted .
the quantity to be measured for reset mailbox structure shall be the number of supporting structures complete with mailboxes restored at new locations and accepted .
moving the mailbox structures for temporary mail service during construction and installing new support post base mounting brackets and hardware will not be measured or paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
resetting of structures fences and related materials shall include all work necessary to remove the items from their existing location to the new location and shall include all mounting hardware footings and all other work necessary to complete the reset item except for new fence posts .
fence posts required and approved will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num resetting of traffic signals poles controllers cabinets preemption units coordination and interconnection equipment and related equipment and materials shall include all work necessary to remove the items from their existing location and reset them at the new location and shall include all mounting hardware footings other electrical equipment and service and all other materials and work necessary to complete the reset item in service at the new location .
basis of payment the accepted quantities measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit reset each linear foot square yard lump sum relay pipe linear foot adjust each linear foot modify each reset mailbox structure type each adjust guardrail linear foot structure excavation and structure backfill required for relay pipe will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
any void in the structure excavation prism created by the removal of pipe will be excluded from measurement and payment of structure excavation .
except as otherwise provided in the contract collars and connecting devices will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num seeding fertilizer soil conditioner and sodding description this work consists of soil preparation application of fertilizer soil conditioners or both and furnishing and placing seed and sod .
the work shall be in accordance with the contract and accepted horticultural practices .
materials seed soil conditioners fertilizers and sod .
a seed .
all seed shall be furnished in bags or containers clearly labeled to show the name and address of the supplier the seed name the lot number net weight origin the percent of weed seed content the guaranteed percentage of purity and germination pounds of pure live seed pls of each seed species and the total pounds of pls in the container .
all seeds shall be free from noxious weed seeds in accordance with current state and local lists and as indicated in section num .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a signed statement certifying that the seed is from a lot that has been tested by a recognized laboratory for seed testing within thirteen months prior to the date of seeding .
the engineer may obtain seed samples from the seed equipment furnished bags or containers to test seed for species identification purity and germination .
seed tested and found to be less than num percent of the labeled certified pls and different than the specified species will not be accepted .
seed which has become wet moldy or damaged in transit or in storage will not be accepted .
seed types and amount of pls required per acre shall be provided in accordance with the contract .
seed and seed labels shall conform to all current state and federal regulations and will be subject to the testing provisions of the association of official seed analysis .
computations for quantity of seed required on the project shall include the percent of purity and percent of germination .
the formula used for determining the quantity of pls shall be bulk pounds of seed species purity germination pounds of pls b soil conditioners and fertilizer .
num .
fertilizer fertilizer plant nutrients shall conform to the applicable state fertilizer laws .
it shall be uniform in composition dry and free flowing and shall be delivered to the site in the original unopened containers each bearing the manufacturers guaranteed analysis .
fertilizer which becomes caked or damaged will not be accepted .
num num num .
soil conditioner soil conditioner shall consist of compost biological nutrient biological culture or humic acid based material .
humic acid based material humate shall include the following num a ph of num to num .
num maximum num percent inert ingredient .
num minimum num percent organic matter with num percent minimum humic acid .
compost shall be weedfree organic compost derived from a variety of feed stocks including agricultural biosolids forestry food leaf and yard trimmings manure tree wood with no substances toxic to plants .
material shall be aerobically composted in a facility permitted by the colorado department of public health and environment cdphe to produce or sell compost in accordance with house bill hb num .
the contractor shall submit a copy of this permit to the engineer for approval and the project records .
the compost shall be tested in accordance with the u.s. composting councils test methods for examining of composting and compost tmecc manual .
the compost manufacturer shall be a participating member of in the u.s. composting councils seal of testing assurance program sta .
the contractor shall provide a participation certificate and test data on a compost technical data sheet .
compost shall have the following physical properties compost parameters reported as requirement test method ph ph units num num tmecc numa soluble salts electrical conductivity ds mnum or mmhos cmnum maximum numdsm tmecc numa moisture content wet weight basis num num tmecc numa organic matter content dry weight basis num num tmecc numa particle size sieve sizes dry weight basis for each sieve fraction passing num inch num  inch num tmecc numb manmade inert contamination dry weight basis num tmecc numa num num compost parameters reported as requirement test method stability respirometry mg conumc per g ts per day mg conumc per g om per day num or below tmecc numb select pathogens passfail limits salmonella num mpnnumgrams of ts or coliform bacteria num mpngram pass tmecc numb fecal coliforms or num salmonella trace metals passfail limits mg kgnum dw basis as num cd num cu num pb num hg num ni num se num zn num pass tmecc num maturity bioassay percent emergence average num tmecc numa relative seedling vigor average num the contractor shall provide a ctr in accordance with subsection num confirming that the material has been tested in accordance with tmecc .
c sod .
sod shall be nursery grown and num percent weed free .
species shall be as shown on the plans .
other sod types may be used only if approved in writing by the engineer .
the one percent allowable weeds shall not include any undesirable perennial or annual grasses or plants defined as noxious by current state statute .
soil thickness of sod cuts shall not be less than  inch nor more than num inch .
sod shall be cut in uniform strips with minimum dimensions of num inches in width and num inches in length .
the contractor shall submit a sample of the sod proposed for use which shall serve as a standard .
any sod furnished whether in place or not that is not up to the standard of the sample may be rejected .
sod that was cut more than num hours prior to installation shall not be used .
each load of sod shall be accompanied by a certificate from the grower stating num num the type of sod and the date and time of cutting .
construction requirements seeding seasons .
seeding in areas that are not irrigated shall be restricted according to the following time table and specifications .
zone spring seeding fall seeding areas other than the western slope below num spring thaw to june num september num until consistent ground freeze num to num spring thaw to june num september num until consistent ground freeze num to num spring thaw to july num august num until consistent ground freeze above num spring thaw to consistent ground freeze western slope below num spring thaw to may num august num until consistent ground freeze num to num spring thaw to june num september num until consistent ground freeze above num spring thaw to consistent ground freeze num spring thaw shall be defined as the earliest date in a new calendar year in which seed can be buried  inch into the surface soil topsoil thru normal drill seeding methods .
num consistent ground freeze shall be defined as that time during the fall months in which the surface soil topsoil due to freeze conditions prevents burying the seed  inch thru normal drill seeding operations .
seed shall not be sown drilled or planted when the surface soil or topsoil is in a frozen or crusted state .
seeding accomplished outside the time periods listed above will be allowed only when ordered by the engineer or when the contractors request is approved in writing .
when requested by the contractor the contractor must agree to perform the following work at no cost to the department reseed remulch and repair areas which fail to produce species indicated in the contract .
when seeding is ordered by the engineer outside the time periods listed above the cost of additional material will be paid for by the department .
the contractor will not be responsible for failure of the seeded area to produce species indicated in the contract due to reasons beyond the control of the contractor .
the seeding the soil conditioning and the fertilizing application rate shall be as specified .
the engineer may establish test sections for adjusting the seeding and num num the fertilizing equipment to assure the specified rate .
the engineer may order equipment readjustment at any time .
seed soil conditioner and fertilizer shall not be applied during inclement weather including rain and high winds or when soil is frozen or soil moisture is too high to evenly incorporate seed soil conditioner or fertilizer .
lawn grass seeding .
lawn grass seeding shall be accomplished in the seeding seasons described in subsection num. a soil preparation .
preparatory to seeding lawn grass irregularities in the ground surface except the saucers for trees and shrubs shall be removed .
measures shall be taken to prevent the formation of low places and pockets where water will stand .
immediately prior to seeding the ground surface shall be tilled or hand worked into an even and loose seedbed to a depth of num inches free of clods sticks stones debris concrete and asphalt in excess of num inches in any dimension and brought to the desired line and grade .
b fertilizing and soil conditioning .
the first application of fertilizer soil conditioner or both shall be incorporated into the soil prior to seeding and shall consist of a soil conditioner commercial fertilizer or both as designated in the contract .
fertilizer called for on the plans shall be worked into the top num inches of soil at the rate specified in the contract .
biological nutrient culture or humic acid based material called for on the plans shall be applied in a uniform application onto the soil service .
organic amendments shall be applied uniformly over the soil surface and incorporated into the top num inches of soil .
the second application of fertilizer shall consist of a fertilizer having an available nutrient analysis of num applied at the rate of num lbs .
per acre .
it shall be uniformly broadcast over the seeded area three weeks after germination or emergence .
the area shall then be thoroughly soaked with water to a depth of num inch .
fertilizer shall not be applied when the application will damage the new lawn .
c seeding .
after the surface is raked and rolled the seed shall be drilled or broadcast and raked into the top  inch of soil .
seeding shall be accomplished by mechanical landscape type drills .
broadcast type seeders or hydraulic seeding will be permitted only on small areas not accessible to drills .
seed shall not be drilled or broadcast during windy weather or when the ground is frozen or untillable .
all loose exposed rock larger than num inches shall be removed from slopes that are to be seeded by drilling .
hydraulic seeding equipment shall include a pump capable of being operated at num gallons per minute and at num pounds per square inch pressure unless otherwise directed .
the equipment shall have a nozzle adaptable to hydraulic num num seeding requirements .
storage tanks shall have a means of estimating the volume used or remaining in the tank .
sodding .
a soil preparation .
preparatory to sodding the ground shall be tilled or hand worked into an even and loose sod bed to a depth of num inches and irregularities in the ground surface shall be removed .
sticks stones debris clods asphalt concrete and other material more than num inches in any dimension shall be removed .
any depressions or variances from a smooth grade shall be corrected .
areas to be sodded shall be smooth before any sodding is done .
b sodding .
the sod shall be laid by staggering joints with all edges touching .
on slopes the sod shall run approximately parallel to the slope contours .
where the sod abuts a drop inlet the subgrade shall be adjusted so that the sod shall be num inch below the top of the inlet .
within one hour after the sod is laid and fertilized it shall be watered .
after watering the sod shall be permitted to dry to the point where it is still wet enough for effective rolling .
it shall then be rolled in two directions with a lawn roller weighing at least num pounds .
c fertilizing and soil conditioning .
prior to laying sod the num inches of subsoil underlying the sod shall be treated by tilling in fertilizer soil conditioner or both .
the rate of application shall be as designated in the contract .
fertilizer called for on the plans shall be worked into the top num inches of soil at the rate specified in the contract .
biological nutrient culture or humic acid based material called for on the plans shall be applied uniformly onto the soil surface .
organic amendments shall be applied uniformly over the soil surface and incorporated into the top num inches of soil .
after laying the sod shall be fertilized with a fertilizer having an available nutrient analysis of num at the rate of num pounds per acre .
fertilizer shall not be applied when the application will damage the sod .
native seeding .
areas that are unirrigated shall be seeded in accordance with subsection num. a soil preparation .
slopes flatter than num shall be tilled into an even and loose seed bed num inches deep .
slopes num or steeper shall be left in a roughened condition .
slopes shall be free of clods sticks stones debris concrete and asphalt in excess of num inches in any dimension and brought to the desired line and grade .
b fertilizing and soil conditioning .
prior to seeding fertilizer soil conditioner or both shall be applied .
the fertilizer and soil conditioner type and rate of application shall be as designated in the contract .
fertilizer called for on the plans shall be worked into the top num inches of soil at the rate specified in the num num contract .
biological nutrient culture or humic acid based material called for on the plans shall be applied in a uniform application onto the soil service .
organic amendments shall be applied uniformly over the soil surface and incorporated into the top num inches of soil .
no measurable quantity of organic amendment shall be present on the surface after incorporation .
c seeding .
seeding shall be accomplished within num hours of tilling or scarifying to make special seed bed preparation unnecessary .
the seeding application rate shall be as designated in the contract .
all slopes flatter than num shall be seeded by mechanical power drawn drills followed by packer wheels or drag chains .
mechanical power drawn drills shall have depth bands set to maintain a planting depth of at least  inch and shall be set to space the rows not more than num inches apart .
seed that is extremely small shall be sowed from a separate hopper adjusted to the proper rate of application .
if strips greater than num inches between the rows have been left unplanted or other areas skipped the engineer will require additional seeding at the contractors expense .
when requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer seeding may be accomplished by broadcast or hydraulic type seeders at twice the rate specified in the contract at no additional cost to the project .
all seed sown by broadcasttype seeders shall be raked in or covered with soil to a depth of at least  inch .
broadcasting seed will be permitted only on small areas not accessible to machine methods .
hydraulic seeding equipment and accessories shall conform to the equipment and accessories described in subsection numc .
seeded areas damaged due to circumstances beyond the contractors control shall be repaired and reseeded as ordered .
payment for this corrective work when ordered shall be at the contract prices .
multiple seeding operations shall be anticipated as portions of job are completed to take advantage of growing conditions and to comply with section num and subsection num .
method of measurement the quantities of lawn seeding and native seeding will not be measured but shall be the quantities designated in the contract except that measurements will be made for revisions requested by the engineer or for discrepancies of plus or minus five percent of the total quantity designated in the contract .
the quantity of lawn seeding shall include soil preparation water fertilizer and seed completed and accepted .
the quantity of native seeding shall include soil preparation fertilizer soil conditioner and seed applied completed and accepted .
the quantity of sod to be measured will be the actual number of square feet num num including soil preparation water fertilizer and sod completed and accepted .
when soil conditioner is measured and paid for separately it will be measured by the actual number of acres to which soil conditioner is applied and will be paid for as soil conditioning .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with seed certifications and analysis fertilizer analysis and bag weight tickets prior to placing any seed or fertilizer .
any seed or fertilizer placed by the contractor without the engineers approval will not be paid for .
measurement for acres will be by slope distances .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of lawn seeding native seeding soil conditioning and sod will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit seeding lawn acre seeding native acre sod square foot soil conditioning acre soil preparation water seed fertilizer and soil conditioner incorporated into the seeding sodding or soil conditioning will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
adjusting or readjusting seeding or fertilizing equipment will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num mulching description this work consists of mulching the seeded areas furnishing and placing wood chip mulch in the planting beds and plant saucers furnishing and applying hydromulch with tackifier on roadway ditches and slopes furnishing and placing tackifier on mulch or soil on roadway ditches or slopes and furnishing and installing metal landscape border for the separation of planting beds in accordance with the contract or as directed .
mulching may be accomplished by the crimping method using straw or hay by the hydraulic method using wood cellulose fiber mulch or by other approved methods with approved materials .
when a specific mulching method is required it will be designated in the contract .
this work includes furnishing and applying sprayon mulch blanket or bonded fiber matrix on top of rock cuts and slopes after seeding or as temporary stabilization as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
materials shall conform to the following requirements .
a mulching .
materials for mulching shall consist of certified weed free field or marsh hay or straw of oats barley wheat rye or triticale certified under the colorado department of agriculture weed free forage certification program and inspected as regulated by the weed free forage act title num article num crs .
each certified weed free mulch bale shall be identified by one of the following num one of the ties binding the bale shall consist of blue and orange twine or num the bale shall have a regional forage certification program tag indicating the regional forage certification program number .
mulch shall be inspected for and regionally certified as weed free based on the regionally designated noxious weed and undesirable plant list for colorado wyoming montana nebraska utah idaho kansas and south dakota .
the contractor shall not unload certified weed free mulch bales or remove their identifying twine wire or tags until the engineer has inspected and accepted them .
the contractor shall provide a transit certificate that has been filled out and signed by the grower and by the department of agriculture inspector .
the contractor may obtain a current list of colorado weed free forage crop producers who have completed certification by contacting the colorado department of agriculture division of plant industry .
num num straw or hay in a stage of decomposition discolored brittle rotten or moldy or old dry mulch which breaks in the crimping process will not be accepted .
the type and application rate of mulch material shall be as designated in the contract .
b wood cellulose fiber mulch .
wood cellulose fiber mulch shall consist of virgin wood fibers manufactured expressly from clean whole wood chips .
the chips shall be processed in such a manner as to contain no growth or germination inhibiting factors .
fiber shall not be produced from recycled materials such as sawdust paper cardboard or residue from pulp and paper plants .
the wood cellulose fibers of the mulch must maintain uniform suspension in water under agitation .
upon application the mulch material shall form a blotter like mat covering the ground .
this mat shall have the characteristics of moisture absorption and percolation and shall cover and hold seed in contact with the soil .
the contractor shall obtain certifications from suppliers that laboratory and field testing of their product has been accomplished and that it meets all of the foregoing requirements pertaining to wood cellulose fiber mulch .
the wood cellulose fiber mulch shall conform to the following specifications property requirement percent moisture content num num percent organic matter wood cellulose fiber num num percent ash content num num ph num num water holding capacity num grams oven dried basis per num grams of fiber c mulch tackifier .
material for mulch tackifier shall consist of a freeflowing noncorrosive powder produced either from the natural plant gum of plantago insularis desert indianwheat or pregelatinized num percent natural corn starch polymer .
the powders shall possess the following properties plantago insularis desert indianwheat property requirement test method ph num solution num num mucilage content num min .
astm dnum num num pregelatinized num percent natural corn starch polymer property requirement organic nitrogen as protein num ash content num fiber num ph num solution num num size num thru num microns num mesh settleable solids num all fibers shall be colored green or yellow with a biodegradable dye .
the material used for mulch tackifier shall not contain any mineral filler recycled cellulose fiber clays or other substances which may inhibit germination or growth of plants .
water shall conform to subsection num. d wood chip mulch .
wood chip mulch shall consist of fresh moist pole peelings material having approximate dimensions width  to  inch length num to num inches the contractor shall submit a sample to the engineer for approval at least num days prior to placing on the project .
e metal landscape border .
the metal landscape border shall consist of a strip of metal such as steel conforming to astm anum or approved equal .
f sprayon mulch blanket .
spray on mulch blanket shall be one of the following unless otherwise shown on the plans num sprayon mulch blanket type num shall be a hydraulically applied matrix containing organic fibers water soluble crosslinked tackifier and reinforcing interlocking fibers .
the reinforcing interlocking fibers may be natural or synthetic or a combination thereof .
mulch blanket type num shall conform to the following properties requirement test method organic fibers num min .
astm dnum cross linked tackifiers num num min .
reinforcing interlocking fibers num num min .
biodegradability num astm dnum ground cover at application rate num min .
astm dnum functional longevity num months min .
cure time num hours application num num the organic fiber shall not contain lead paint printing ink varnish petroleum products seed germination inhibitors or chlorine bleach .
the organic fibers and reinforcing interlocking fibers can not be produced from sawdust cardboard paper or paper byproducts .
num sprayon mulch blanket type num shall be a hydraulically applied matrix prepackaged in num pound bags containing both a soil and fiber stabilizing compound and thermally processed wood fiber .
the sterilized weedfree wood fiber mulch shall be manufactured through a thermomechanical defibrating process containing a specific range of fiber lengths averaging num inches or longer .
mulch blanket type num shall meet the following requirements property requirement test method fiber retention on nummesh screen num tyler rotap method moisture content num num total air dry weight basis organic matter num num oven dry weight basis ash content num num oven dry weight basis ph at num consistency in water num num sterilized weedfree yes nontoxic to plant or animal life yes application application rate num lb.acre the soil and fiber stabilizing compound shall be composed of linear anionic copolymers of acrylamide prepacked within the bag having a minimum content of num percent .
the compound shall conform to the following property requirement molecular weight numxnum charge density num nontoxic to plant or animal life yes g bonded fiber matrices bfm .
bfm shall consist of hydraulicallyapplied matrix with a minimum of num percent nontoxic thermally processed or refined long strand organic fibers and water soluble tackifier to provide erosion control and shall be designed to be functional for a minimum of num months .
bfms form an erosionresistant blanket that promotes vegetation and num num prevents soil erosion .
the bfm shall be num percent biodegradable .
the binder in the bfm shall also be biodegradable .
bfms shall conform to the following requirements property requirement test method ground cover num astm dnum biodegradability num astm dnum functional longevity months num month minimum cure time hours num crosslinked tackifier num minimum application application rate lbs.acre num the fibers shall not contain lead paint printing ink varnish petroleum products seed germination inhibitors or chlorine bleach .
fiber shall not be produced from sawdust cardboard paper or paper byproducts .
construction requirements a hay or straw mulching .
after seeding has been completed or when required for erosion control hay or straw shall be uniformly applied with no bare soil showing at the rate designated in the contract or as directed .
it shall be crimped in with a crimper or other approved equipment .
the engineer may order handcrimping on areas where mechanical methods can not be used .
the seeded area shall be mulched and crimped within four hours after seeding .
areas not mulched and crimped within four hours after seeding or prior to precipitation or damaging winds on site shall be reseeded with the specified seed mix at the contractors expense prior to mulching and crimping .
when tackifier is required in the contract it shall be applied in the following order num mulching num mulch tackifier .
b hydraulic mulching .
wood cellulose fiber mulch and mulch tackifier shall be added to water to form a homogeneous slurry .
the operator shall spray apply the slurry mixture uniformly over the designated seeded area .
hydraulic mulching shall not be done in the presence of free surface water .
mixing procedure for the hydraulic mulch and tackifier mixture shall be as follows num num num fill tank with water approximately  full .
num continue filling while agitating with engine at full rpm .
num pour tackifier at a moderate rate directly into area of greatest turbulence .
num with the recommended amount of tackifier in solution add wood cellulose fiber mulch .
do not add fertilizer .
apply the hydromulch and tackifier mixture at the following rate wood cellulose fiber mulch tackifier num lbs.acre num lbs.acre c mulch tackifier .
mixing procedure for mulch tackifier shall be as follows num fill tank with desired amount of water and run engine at full r.p.m .
num add wood cellulose fiber .
agitate until a homogenous nonlumpy slurry is formed .
do not add fertilizer num slowly sift powdered tackifier into slurry and continue to agitate for at least five minutes .
mulch tackifier shall be sprayed over hay or straw using a nozzle that will disperse the spray into a mist that will uniformly cover the mulch .
application rate apply this as an overspray at the following rate or as approved by the engineer .
powder wood cellulose fiber water num lbs.acre num lbs.acre num gal.acre d general .
mulch shall be tacked simultaneously or immediately upon completion of mulching and crimping to avoid nonuniform coverage .
areas not properly mulched or areas damaged due to the contractors negligence shall be repaired and remulched as described above at the contractors expense .
mulch removed by circumstances beyond the contractors control shall be repaired and remulched as ordered .
payment for this ordered corrective work shall be at the contract prices .
the engineer may order test sections be established for adjusting the mulching equipment to assure conformance with the specified application rate .
the engineer may order equipment readjustment at any time .
e wood chip mulch .
a numinch layer unless otherwise shown in the plans of num num wood chip mulch shall be uniformly applied to all planting beds as shown on the plans or as directed .
wood chip mulch shall be placed in all tree and shrub saucers in seeded areas .
wood chip mulch shall be capable of matting together to resist scattering by the wind .
f metal landscape border .
metal landscape border shall be installed along the lines and at the grades shown on the plans by an approved method that will not damage the border .
ends of metal landscape border shall overlap the next adjacent section a minimum of num inches .
metal landscape border shall be anchored with wire tiedowns at intervals of approximately num feet .
wire tie downs shall be num gage wire at least num inches long .
metal landscape border shall be inserted into the ground by driving against the wire tiedowns ground may be moistened to ease entrance into the ground .
driving on edge of metal landscape border will not be permitted except when the edge is properly shielded .
metal landscape border may be bent for sharp angles and overlapped at closure of perimeter .
g sprayon mulch blanket .
sprayon mulch blanket installation shall strictly comply with the manufacturers mixing recommendations and installation instructions .
no chemical additives with the exception of fertilizer soil ph modifiers extendedterm dyes and bio nutrients will be permitted .
the spray on mulch blanket shall be mixed and applied as follows the hydromulching vessel shall be filled with water to at least  capacity high enough to cover agitators prior to adding any material .
continue to fill vessel with water and slowly add the fibers while agitators are in motion .
run agitators at  speed .
continue to mix tank a minimum of num minutes prior to application .
apply sprayon mulch blanket in a uniform application using a minimum num degree arc type nozzle .
apply hydro slurry in two direction from top of slope down and from toe of the slope up as well as be applied at a minimum of two layers .
copolymer shall not be used use in channels swales or other areas where concentrated flows are anticipated and should not be used on saturated soils that have groundwater seeps .
h bonded fiber matrices bfm .
bonded fiber matrices shall strictly comply with the manufacturers mixing recommendations and installation instructions .
no chemical additives with the exception of fertilizer soil ph modifiers extendedterm dyes and bio stimulant materials shall be permitted .
bfms shall be applied in a uniform application using a minimum num degree arc type nozzle .
bfms shall be applied in two directions from top of slope down and from toe of the slope up as well as be applied at a minimum of two layers .
biodegradable bfms shall not be applied immediately before during or immediately after rainfall if the soil is saturated .
num num bfms shall not be used use in channels swales or other areas where concentrated flows are anticipated and shall not be used on saturated soils that have groundwater seeps .
foot traffic mechanical traffic or grazing shall not be permitted on treated areas until vegetated .
treated areas damaged due to circumstances beyond the contractors control shall be repaired or reapplied as ordered .
payment for corrective work when ordered shall be at contract unit prices .
method of measurement the quantity of hay and straw mulch wood chip mulch wood fiber and sprayon mulch blanket bonded fiber matrix and tackifier will not be measured but shall be the quantity designated in the contract except that measurements will be made for revisions requested by the engineer or for discrepancies of plus or minus five percent of the total quantity designated in the contract .
measurement for acres will be by slope distances .
the quantity of mulch tackifier to be measured will be the actual number of pounds of dry tackifier powder used .
metal landscape border will be measured by the linear foot of completed and accepted metal border .
measured length of metal landscape border will not include required overlap splices .
sprayon mulch blanket and bonded fiber matrix will be measured by the acre or by the actual pounds of product applied as shown on the plans .
the area will be calculated on the basis of actual or computed slope measurements .
the contractor shall verify prior to application weight of spray on mulch blanket and bonded fiber matrix bags for certification of materials and application rate .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit mulching acre mulching hydraulic acre mulching weed free hay acre mulching weed free straw acre mulching wood chip cubic foot mulch tackifier pound metal landscape border inch linear foot sprayon mulch blanket acre num num sprayon mulch blanket pound bonded fiber matrix acre bonded fiber matrix pound water wood fiber mixing and application for mulch tackifier will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
adjusting or readjusting mulching equipment will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for sprayon mulch blanket and bonded fiber matrix will be full compensation for all work and materials necessary to complete the item .
num num section num planting description this work consists of furnishing and planting trees shrubs wetland perennials and other plant material hereinafter referred to as plants and obtaining live brush layer cuttings from onsite willow species designated by the engineer near the project site and planting them in moist areas as shown on the plans or as directed .
materials general .
plants shall be of the species or variety designated in the contract in healthy condition with normal well developed branch and root systems and shall conform to the requirements of the current american standard for nursery stock .
the contractor shall obtain certificates of inspection of plant materials that are required by federal state or local laws and submit the certificates to the engineer .
all plants shall be free from plant diseases and insect pests .
all shipments of plants shall comply with all nursery inspection and plant quarantine regulations of the state of origin and destination and the federal regulations governing interstate movement of nursery stock .
the minimum acceptable sizes of all plants with branches in normal position shall conform to the measurements specified in the contract .
plants hardy in hardiness zones num num num and num only will be accepted .
hardiness zones are defined in u.s. department of agriculture publications .
all container grown plants shall be those plants that have been growing in a nursery for at least one growing season or plants that have established themselves in accordance with definitions set forth in the colorado nursery act title num article num crs .
trees and shrubs shall have been rootpruned during their growing period in the nursery in accordance with standard nursery practice .
if plants of acceptable quality and specified variety or size are not available locally the contractor may num substitute acceptable plants that are larger than specified at no change in contract price .
num on written approval substitute smaller plants than those specified in the contract at the adjusted price stated in the written approval .
num on written approval substitute plants of a different genus species or variety at the adjusted price stated in the written approval .
num num before any substitution of plants will be considered the contractor shall furnish to the engineer written statements from three sources verifying that the plants designated on the plans are not available .
at the landscape preconstruction conference the contractor shall name the nursery stock supplier for all items .
the contractor shall tag all nursery stock for inspection by the engineer .
the engineer will reject any nursery stock not meeting the contract at any of the three following times and locations num at the named suppliers location .
the engineer will notify the contractor when nursery stock will be inspected at the suppliers location .
num on the project site at the time of delivery prior to planting .
num at the time of installation .
final acceptance of all plant material will be made at the time of installation on the project site .
deciduous plants broadleaf evergreens and conifers shall be balled and burlapped or in containers used in standard nursery practice .
balling and burlapping shall conform to the recommended specifications in the american standard for nursery stock .
the ball of the plant shall be natural not made and the plant shall be handled by the ball at all times .
no balled and burlapped plant shall be accepted if the ball is broken or the trunk is loose in the ball .
each species shall be identified by means of growers label affixed to the plant .
the growers label shall include the data necessary to indicate conformance to specifications .
plants for fall planting shall be furnished balled and burlapped or containergrown unless otherwise designated in the contract or approved .
a brush layer cuttings .
brush layer cuttings taken from designated plants shall be at least num inch in diameter or larger .
brush layer cuttings shall be num to num inches long with the bottom end cut off at an angle and the top end with a straight cut .
cuttings shall be taken and installed while dormant in early spring .
cuttings shall not be planted when the ground is frozen .
brush layer cuttings shall be stored no longer than one week .
the cuttings shall be stored by submerging them at least  of their length in containers of water free from any harmful oil chemical sprays or other materials .
the containers shall be kept in the shade .
b wetland perennial plants .
perennial wetland plants shall be supplied in containers as designated in the contract no bare root material will be allowed .
the original plant stock for the plants shall be from colorado .
perennial plants shall have been growing at least one growing season in the nursery .
perennial shall not be shipped while in a dormant condition .
perennials shall be a minimum of num inches in height when applicable to the species .
water shall be applied to wetland perennial plants until soil is saturated .
wetland perennial plants shall be watered thoroughly every day for a period of one month .
num num c stakes .
wood stakes shall be num inches x num inches square or num  inch diameter and num feet long free from bends .
metal stakes shall be num feet long standard tbar steel fence post or num or larger rebar .
wood stakes shall be made of untreated wood guaranteed to last in the ground at least two growing seasons .
the bottom of wood stakes shall be pointed .
d soil conditioners and fertilizer .
soil conditioner shall consist of composted plant material num percent  inch or less with a carbon to nitrogen ratio of num to num .
a sample of the soil conditioner and certificate of compliance shall be provided to the engineer to verify the organic matter content and carbon matter to nitrogen ratio shall be submitted one month prior to planting for approval .
fertilizer for planting shall be used as specified in the contract .
construction requirements general .
all plants shall be protected from drying out or other injury .
broken and damaged roots shall be pruned before planting .
a planting seasons .
plants shall be planted in accordance with the contract .
areas to be planted shall be brought to the lines and grades designated or approved .
the location of plants shown in the contract is approximate to the degree that unsuitable planting locations shall be avoided .
trees shall be planted at least num feet from the edge of the traveled way except when guardrail or vertical curb exists this distance may be reduced to num feet .
locations and layouts shall be approved before preparatory work for planting is started .
shrubs shall not be planted closer than num feet from the edge of pavement .
all layout staking for planting shall be done by the contractor and shall be approved by the engineer before planting holes are prepared .
the contractor shall place all plant material according to the approved planting plans or as directed .
b excavation .
planting pits shall be circular in outline with vertical or sloped sides .
pits for trees and shrubs shall be at least two times greater in diameter than the earth ball .
c planting .
planting shall be done in accordance with good horticultural practices .
plants of upright growth shall be set plumb and plants of prostrate type shall be set normal to the ground surface .
plants with dry broken or crumbling roots will not be accepted for planting .
planting pits shall be dug num to num inches shallower than the height of the rootball for trees and num inches shallower for shrubs .
in nonirrigated areas planting pits shall be dug so that the top of the rootball is level with the final grade .
the tree rootball shall be set in the center of the planting pit on undisturbed soil .
trees shall be stabilized and then the wire basket any twine num num or wire and burlap shall be removed before the pit is backfilled .
shrubs shall be planted in the center of the pit .
plastic metal fabric or peat containers shall be removed .
shallow scores  to  inch deep shall be made along the edges of the rootball .
areas to be planted with ground cover shall be prepared by placing topsoil and a  inch layer of soil conditioner on the ground surface and rototilling to a depth of num inches .
ground cover shall be planted by excavating to a depth sufficient to accommodate the root structure of plant materials without crimping or bending roots .
after planting backfill shall be placed around the ground cover and compacted firmly around the roots .
the planted areas shall be brought to a smooth and uniform grade and then top dressed with a num inch mulch cover of the type specified on the plans .
d backfilling .
when soil conditioner is specified composted plant material shall be added and thoroughly mixed into the backfill material at the rate of num cubic foot per tree and num cubic foot per shrub .
backfill shall be thoroughly worked and wateredin to eliminate air pockets .
watering shall be done immediately after the plant is placed .
backfilling of the planting pit shall be resumed after this water is absorbed .
roots and crown shall be covered with soil at this time .
after the soil has settled plants must be in the proper position and at the proper depth .
saucers shall be prepared around each plant to the dimensions shown on the planting details .
when saucers are required they shall be covered with a num inch thick layer of fresh moist wood chip mulch conforming to section num .
after completion of all planting and before acceptance of the work the contractor shall water plants installed under this contract as needed to maintain a moist root zone optimum for plant growth .
plants damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
surplus soil remaining after backfilling is completed shall be used for constructing water retention berms or if not needed for berms shall be thinly distributed wasted in the vicinity subject to approval of the engineer .
e pruning .
all deciduous trees and shrubs shall be pruned in accordance with standard horticultural practice preserving the natural character of the plant .
guidelines for pruning are indicated in the planting details .
pruning cuts shall be made with sharp clean tools .
all clippings shall become the property of the contractor and be removed from the site .
f staking .
all deciduous trees num inch caliper and greater shall be staked with two stakes .
stakes shall conform to subsection numc .
stakes shall be driven num feet into the ground with one stake on the side of the prevailing wind generally the west side and the other stake on the opposite side .
stakes shall be driven at least num foot outside each edge of the planting pit .
trees shall be guyed with num to num inch wide strips of nylon webbing with metal grommets .
num num coniferous trees num feet or taller shall be staked as designated in the contract or as directed .
stakes shall be spaced equally around the tree .
trees specified to be guyed with wire shall be secured with no .
num gage annealed galvanized steel wire free of bends and kinks .
g wrapping materials .
wrapping material shall be horticulturally approved waterproof wrapping paper .
wrapping shall be applied from the base of the tree upward to the second scaffold branch and secured with arbor tape .
populus sp .
are exempt from tree wrap .
the contractor shall submit the manufacturers certification for the wrapping material requirements .
wrapping shall be done in the fall months prior to freeze and removed in the spring .
wrapping shall not remain on any trees throughout the summer months .
wrapping shall be removed by the contractor .
all plant tags shall be removed from plants and all packing or other material used by the contractor shall be removed from the site .
h brush layer cuttings .
using a rock bar or other tool holes at least num inches deep shall be made in the stream bank or other areas .
a cutting shall be placed in each hole .
if in riprap the hole shall be backfilled with soil to within num inches of the riprap surface .
the top num inches of the void shall be filled with gravel from the stream bank or streambed and compacted slightly .
the remaining exposed length shall be cut off num to num inches above the ground line .
the placement of these cuttings shall be in areas shown on the plans that remain damp or are seasonally inundated as directed .
brush layer cuttings shall be planted at a density of one cutting per square yard on streambank or other designated areas that have been regraded riprapped or disturbed .
the strip that is most successful for brush layer cutting establishment is only several yards wide and approximately plus or minus num feet from the ordinary high water line .
water shall be applied to the brush layer cuttings planted areas until the soil mass is saturated .
brush layer cuttings shall be watered thoroughly every day for a period of one month .
i irrigation .
plantings that are to be irrigated shall be planted so that the irrigation system is operating and supplying the designated amount of water as planting is occurring .
plants shall be watered within num minutes of planting .
landscape establishment .
from the time of installation during construction and throughout the landscape establishment period the contractor shall maintain all plant material and seeded areas in a healthy and vigorous growing condition and ensure the successful establishment of vegetation .
this includes performing establishment replacement work and landscape maintenance work as described below .
num num the beginning of the landscape establishment period depends upon receipt of the written notice of substantial landscape completion from the engineer .
substantial landscape completion occurs when all plant materials in the contract have been planted and all work under sections num num num and num has been performed except for the section num pay item landscape maintenance .
if the notice of substantial landscape completion is issued during the spring planting season the landscape establishment period begins immediately and lasts for a period of num months .
if the notice of substantial landscape completion is issued at any other time the landscape establishment period begins at the start of the next spring planting season and lasts for a period of num months .
a establishment and replacement .
after all planting on the project is complete a plant inspection shall be held including the contractor engineer and cdot landscape architect to determine acceptability of plant material .
during the inspection an inventory of rejected material will be made and corrective and necessary cleanup measures will be determined .
dead dying or rejected material shall be removed each month during the landscape establishment period as directed .
plant replacement shall be performed during the spring planting seasons at the beginning and end of the landscape establishment period .
plant replacement stock shall be planted in accordance with the contract and is subject to all requirements specified for the original material .
plant replacement shall be at the contractors expense .
b landscape maintenance .
during the landscape establishment period the contractor shall perform landscape maintenance as described herein .
the contractor shall maintain all landscaped areas in the condition they were in when first installed and accepted .
prior to the notice of substantial landscape completion the contractor shall submit a detailed maintenance plan which includes a schedule showing the number of hours or days personnel will be present the type of work to be performed supervision equipment and supplies to be used emergency program and responsible person to contact for emergency work and inspection schedule .
the detailed maintenance plan is subject to review and approval by the engineer .
the engineer will not issue the notice of substantial completion until the engineer has received and approved the maintenance plan .
the proposed types brand names material safety data sheets and rates of application of herbicides pesticides and fertilizers to be used shall be submitted for approval with the detailed maintenance plan .
herbicides pesticides and fertilizers shall meet all local state and federal regulations and shall be applied by a licensed applicator .
the contractor shall perform startup watering programming operation and fall winterization of the irrigation system .
the contractor shall do a spring startup of the irrigation system prior to final acceptance and perform all irrigation system warranty work as specified in section num .
num num the contractor shall keep a project diary documenting all landscape and irrigation maintenance activities including work locations and time spent .
the contractor shall provide copies of the diary to the engineer upon request .
the contractor shall restore and reseed eroded areas and areas of poor establishment in accordance with sections num and num .
the contractor shall maintain staking and guying until the end of the landscape establishment period .
the contractor shall remove all guying wire straps and stakes at the end of the landscape establishment period .
during the landscape establishment period the contractor shall water cultivate and prune the plants and repair replace or readjust guy material stakes and posts as required or directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall reshape plant saucers repair washouts and gullies replace lost wood chip mulch keep all planting sites free from weeds and do other work necessary to maintain the plants in a healthy and vigorous growing condition .
this includes seasonal spraying or deep root watering with approved insecticides or fungicides as required .
num .
watering in irrigated areas .
trees planted at all locations on the project shall be watered once per month at the rate of num gallons per tree for the months november through april until the landscape establishment period ends .
shrubs planted at all locations on the project shall be watered once per month at the rate of num gallons per shrub for the months november through april until the landscape establishment period ends .
num .
watering in nonirrigated areas .
trees planted shall be watered twice per month by the contractor at the rate of num gallons per tree per watering for the months may through october and once per month at the rate of num gallons per tree for the months november through april of the num month period following planting .
shrubs planted in upland areas shall be watered twice per month by the contractor at the rate of num gallons per shrub per watering for the months may through october and shall be watered once per month at the rate of num gallons per shrub for the months november through april of the num month period following planting .
the contract performance bond required by subsection num shall guarantee replacement work during the plant establishment period .
if all other work is completed on a project no contract time will be charged during the plant establishment period .
method of measurement the quantity of planting to be measured will be the number of plants of the types and sizes designated in the contract that are actually planted and accepted .
num num the quantity of brush layer cuttings will be measured by the actual number planted complete in place and accepted .
landscape maintenance will not be measured but will be paid for on a lump sum basis .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of planting and brush layer cuttings will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the various items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment for the total cost of the item will be made at the completion of planting .
cost of the performance bond shall be included in the cost of the plant items .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit _____ tree ____inch caliper each _____ tree ____foot each _____ shrub ____gallon container each perennials ____quart container each perennials ____gallon container each brush layer cuttings each landscape maintenance lump sum r water required for all items of work will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment shall be full compensation for all work necessary to complete the item .
for each month that landscape maintenance is performed and accepted during the landscape maintenance period as specified in subsection num payment for landscape maintenance will be made in installments as follows num num percent of the lump sum amount will be paid for each of the eight growing season months march through october .
num num percent of the lump sum amount will be paid for each of the winter months november through february .
landscape maintenance performed during construction will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
landscape establishment except for landscape maintenance will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num transplanting description this work consists of transplanting trees shrubs plugs of wetland material including root mats from existing wetlands and other plant material hereinafter referred to as plants of the designated species in accordance with this specification and accepted standard horticultural practice at the designated locations .
transplanting season is that period when plants are in a dormant condition and can be moved .
dormant means that deciduous material is without leaves and coniferous material is without new candle growth .
transplanting done in periods not considered dormant transplanting season shall require advance approval .
materials plants to be transplanted shall be those which are flagged on the project site within the right of way or as directed .
plugs shall be dug from areas noted in the contract or as directed by the engineer .
removal shall be dispersed throughout the areas so as not to impact the existing wetland .
plugs shall be taken in early spring when plants are emerging .
plugs shall be a minimum of num inches in diameter and num inches to num inches deep with the root mat to remain intact .
plugs shall not be stockpiled but shall be transplanted directly to wetland mitigation sites as directed .
transplanting shall be accomplished the day they are dug .
plugs shall be kept moist and shall not be placed in holding beds construction requirements plants shall be dug properly pruned and prepared for transplanting in accordance with standard practice .
the root system shall be kept moist and plants shall be protected from adverse conditions due to climate and transporting from the time they are dug to the actual planting .
prior to removal for transplanting all coniferous trees shall be sprayed with an approved antidesiccant .
the following table represents the minimum diameter of root balls for collected plants .
type num collected pinon pine caliper min .
ball dia .
num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch h num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num num num to num inch num inch type num all collected plants other than pinon pine caliper min .
ball dia .
num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch for caliper sizes larger than those given under type num the ratio of ball diameter to caliper shall be num .
planting pits for balled and burlapped trees shall be circular in outline with vertical sides .
pits shall be at least two times greater in diameter than the earth ball .
before a tree is placed in a plant pit the pit shall be filled half full of water .
backfill shall be thoroughly worked and watered to eliminate air pockets .
unsuitable backfill soils shall be replaced .
trees shall be machine transplanted with tree spades .
the following table represents the minimum size of spade machine equipment to be used for transplanting plants based upon caliper size .
the table also represents the minimum diameter of rootballs for machine transplanted plants .
min .
spade machine size caliper based upon root ball width num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch num to num inch num inch each tree shall be transported to the new site using the same spade with which it was dug or several trees may be spadedug and transported in a pod trailer manufactured specifically for this purpose .
trees shall not be removed from spade or transported in a haul truck .
the contractor shall give the engineer one week notice prior to transplanting trees .
at the time of transplanting the engineer will designate a department landscape architect to be on the site to oversee all tree planting .
planting pits for machinedug trees shall have the same dimension as the machine ball being placed .
before a tree is placed in a planting pit the pit shall be filled half full of water and allowed to drain .
once the tree is placed voids in the pit shall be filled with clean suitable backfill and tamped .
if unsuitable soil is encountered in the planting pits the contractor shall dispose of said material and num num backfill with suitable material as determined by the engineer .
after the tree is planted collected or machine transplanted a basin shall be built to hold at least num gallons of water .
for each inch of trunk diameter greater than num inches the basin capacity shall be increased by num gallons .
the depth of saucer shall not be below the top of the root system of the tree .
the basin shall be filled with water three times and allowed to stand each time until empty before refilling .
saucers shall be covered with a num inch thick layer of fresh moist wood chip mulch as shown on the plans .
the size of mulch shall be approximately  to  inch wide and num to num inches long .
a sample shall be submitted in advance to the engineer for approval .
transplanting shall be accomplished within one day .
trees shall not be placed in holding beds .
all transplanted trees shall be subject to a num day maintenance period during one or more growing seasons and shall be watered every seven calendar days .
each watering shall be num gallons per tree .
all transplanted trees shall be guyed in accordance with standard plan m num num .
guying material shall be removed at the end of the num day maintenance period .
all trees damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced and replanted at the contractors expense as approved .
at the end of the num day maintenance period all dead trees shall be replaced and replanted with trees at the contractors expense .
further maintenance will not be required .
the contractor shall not damage existing landscaped areas including but not limited to turf irrigation equipment and other plants during the transplanting operation .
the contractor may use suitable platform material over existing turf to prevent damage from heavy machinery .
wetland plugs shall be a minimum of num inches in diameter and num to num inches in depth .
holes left in the existing wetlands from plug removal shall be filled with topsoil and tamped lightly .
after tamping the filled hole shall be at the same elevation as the existing surrounding wetlands .
transplant plugs shall be placed in containers one plug per container after harvesting to facilitate handling and placing of material .
plugs shall be spaced as directed in the contract .
plugs shall be planted to match surrounding grade .
water shall be applied to plugs until soil is saturated .
plugs shall be watered thoroughly every day for a period of one month .
the quantity of transplanting to be measured will be the actual number of plants of the various types transplanted and accepted .
num num the quantity of transplanted trees to be measured will be the actual number of trees of the various calipers and types transplanted and accepted in their final location .
caliper measurement shall conform to the usa standard for nursery stock sponsored by the american association of nurserymen inc. only living plants in healthy condition at the end of the maintenance period will be accepted .
if all other work is completed on the project contract time will not be charged during the maintenance period .
the quantity of transplanted plugs to be measured will be the actual number of plugs transplanted and accepted in their final locations .
the accepted quantities of transplanting measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit transplant tree inch each transplant shrub each transplant plug each water required will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
hauling plants to their new location removing unsuitable backfill and providing clean suitable backfill for planting pit voids will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work num num section num soil retention covering description this work consists of furnishing preparing applying placing and securing soil retention blankets and turf reinforcement mats for erosion control on roadway slopes or channels as designated in the contract .
materials soil retention covering shall be either a soil retention blanket or a turf reinforcement mat as specified in the contract .
it shall be one of the products listed on cdots approved products list and shall conform to the following a soil retention blanket .
soil retention blanket shall be composed of degradable natural fibers mechanically bound together between two slowly degrading synthetic or natural fiber nettings to form a continuous matrix and shall conform to the requirements of tables num and num .
the blanket shall be of consistent thickness with the fiber evenly distributed over the entire area of the mat .
when specified lightweight polypropylene netting shall be num pounds per num square feet heavyweight netting shall be num pounds per num square feet .
when biodegradable blanket is specified the thread shall be num percent biodegradable polypropylene thread is not allowed .
when photodegradable netting is specified the thread shall be polyester biodegradable or photodegradable .
blankets and nettings shall be nontoxic to vegetation and shall not inhibit germination of native seed mix as specified in the contract .
the materials shall not be toxic or injurious to humans .
class num blanket shall be an extended term blanket with a typical num month functional longevity .
class num blanket shall be a long term blanket with a typical num month functional longevity .
the class of blanket is defined by the physical and performance characteristics .
num .
soil retention blanket strawcoconut .
soil retention blanket straw coconut shall be a machine produced mat consisting of num percent certified weed free agricultural straw or colorado native grass straw and num percent coconut fiber .
the blanket shall be either biodegradable or photodegradable .
blankets shall be sewn together on a maximum num inch centers .
netting shall be as follows when biodegradable netting is specified the top and bottom netting shall be num percent biodegradable organic jute fiber .
netting shall be constructed using a weave unattached at intersections which allows the strands of the net to move independently of each other .
num num when photodegradable netting is specified the bottom side shall be lightweight polypropylene .
the top side shall be heavyweight or lightweight polypropylene .
num .
soil retention blanket excelsior .
soil retention blanket excelsior shall consist of a machine produced mat of num percent curled wood excelsior num percent of which shall be num inches or longer in fiber length .
it shall be either biodegradable or photodegradable .
blankets shall be sewn together at a maximum of num inch centers .
netting shall be as follows when biodegradable netting is specified the top and bottom netting shall be num percent biodegradable organic jute fiber .
netting shall be constructed using a weave unattached at intersections which allows the strands of the net to move independently of each other .
when photodegradable netting is specified the bottom side shall be lightweight polypropylene .
the top side shall be heavyweight or lightweight polypropylene .
num .
soil retention blanket coconut .
soil retention blanket coconut shall be a machine produced mat consisting of num percent coconut fiber .
it shall be either biodegradable or photodegradable .
netting shall be as follows when biodegradable netting is specified the top and bottom netting shall be num percent biodegradable organic jute fiber .
netting shall be constructed using a weave which is unattached at the intersections and which allows the strands of the net to move independently of each other .
when photodegradable netting is specified the bottom and top side shall be heavyweight polypropylene .
num num table num physical requirements for soil retention blanket photodegradable or biodegradable blankets photobio degradable class minimum roll width minimum thickness astm dnum acceptable matrix fill material min .
mass per unit area astm dnum size of net opening photo degradable bio degradable num num ft. num mils straw coconut num ozsy minimum numxnum minimum numxnum maximum numxnum maximum numxnum num num ft. num mils excelsior num ozsy minimum numxnum none maximum numxnum num num ft. num mils coconut numozsy minimum num xnum minimum numxnum maximum numxnum maximum numxnum table num performance requirements for soil retention blanket photodegradable or biodegradable blankets photobio degradable class slope application c factornum astm dnum minimum tensile strength mdnum astm dnum num num at num num lbin num num at num num lbin notes num c factor is calculated as ratio of soil loss from soil retention blanket protected slope tested at specified or greater gradient numhnumv to ratio of soil loss from unprotected control plot in largescale testing .
num md is for machine direction testing along the length of the roll .
blankets shall be tested for physical properties and have published data from an independent testing facility .
large scale testing of slope erosion protection c factor shall be performed by an independent testing facility .
num num b turf reinforcement mat .
turf reinforcement mat trm shall be a rolled mat consisting of uv stabilized corrosion resistant nondegradable synthetic fibers filaments or nets processed into a permanent threedimensional matrix of the thickness specified in tables num and num .
trms shall provide sufficient thickness strength and void space to permit soil filling and retention and the development of vegetation within the matrix .
the class of trm is defined by the physical and performance characteristics as specified in the following tables .
table num physical requirementsnum for turf reinforcement mat product class minimum roll width minimum thickness astm dnum acceptable matrix fill materialnum size of net openingnum num num ft. num mils excelsior strawcoconut coconut or polymer fibers minimum numxnum maximum numxnum num num ft. num mils num uv stabilized synthetic or coconut fibers maximum numx num num num ft. num mils num uv stabilized synthetic fibers maximum numx num notes num for trms containing degradable components all property values shall be obtained on the nondegradable portion of the matting alone .
num for trms with nets and fill material .
netted trms shall be sewn together on a maximum num inch centers .
num num table num performance requirements for turf reinforcement mat product class tensile strength md astm dnum minimum uv stability at num hours astm dnum minimum permissible shear stressnum unvegetated astm dnum num num lbsft num num lbssf num num lbsft num num lbssf num num lbsft num num lbssf notes num permissible shear stress is the minimum shear stress that a product must be able to sustain when placed on a channel unvegetated without physical damage or excess soil loss .
failure is defined as  inch of soil loss during a num minute flow event in large scale testing .
trms shall be tested for physical properties and have published data from an independent testing facility .
large scale testing of permissible shear stress shall be performed by an independent testing facility .
c staples .
staples shall be made of ductile steel wire num inches in diameter num inches long and have a num inch crown .
t shaped staples will not be permitted .
a sample of the staples and a certificate of compliance coc including the manufacturers product data showing that the product meets the contract requirements shall be submitted for approval at the environmental pre construction conference .
installation of the blanket will not begin until approval has been received from the engineer in writing .
d earth anchors .
the mechanical earth anchor shall be composed of a load bearing face plate a tendon rod or wire rope and a locking head or percussion anchor .
each element of the anchor shall be composed of corrosion resistant materials .
the anchor and wire rope shall have a breaking strength of num pounds utilizing standard tensile testing and astm anum .
the anchor shall have a minimum num pounds ultimate holding strength in normal soil and a manufacturers recommended minimum driven depth of num feet .
a sample of the anchors and a certificate of compliance coc including the manufacturers product data showing that the product meets the contract requirements shall be submitted for approval at the environmental pre construction conference .
installation of the blanket will not begin until approval has been received from the engineer in writing .
num num construction requirements the contractor shall install soil retention coverings in accordance with standard plan mnum and the following procedure num prepare soil in accordance with subsection num a .
num apply topsoil or soil conditioning as directed in the contract to prepare seed bed .
num place seed in accordance with the contract .
num unroll the covering parallel to the primary direction of flow .
num ensure that the covering maintains direct contact with the soil surface over the entirety of the installation area .
num do not stretch the material or allow it to bridge over surface inconsistencies .
num staple the covering to the soil such that each staple is flush with the underlying soil .
num ensure that staples or earth anchors are installed full depth to resist pull out .
no bent over staples will be allowed .
install anchor trenches seams and terminal ends as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall install trms using the following procedure num place num inches of topsoil or soil amended with soil conditioning .
num apply half of the specified seed at the broadcast rate and rake it into the soil .
num install trm .
num place num inch of topsoil or soil amended with soil conditioning into the matrix to fill the product thickness .
num apply the remaining half of the specified seed at the broadcast rate and rake it into the soil .
num install soil retention blanket photodegradable or biodegradable class num over the seeded area and trm .
when applicable the covering shall be unrolled with the heavyweight polypropylene netting on top and the lightweight polypropylene netting in contact with the soil .
slope application .
soil retention coverings shall be installed on slopes as follows the upslope end shall be buried in a trench num feet beyond the crest of the slope if possible .
trench depth shall be a minimum of num inches unless required by the manufacture to be deeper .
before backfilling begins staples shall be placed across the width of the trench .
the trench shall then be backfilled to grade with soil amended with soil conditioning or topsoil compacted by foot tamping and seeded .
fabric shall be brought back over trench and secured with staples or earth anchors at num foot on center .
there shall be an overlap wherever one roll of fabric ends and another begins with the uphill covering placed on top of the downhill covering .
staples shall be installed in the overlap .
num num there shall be an overlap wherever two widths of covering are applied side by side .
staples shall be installed in the overlap .
staple checks shall be installed on the slope length at a maximum of every num feet .
each staple check shall consist of two rows of staggered staples .
the down slope end shall be buried in a trench num feet beyond the toe of slope .
before backfilling begins staples shall be placed across the width of the trench .
the trench shall then be backfilled to grade with soil amended with soil conditioning or topsoil compacted by foot tamping and seeded .
fabric shall be brought back over the trench and secured with staples or earth anchors .
if a slope runs into state waters or can not be extended num feet beyond the toe of slope the end of covering shall be secured using a staple check as described above .
coverings shall be securely fastened to the soil by installing staples or earth anchors at the minimum rate shown on the standard plan mnum .
staple or earth anchor spacing shall be reduced where required due to soil type or steepness of slope .
channel application .
soil retention coverings shall be installed as follows on a channel application coverings shall be anchored at the beginning and end of the channel across its entire width by burying the end in a trench .
trench depth shall be a minimum of num inches unless a larger depth is specified by the manufacturers recommendations .
before backfilling begins staples shall be placed across the width of the trench .
the trench shall then be backfilled to grade with soil amended with soil conditioning or topsoil and compacted by foot tamping and seeded .
fabric shall be brought back over the trench and stapled .
covering shall be unrolled in the direction of flow and placed in the bottom of the channel first .
seams shall not be placed down the center of the channel bottom or in areas of concentrated flows when placing rolls side by side .
there shall be an overlap wherever one roll of covering ends and another begins with the upstream covering placed on top of the downstream covering .
two rows of staggered staples shall be placed .
there shall be an overlap wherever two widths of covering are applied side by side .
staples shall be placed in the overlap .
the covering shall have a channel check slot every num feet along the gradient of the flowline .
check slots shall extend the entire width of the channel .
the covering shall be buried in a trench .
before backfilling begins staples shall be placed across the width of the trench .
the trench shall then be backfilled to grade with soil amended with soil conditioning or topsoil compacted by foot tamping and seeded .
fabric shall be brought back over the trench and continued down the channel .
coverings shall be securely fastened to the soil by installing staples at the minimum rate shown on the plans .
staple spacing shall be reduced where needed due to soil type or high flows .
num num maintenance .
the contractor shall maintain the soil retention coverings until all work on the contract has been completed and accepted .
maintenance shall consist of the repair of areas where damage is due to the contractors operations .
maintenance shall be performed at the contractors expense .
repair of those areas damaged by causes not attributable to the contractors operations shall be repaired by the contractor and will be paid for at the contract unit price .
areas shall be repaired to reestablish the condition and grade of the soil and seeding prior to application of the covering .
method of measurement soil retention coverings including staples complete in place and accepted will be measured by the square yard of finished surface excluding overlap which is installed and accepted .
earth anchors will be measured by the actual number of earth anchors complete in place and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of soil retention coverings will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the accepted quantities of earth anchors will be paid for at the contract unit price for each installed .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit soil retention blanket _ photodegradable class _ square yard soil retention blanket _ biodegradable class _ square yard turf reinforcement mat class _ square yard earth anchors each preparation of seedbed fertilizing and seeding will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
placing and preparation of seedbed fertilizing and seeding of soil under the trm layer will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
topsoil or amended soil and seed placed on the trm will be measured and paid for in accordance with sections num and num .
staples will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num herbicide treatment description this work consists of furnishing and applying herbicides to prevent or control plant growth in areas shown on the plans or designated .
materials herbicides shall be designated in the contract .
all herbicide labels shall be currently registered with the colorado department of agriculture and the u.s. environmental protection agency .
all herbicides shall be supplied to the project in labeled containers .
the labels shall show the product name chemical composition expiration date and directions for use .
construction requirements all herbicides shall be applied by commercial pesticide applicators licensed by the colorado department of agriculture as qualified applicators .
the contractor shall furnish documentation of such licensing prior to herbicide application .
herbicide mixing and application shall be done in accordance with instructions on the registered product label .
the engineer shall be furnished such label information prior to mixing and application .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours prior to each herbicide application and shall indicate the time and location application will begin .
application will not be allowed on saturdays sundays or holidays unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
herbicides shall not be applied when weather conditions including wind conditions are unsuitable for such work .
herbicides shall not be applied when soil is extremely dry .
herbicide application method shall be such that plant growth outside the designated treatment areas will not be damaged .
all damage caused by improper herbicide application shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
herbicides shall not be used on areas that are to be topsoil sources unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the quantity of herbicide treatment to be measured will be the actual number of square yards treated in accordance with the foregoing requirements or the actual number of hours the contractor spends applying the herbicide and accepted by the engineer .
areas designated to receive herbicide treatment will be num num measured once for each designated application .
reapplication of herbicide required due to inappropriate timing of the original application will not be measured or paid for .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of herbicide treatment will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or per hour .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit herbicide treatment square yard herbicide treatment hour water will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num environmental health and safety management description this work consists of protection of the environment persons and property from contaminants that may be encountered on the project .
this includes monitoring the work for encounters with contaminants or suspected soil and groundwater contaminants the management of solid special and hazardous waste and management of visual emissions associated with hazardous waste when encountered on the project .
the contractor shall furnish all personnel materials equipment laboratory services and traffic control necessary to perform the contamination monitoring testing and site remediation when required .
traffic control shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
monitoring equipment used to detect flammable gas oxygen level and toxic gas shall be capable of detection to meet the following standards construction requirements general .
prospective bidders including subcontractors are required to review the environmental documents available for this project .
these documents are listed in subsection num as revised for this project .
this project may be in the vicinity of property associated with petroleum products heavy metal based paint landfill buried foundations abandoned utility lines industrial area or other sites which can yield hazardous substances or produce dangerous gases .
these hazardous substances or gases can migrate within or into the construction area and could create hazardous conditions .
the contractor shall use appropriate methods to reduce and control known landfill industrial gases and visible emissions from asbestos encounters and hazardous substances which exist or migrate into the construction area .
the contractor shall follow cdots asbestoscontaminated soil management standard operating procedure dated august num num for proper handling of asbestoscontaminated soil and follow all applicable solid and hazardous waste regulations for proper handling of soils encountered that contain any other substance mentioned above .
instrument detection constituent threshold limit increments flammable gas num lel num oxygen num num toxic gas num ppm num ppm lel lower explosive limit ppm parts per million num num encountering suspected contaminated material including groundwater old foundations building materials demolition debris or utility lines that may contain asbestos or be contaminated by asbestos is possible at some point during the construction of this project .
when suspected contaminated material including groundwater is encountered or brought to the surface the procedures under subsection numd and num shall be followed .
transportation of waste materials on public highways streets and roadways shall be done in accordance with title num code of federal regulations cfr .
all labeling manifesting transportation etc .
of waste materials generated on this project shall be coordinated with the engineer .
all hazardous waste manifests for waste materials generated on this project shall list the colorado department of transportation as the generator of the waste materials except as otherwise noted .
if the contractor contaminates the site the contractor shall be listed as the generator on the hazardous waste manifests permits and other documents for such material .
if the project is not on a state highway or frontage road then the appropriate local governmental entity having jurisdiction over the transportation system facility shall be listed as the hazardous waste generator .
if waste materials must be handled in a permitted treatment storage and disposal tsd facility the facility shall be designated in writing by the engineer .
if the waste materials are the result of the contractors actions the contractor shall designate the facility .
the hazardous waste transportation phase of the work involves insurance required by law and regulations .
if the waste materials are determined to be hazardous the contractor must submit proof that the transportation company is covered by the appropriate type and amount of insurance required by laws and regulations governing the transportation of hazardous waste .
the contractor alone bears the responsibility for determining that the work is accomplished in strict accordance with all applicable federal state and local laws regulations standards and codes governing special waste petroleum and hazardous substance encounters and releases .
the contract will list known or suspected areas of contamination .
health and safety officer monitoring technician and health and safety plan shall be required when so stated in the contract .
a health and safety officer hso .
the contractor shall designate a hso not the project superintendent who shall have at least two years field experience in chemical related health and safety .
the hso shall be either a certified industrial hygienist cih certified hazardous materials manager chmm professional engineer pe licensed in the state of colorado certified safety professional csp or registered environmental manager rem meeting the criteria set forth in num cfr num .
when asbestos is present or is suspected to be present the hso shall have additional training and certification in accordance with the air quality control commission regulation no .
num part b .
the hso shall meet the minimum training and medical surveillance requirements established by the occupational safety and health num num administration osha and the environmental protection agency epa for a supervisory site safety official per num cfr num .
the contractor shall furnish documentation to the engineer at the preconstruction conference that the above requirements have been met .
the hso shall be equipped with the following num communication equipment as required in subsection numdnum.a .
and a vehicle .
num monitoring and detection equipment for flammable gas oxygen sufficiency toxic gas radiological screening and other hazards .
this includes as required a combustible gas indicator flame ionization or photo ionization detector oxygen meter radiation monitor with geiger mueller detector and other foreseeable equipment .
num depth gauging equipment sampling equipment and sampling containers .
num personal protective equipment levels c and d when required .
the hso shall recommend and supervise those actions which will minimize the risk of hazardous substance related injury to the workers department personnel the general public property and the environment .
hazardous substance is defined in num cfr num .
the hso shall prepare written procedures for the monitoring of confined space entry and working in or near excavations including but not limited to trenches and drill holes associated with this project .
the hso shall conduct or supervise all hazardous substance and solid waste related testing sampling monitoring and handling for this project to ensure compliance with applicable statutes and regulations and other applicable environmental requirements under subsections num and num .
the hso shall be available for consultation and assistance with contaminated materials related testing sampling and field monitoring as required by the engineer .
the hso shall prepare and submit a bound and indexed final site report to the engineer at the end of the project .
this site report shall include a detailed summary of all contaminated materials and contaminated water that were encountered and their final disposition .
during each week the hso is utilized the hso shall prepare a daily diary which shall be submitted to the contractor and the engineer .
this diary shall be submitted at the end of the week and shall become a part of the departments records .
the diary shall contain a chronological log of activities on the project including dates and times on site equipment used and calibrations field monitoring results visual observations conversations directives both given and received and disposition of suspected hazardous substances .
the engineer will review this submittal and approve the actual number of hours to be paid .
b monitoring technician mt .
the contractor shall designate a monitoring technician to be responsible for monitoring of hazardous substances during num num work on the project .
the mt shall have a minimum of two years of actual field experience in assessment and remediation of hazardous substances that may be encountered during highway construction projects .
the mt shall be experienced in the operation of monitoring devices identifying substances based upon experience and observation and field sampling for testing of all media that may be found on the site .
completion of the num hour hazardous waste and num hour supervisory training required by osha and u.s. epa rules and regulations which complies with the accreditation criteria under the provisions of the proposed num cfr num is required prior to beginning work .
the contractor shall furnish documentation at the preconstruction conference that demonstrates these requirements have been met .
the mt shall be equipped with the following num communication equipment as required in subsection numdnum.a .
and a vehicle .
num monitoring and detection equipment for flammable gas oxygen sufficiency toxic gas radiological screening and other hazards .
this includes as required a combustible gas indicator flame ionization or photo ionization detector oxygen meter radiation monitor with geiger mueller detector and other foreseeable equipment .
num personal protective equipment levels c and d when required .
the mt shall be present on site and perform monitoring as required by numd when work is being performed in areas of suspected contamination and on a predetermined basis throughout other work on the project .
the mt shall monitor for compliance with regulations the project health and safety plan and the materials management plan if they exist for the project the contract and the environmental documents for the project .
the mt shall immediately notify the contractor the engineer and the hso of any hazardous condition .
during each week the mt is utilized the mt shall prepare a daily monitoring diary which shall be submitted to the contractor hso and the engineer .
this diary shall be submitted at the end of the week and shall become a part of the departments records .
the diary shall contain a chronological log of activities on the project including dates and times on site equipment used and calibrations field monitoring results visual observations conversations directives both given and received and disposition of suspected hazardous substances .
the engineer will review this submittal and approve the actual number of hours to be paid .
c health and safety plan hasp .
the hso shall prepare a written hasp for the project formatted as shown in appendix b occupational safety and health guidance manual for hazardous waste site activities dhhs niosh publication number num available from the superintendent of documents u.s. government printing office .
the contractor and the hso shall review the num num environmental documents listed prior to preparation of the hasp .
four signed copies of the hasp shall be furnished to the engineer for acceptance .
the engineer shall have seven calendar days to review and accept or reject the proposed hasp .
within five calendar days after acceptance the hso shall distribute signed and stamped or sealed copies of the accepted hasp to each emergency response agency servicing the project area the hasp designated emergency hospital and five copies to the engineer .
earth or demolition work shall not occur until after the hasp is accepted and the hasp has been distributed .
the hasp shall also be available to the contractors employees their representatives and officials of osha epa colorado department of public health and environment cdphe local government health department federal highway administration and other appropriate agencies and officials as may be designated by the engineer .
the engineer will distribute the accepted hasp to appropriate department personnel .
the hasp shall be kept current and shall be revised by the hso as warranted by changes in the field conditions .
all onsite workers contractors departments utilities and others shall be briefed by the hso on the contents of the hasp and any revisions thereof .
the hso shall conduct briefings group or individual to inform new employees subcontractors utility companies and other onsite workers of the hasp contents prior to their entry on site .
all personnel involved in excavation or other soil disturbing activities shall receive the required two hour asbestos awareness training by a certified asbestos inspector when asbestos discoveries are anticipated or discoveries are made .
a signature log of all briefing attendees shall be kept and furnished to the engineer .
the contractor shall provide as required eye wash equipment and stations emergency showers hand and face washing facilities and first aid equipment .
the contractor shall provide as required decontamination facilities for personnel and equipment employed in the work .
the exact procedure for decontamination and frequency shall be included in the accepted hasp .
decontamination facilities shall meet the criteria set forth in the code of federal regulations num cfr and num cfr .
d precautions and procedures .
the following minimum precautions and procedures shall be followed during the construction of the project num .
general construction precautions a .
all monitoring and piezometer wells and test borings shall be established or abandoned by the contractor as regulated by the state engineers office .
copies of all required permits notification and abandonment documents shall be submitted to the engineer prior to payment approval .
b .
hazardous substance related activities shall have a work plan for each work phase which shall be coordinated with the engineer at least three num num working days prior to commencement of each phase of the work .
c. the contractor shall properly handle all investigation derived waste generated by this project .
documentation shall be submitted to the engineer of all tests performed for treatment storage and disposal tsd determination classification of waste hauling records tsd acceptance manifest if required etc .
in accordance with applicable laws and regulations .
d. when the work may involve air emissions the contractor shall contact the colorado department of public health and environment cdphe air pollution control division to ascertain if an air pollution emission notice apen or permit is required for this operation .
the contractor shall be responsible for filing the apen and obtaining said permit if required .
the processing of air pollution permits if required in nonattainment areas or where public hearings are required likely will take more than num days .
num .
for construction on a known or potentially contaminated site the following conditions shall apply in addition to those listed in subsection numdnum a .
the hso shall be on site or readily available by radio telephone or pager at all times during the work .
when on site the hso shall have an operational portable or mobile cellular telephone available for immediate use in areas where such service is available .
when on site in cellular telephone nonservice areas the hso shall have available for immediate use radio access to a site with telephone service .
the hso shall be notified at least num hours prior to the start of confined space entry storage tank removal drilling excavation trenching or dewatering operations .
b .
the hso shall designate the onsite monitoring equipment for flammable gases oxygen deficient or enriched atmosphere and toxic gases such as but not limited to a flame ionization detector photoionization detector combustible gas indicator and oxygen meter .
this designated equipment shall be on site during all construction operations and be utilized during trenching drilling excavating confined space entry underground storage tank removal and other appropriate construction operations .
the exact equipment to fulfill this requirement shall be specified in the accepted hasp .
the hso shall conduct or supervise the monitoring .
the monitoring equipment shall be calibrated as recommended by the manufacturer .
c. when drilling trenching or excavating in the presence of detectable concentrations of explosive gases the soil shall be wetted and the operating equipment shall be provided with spark proof exhausts .
d. the contractor through the hso is responsible for ensuring that num cfr num is fully complied with during the construction of the project .
num num e. affected excavation operations shall be discontinued and personnel shall be removed from the affected excavation sites where any of the following levels are detected num num percent or more lel flammable gas or num percent in an underground or confined space num permissible exposure limit pel of any toxic gas num num percent or less oxygen num num percent or more oxygen num greater than num mremhr .
beta particle photon radioactivity num greater than num pcil gross alpha particle activity or num other action levels as determined by the hso .
num uncovering of suspect asbestos containing material acm including but not limited to buried facility components active or abandoned utility lines buried foundations and demolition debris or miscellaneous acm dispersed in the soil .
the contractor shall follow the procedures outlined in the hasp and num cfr num to address these conditions .
work shall resume in these areas when approved by the engineer .
f. personnel shall be issued and utilize appropriate health and safety equipment as determined by the hso who shall provide the engineer with a written explanation of what personal protective equipment ppe shall be worn when and by which personnel .
except in emergency cases the engineer shall be advised by the hso of changes in the degree of ppe prior to implementation .
g. personnel shall avoid the area immediately downwind of any excavation unless the excavation is monitored and declared safe .
h. the operators of excavating trenching or drilling equipment shall wear appropriate ppe as required in the hasp .
i .
exhaust blowers shall be present at the location where required in the accepted hasp .
j .
the contractor shall accomplish the work with employees who have been trained and equipped as required by the hasp and applicable provisions of num cfr num and num cfr num .
k. fire extinguishers electrical equipment and wiring shall conform to the applicable requirements of num cfr num and num cfr .
l. smoking shall not be permitted within num feet of any excavation .
num .
for construction within num feet of a known or potentially contaminated site the following conditions in addition to those listed in subsection numdnum .
shall apply num num a .
the areas under construction shall be checked with a combustible gas indicator before excavation begins to determine if flammable or combustible gas is in the area .
b. excavations trenches and drill holes shall be monitored by the hso for flammable gas toxic gas and oxygen deficiency or enrichment .
this shall be carried out continuously unless the presence of flammable combustible or toxic gas or oxygen deficiency or enrichment in the area can be ruled out by the hso .
the recommendation to discontinue monitoring must be agreed to by the engineer and the contractor .
prior to implementation this agreement shall be written and shall contain specific conditions that will require reevaluation of the area .
c. when flammable or toxic gas is found in the area those precautions and procedures in subsection numdnum shall apply .
num .
the following procedures shall be followed if the level of contamination as documented in the environmental documents referenced in subsection num as revised for this project is exceeded or if previously unidentified contaminated air soil or water is encountered during the construction of the project a .
work in the immediate area of the release or discovery of contamination shall cease .
the engineer shall be immediately notified .
b .
if no hso is required by the contract the contractor shall designate an hso as directed in accordance with subsection numa .
c. the engineer may direct the hso to evaluate the material for potential hazardous substance or other contamination or unsafe conditions .
this evaluation may include but is not limited to on site field monitoring on site testing and on or off site laboratory analysis .
removal of storage tanks and surrounding contaminated soils shall be in accordance with applicable laws regulations and established procedures .
if the contaminated material can not be placed in the embankment or remediated on site it must be removed to an appropriate tsd facility as designated in writing by the engineer .
the hso shall supervise the necessary testing required to make appropriate tsd determinations .
disposal of the unsuitable material shall be considered as remediation work as described in subsection numdnum.d and numdnum.e .
d. if this site is determined to be contaminated with petroleum products hazardous substances or other solid waste in excess of that indicated in the above listed site investigation documents a thorough site investigation and waste management plan shall be accomplished under the supervision of the hso .
the site investigation and waste management plan shall be submitted to the engineer for approval and shall determine the extent of num num contamination and propose at least three types of remedial action for the contaminated area as required by applicable statutes and regulations .
the hso shall be available to assist the engineer in explaining this study to the regulatory agencies .
when requested by the engineer the contractor shall prepare a remediation plan based on the selected remedial method and shall submit this to the engineer for approval .
the time required for the engineers review of the remediation plan including all necessary drawings calculations specifications and other documentation will not exceed four weeks after a complete submittal is received .
this work shall not be done unless authorized in writing by the engineer .
e. if the site is determined to be contaminated with petroleum products hazardous chemicals materials or wastes or other solid wastes and is required to be remediated the hso or other qualified individuals will supervise the remediation plan implementation as concurred to by the regulatory agencies as directed .
hazardous waste generated by remedial activities shall list the colorado department of transportation as the hazardous waste generator on the required paperwork for projects on state highways and their associated frontage roads .
if this project is not on a state highway or frontage road then the appropriate local governmental entity having jurisdiction over the transportation system facility shall be listed as the hazardous waste generator .
if the waste disturbed or produced was caused by contractor negligence the contractor shall be listed as the hazardous waste generator .
remediation work shall be done only when authorized by the engineer in writing .
heavy metal based paint management .
when the work includes the removal of paint or items covered with paint which may contain lead chromium or other heavy metals the requirements of this subsection shall apply in addition to the requirements of subsection num .
the requirements of the hasp shall be in accordance with osha publication number num working with lead in the construction industry .
paint removal and waste disposal work shall be performed in accordance with num cfr num state and local air quality regulations the steel structures painting council sspc guide for containing debris generated during paint removal operations the industrial lead paint removal handbook sspc num and the references contained therein .
the following minimum precautions and procedures shall be followed unless modified in the approved hasp or its updates a the contractor shall contact the cdphe air pollution control division to ascertain if an air pollution permit is required for the cleaning or demolition work .
if an air pollution permit is required the contractor shall obtain the permit .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a copy of the permit application and the permit issued prior to starting cleaning or demolition activities .
a copy of the air pollution emission notice apen shall be num num provided to the engineer if such notice is required under the colorado air quality control commissions regulations .
the processing of air pollution permits in nonattainment areas or where public hearings are required likely will take more than num days .
b the contractor shall contain paint chips corrosion residues and spent abrasives herein referred to as waste materials resulting from the cleaning or demolition operations .
the contractor shall not deposit or release waste material into the water air or onto the ground below or adjacent to the structure .
the contractor shall conduct cleaning operations to minimize the waste materials produced .
prior to beginning the work the contractor shall submit to the engineer for acceptance a detailed methods statement for capturing testing and disposing of the removed materials .
the engineer will have seven calendar days to review and accept or reject this methods statement .
c abrasives utilized for blast cleaning shall be lowdusting and low waste .
unless approved otherwise vacuum blasting or wheel blasting shall be used .
d the hso shall sample and test the waste material for lead chromium and other paint associated heavy metals using the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp test method num of the epa publication test methods for evaluating solid waste num .
sample collection methodology and frequency shall be recommended by the hso and accepted by the engineer with an adequate number of samples taken to be representative of all waste material collected .
if the waste material does not pass the tclp test it shall be disposed of in a permitted tsd facility as designated in writing by the engineer .
the waste materials handling decision shall be documented by a report five copies submitted to the engineer .
this documentation shall include a description of sample collection methodology testing performed test results and comparison of test results with hazardous waste requirements .
the waste material shall not be held at an unpermitted tsd facility site in excess of resource conservation and recovery act rcra temporary storage time limits .
e when an item coated with paint is removed all loose paint shall be removed and collected from the item within num hours of the time it is removed or placed onto the ground .
all loose paint shall be removed and collected from a painted item before it is removed from the site .
the contractor shall contain loose paint until it is removed and collected .
loose paint is defined as that which can be removed by manual scraping methods .
over waterways the contractor shall capture all paint debris by the method specified in the methods statement .
the paint debris shall be collected on a daily basis and shall be stored in a properly labeled tightly sealed container and placed in a secured location at the end of each working day .
f all painted steel components which are not designated to be salvaged shall be recycled .
contractor possession of the steel for future use shall be considered a form of recycling .
prior to transport of the components offsite the contractor shall obtain a letter from the recipients of the painted steel num num components stating that they have been fully informed of the contents of the paint and are capable of handling the paint .
if the contractor is to maintain future possession of the steel the contractor shall supply this letter .
if there will be more than one recipient of the painted material one letter shall be obtained from each recipient .
the contractor shall provide a copy of each letter to the engineer .
if the painted steel components will be recycled by melting the letter from the recipient is not required .
the contractor shall submit a letter stating the destination of the painted steel components and that they will be melted .
g when the work consists of the removal of a bridge or components of a bridge coated with paint which has been assumed to contain lead chromium other heavy metals or a combination thereof the contractor shall capture paint debris which is dislodged during removal operations .
the contractor may choose any method for dismantling the bridge subject to the following required construction sequence limitations num the concrete deck shall be removed prior to removal of the steel superstructure .
num if the methods statement indicates that girders will be dropped to the ground during dismantling all debris from the concrete deck removal operation shall be removed from the area below the bridge before any girders are dropped into this area .
num girders may be cut and dropped only if the span is located entirely over land .
material handling .
this work consists of the additional handling of groundwater and soils to be excavated for construction of the project which are suspected or known to be contaminated .
this work also includes stockpiling or containerization analytical sampling and testing and final disposition of contaminated groundwater and soils requiring special handling .
the contractor shall maintain vertical trench walls for the work in the specified areas of known or potential contamination as shown on the plans .
shoring may be necessary to meet this requirement .
the contractor shall confine the removal of contaminated groundwater and soils encountered as a result of the excavation activities in the specified areas to the vertical and horizontal limits of structure excavation specified in the contract .
the contractor shall be responsible for any contaminated materials generated beyond the limits of excavation .
this shall include any sampling analysis and disposal required and the costs thereof .
the contractor shall be listed as the generator of any such material .
the limits of excavation shall be determined as num inches outside of structures including sewers water lines inlets manholes and other underground structures to be constructed or as directed .
specific areas of known or potential contamination have been identified in the project plans .
there is the potential of encountering contaminated groundwater and soil which has not been summarized in the plans or specifications at unknown locations on the site .
suspected contaminated soil and groundwater shall be handled by one of three methods as follows num num a materials handling stockpile containerization .
when recommended by the hso and authorized by the engineer material shall be stockpiled or containerized for analysis and characterization for proper handling and disposal or both .
sampling and testing of materials shall be as described in the contract .
if analysis indicates that soil samples are designated as uncontaminated as determined by the criteria shown in the contract or as determined by the cdphe the associated soils will not require any special handling and will become the property of the contractor and may be used on site subject to other requirements of the contract .
health and safety monitoring and strict fugitive dust control shall be conducted during the placement of these soils .
if analysis indicates that groundwater samples are designated as uncontaminated as determined by the criteria shown in the contract or as determined by the cdphe the groundwater shall be handled in accordance with subsection num .
stockpiled and containerized materials shall be secured in compliance with the following provisions until they are determined to be uncontaminated num the contractor shall not store the material for more than num days .
num the contractor shall prevent any runoff from infiltrating the ground or running out of the containment area .
num soils and groundwater containing different contaminants shall be placed in separate containers or stockpiles .
num the contractor shall prevent the dispersion of materials or the dilution or mixing of containers and stockpiles .
num the ground surface on which the contaminated soils will be placed shall be covered with plastic sheeting which will withstand the placement and removal of stockpiled materials without breaching .
num the ground surface shall be graded to drain toward the edge of the soil piles and the berm or trench around them shall be covered by plastic sheeting .
num proper security shall be provided in accordance with num cfr .
b solid waste disposal .
soils determined to be contaminated but not hazardous as established by criteria in the contract or as determined by cdphe or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction shall be handled and disposed of as recommended by the hso and approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall haul this material to a solid waste disposal facility .
c contaminated groundwater disposal .
groundwater determined to be contaminated but not hazardous as established by criteria in the contract or as determined by cdphe or other regulatory agencies having jurisdiction shall be handled and disposed of as recommended by the hso and approved num num by the engineer .
the contractor shall prepare a dewatering plan proposing at least three types of treatment andor disposal options of contaminated groundwater as required by applicable statutes and regulations .
one of the treatment options shall include permitting and onsite treatment prior to discharge or disposal .
the dewatering plan shall be submitted to the engineer for approval four weeks before dewatering activities begin .
d hazardous waste disposal .
soils and groundwater that are designated or suspected to be hazardous shall be containerized immediately upon excavation or upon discovery .
hazardous material shall be labeled and transported to a permitted treatment storage and disposal tsd facility or to a hazardous waste disposal facility approved by the engineer .
e additional requirements .
stockpiled or containerized material characterized as uncontaminated contaminated or hazardous shall be stored and disposed of in a manner consistent with current established federal state and local regulations for waste materials .
materials with contaminants not specifically regulated shall be disposed of by the contractor as directed in consultation with cdphe .
all areas where wastes are generated shall be reviewed by the hso to identify potential contaminant sources that may result in a contaminated waste stream .
contaminated groundwater and soils which have been identified as solid waste or hazardous waste requiring disposal according to federal state and local regulations shall be transported in accordance with num cfr by the contractor to an appropriately permitted treatment facility landfill incinerator or asphalt plant or other facility approved to accept the waste .
cdphe and the landfill or other treatment or disposal facility shall be notified by the hso of the material to be disposed of and the corresponding analytical test results prior to shipment .
potentially contaminated water collected from the lined trench of a stockpile shall be treated as required by colorado wastewater discharge permit system cdps permits num cfr and num cfr and reimbursed separately in accordance with contract requirements .
sample delivery .
this work consists of the collection containerization and delivery of material samples for analysis to the testing facility designated in the contract .
environmental protection agency epa protocol and standards shall be followed in the collection containerization and transport of samples to be analyzed including the documentation of the proper chain of custody of all samples .
the contractor shall collect sufficient sample material to perform the required analysis and is responsible for ensuring that appropriate climate control has been provided for sample transport .
sample delivery shall be made within the maximum allowable holding time for each sample type not to exceed num hours excluding weekends .
the time period required for sample collection and delivery to the testing facility will not be considered an excusable delay .
the analysis to be completed and turnaround time shall be approved by the engineer .
num num the contractor shall provide the engineer with a copy of documentation indicating that proper chain of custody requirements have been followed for all samples .
quality control samples shall be provided by the contractor in accordance with the quality control requirements of the testing facility designated in the contract quality control requirements are available from the engineer .
the contractor shall prepare label and transport these samples to the testing facility in conjunction with the delivery of other samples authorized for analysis by the engineer at no additional cost .
the engineer may request splits of samples in advance of collection which shall be provided at no additional cost by the contractor .
asbestoscontaining material management .
environmental documents or plans listed in the special provisions include known or suspected locations that could involve encounters with acm during excavation and other soil disturbing construction activities .
unexpected discoveries of acm may be made during excavation and soil disturbing construction activities .
asbestos contaminated soil shall be properly managed or remediated in accordance with subsection numa .
all asbestos related activities shall be performed by colorado certified asbestos professionals contractors or consultants .
certifications are issued by the colorado department of public health and environment cdphe indoor air quality unit .
a colorado certified asbestos professional shall manage the management and disposal of asbestos contaminated soil and other acm .
the indoor air quality unit within cdphe is the only unit that certifies such professionals .
the contactor shall furnish a copy of the license to the engin a regulatory compliance .
asbestos contaminated soil management is governed by num ccr num section num which includes and references regulatory compliance with asbestos hazard emergency response act ahera colorado regulation num .
inspection and reporting protocol and demolition standards are governed by ahera .
demolition and notification standards are governed by national emission standards for hazardous air pollutants neshaps .
colorado regulation num governs all asbestos activities demolition permitting and certification of certified asbestos professionals in the state of colorado .
colorado regulation num is more stringent than ahera and neshaps and supersedes federal regulations .
conflicting regulatory requirements between ahera and neshaps if not specifically addressed in colorado regulation num shall be addressed and approved protocol negotiated with cdphe .
the contractor shall conform to all current regulations policy directives or both issued by the epa cdphe and the department .
b asbestos management and visual inspections asbestos management must be performed by a certified asbestos professional .
final inspections of the area of asbestos contaminated soil removal shall be performed by an asbestos consultant to determine what if any controls must be instituted to allow future activity in the excavation area .
all final visual inspections shall be conducted only when soil is dry .
num num c permitting and notification .
the cdphe requires notification of any soil disturbing activity where asbestos is known suspected or discovered .
a num hour notification to cdphe is required prior to any soil disturbing activity of an unplanned asbestos discovery .
a num working day notification to cdphe is required prior to any soil disturbing activity in an area with known or potential material suspected of containing asbestos in or on the soil or asbestos contaminated soil .
removal of asbestoscontaining material on a facility component that is located on or in soil that will be disturbed with asbestos quantities above the following trigger levels must be permitted and abated in accordance with the requirements of air quality control commission regulation no .
num num ccr num part b num num linear feet on pipes num num square feet on other surfaces or num the volume of a numgallon drum .
all permit applications shall be submitted to the colorado department of public health and environment a minimum of num days prior to start of work for approval .
the permit application and notification shall be submitted simultaneously .
the contractor shall obtain all required state and local permits and shall be responsible for all associated fees .
permit application notification and waiver request forms shall be submitted to colorado department of public health and environment permit coordinatorapcd ss bnum num cherry creek drive south denver co num phone num num fax num num application and waiver forms are available on the cdphe website httpswww.colorado.govpacificcdpheasbestosforms d cdots asbestoscontaminated soil management standard operating procedure dated august num num .
asbestos contaminated soil shall be managed in accordance with num ccr num section num asbestos waste management regulations .
regulations apply only upon discovery of asbestos materials during excavation and soil disturbing activities on construction projects or when asbestos encounters are expected during construction .
the contractor shall comply with procedures detailed in the cdphes asbestos contaminated soil guidance document and cdots approved asbestos contaminated soil management standard operating procedure dated august num num including the following minimum requirements num immediate actions and implementation of interim controls to prevent visible emissions exposure and asbestos contamination in surrounding areas .
num soil characterization .
num num num training required for all personnel involved in excavation and other soil disturbing activities once asbestos is encountered during construction or on projects where asbestos encounters are expected .
asbestos awareness training shall be given by a qualified and certified asbestos building inspector with a minimum of six months experience inspecting asbestos contaminated soil .
num assessment for the presence and extent within the proposed area of disturbance of asbestos discoveries whether expected or unexpected by a certified asbestos inspector .
num investigation and sampling required for risk assessment and management .
investigation if required shall be conducted by a certified asbestos inspector .
num risk assessment and determinations for further management or abatement .
i risk assessment and determinations must be made by a certified asbestos inspector and coordinated with the engineer .
ii soil remediation is not necessarily required depending on the circumstances .
num submit numhour notification of unplanned asbestos discovery .
num submit numday notification of planned asbestos management .
e risk assessment and determinations for further management or remediation .
risk assessment and determinations for further management or remediation must be closely coordinated with the project engineer and project manager of the statewide management plan .
methamphetamine lab sites .
demolition of former methamphetamine meth labs is enforced by the governing authority which varies from county to county .
the contractor shall demolish all buildings that are identified as former meth labs as listed in public listings by the governing authority .
the contractor shall provide evidence of demolition to the governing authority obtain receipt of such evidence by the governing authority and shall submit these to engineer immediately following demolition .
septic tank removal at known meth lab sites shall undergo preliminary assessment by an industrial hygienist or certified industrial hygienist to determine proper removal and disposal .
work shall proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the hygienist .
num num method of measurement environmental health and safety management will not be measured but will be paid for on a lump sum basis .
this will include all work materials and hourly time charges by the hso and other personnel required to accomplish the following num preparation submittal and briefing of the initial hasp .
num preparation and submittal of the waste management plan .
i preparation and submittal of the dewatering plan .
ii preparation and submittal of the remediation plan .
num procedures and equipment specified in subsections num num .
num ppe levels c and d for contractors personnel for any contamination identified in the preconstruction investigations .
num preparation and submittal of the final site report .
the quantity to be measured for health and safety officer will be the total number of hours that the health and safety officer is actually used as authorized for the following work num field monitoring necessary to ensure the safety of workers on the site .
num hours in excess of the items listed under environmental health and safety management .
num hours that are necessary due to unforeseen site conditions .
num hours of additional consultation or field work that is requested by the engineer .
equipment specified in subsection numa preparation and submittal of the daily hso diary travel to and from the project site and ppe levels c and d required for use by the hso will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the hourly cost of the hso .
the quantity to be measured for monitoring technician will be the total number of hours that monitoring technician is actually used as authorized .
equipment specified in subsection numb supervision of the mt preparation and submittal of the daily monitoring diary travel to and from the project site and ppe required for use by the mt levels c d will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the hourly cost of the mt .
solid stockpiled materials will be measured by the cubic yard computed from cross sections by the average end area or other acceptable method .
disposal of solid waste and solid hazardous waste materials will be measured by the cubic yard in the disposal container .
num num materials sampling and delivery will be measured by the actual number of samples collected containerized and transported to the testing facility indicated in the contract .
additional environmental health and safety management work required and authorized by the engineer but not included in the items listed above will be considered extra work to be paid for in accordance with subsection num unless such work is caused by the contractors action .
basis of payment partial payment for environmental health and safety management as determined by the engineer will be made as the work progresses .
the contractor shall submit a schedule of environmental related health and safety management work before the first partial payment is made .
the schedule shall indicate the environmental related health and safety management time for each work item that requires contractor environmental related health and safety management effort and the total time for the project .
the accepted quantity for health and safety officer will be the number of hours actually used and approved for payment by the engineer and will be paid for at the contract unit price .
the accepted quantity for monitoring technician will be the number of hours of onsite monitoring as approved by the engineer and will be paid at the contract unit price .
environmental health and safety management health and safety officer and monitoring technician bid items shall include vehicles phone charges supplies printing postage office support and all other miscellaneous costs associated with the work .
payment for groundwater handling containerization analysis will be made in accordance with subsection num .
payment for soil handling stockpile will be made at the contract unit price for all excavated material required to be stockpiled for analysis .
the contract unit price will be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete this work and all handling of the material prior to disposal .
this includes haul stockpile and security .
payment for this work will be in addition to any payment made under other bid items for excavation embankment or backfill on the project or waste disposal of this material .
payment for solid waste disposal and solid hazardous waste disposal will be made at the appropriate contract unit price for the disposal of material determined to be either solid waste or solid hazardous waste .
the contract unit prices will be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor equipment tools storage containers for transport containerization of material for up to num days and incidentals necessary to complete this work .
this includes all handling of the material loading for disposal unloading for disposal and borrow material num num required for replacement of excavated material disposed of offsite .
it does not include stockpiling or containerization required for analysis which is included in the item materials handling stockpile containerization paid for as described above .
payment for waste disposal fees and transport of hazardous waste will be made as shown below .
payment for this work will be in addition to any payment made under other bid items for excavation embankment backfill or material handling stockpile containerization on the project .
num solid waste .
transport costs to the disposal facility and disposal fees will be included in the contract unit price for this work .
num solid hazardous waste .
transport costs disposal fees and treatment costs will be paid for by planned force account in accordance with subsection num .
num liquid hazardous waste .
transport costs disposal fees and treatment costs will paid for by planned force account in accordance with subsection num .
the cost of shoring required to limit the removal of contaminated materials to the specified limits shall be included in the contract unit prices for any excavation to be performed .
such shoring ordered by the engineer in areas other than the specified areas of known or potential contamination as shown on the plans will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
payment for materials sampling and delivery will be made at the contract unit price for each material sample collected containerized and transported to the laboratory testing facility as designated in the contract .
the contract unit price will be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this work including required sampling kits containers sample splits and quality control samples .
the contractor shall be responsible for damage caused by contractor negligence to the environment persons or property .
expenditures associated with actions of the contractor shall be borne by the contractor at no cost to the project .
contaminated groundwater containerized treated or disposed under the requirements of this specification will be paid for by planned force account in accordance with subsection num .
the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
pay item pay unit environmental health and safety management lump sum health and safety officer hour monitoring technician hour materials sampling and delivery each materials handling stockpile cubic yard solid waste disposal cubic yard num num division num bases section num aggregate base course description this work consists of furnishing and placing one or more courses of aggregate and additives if required on a prepared subgrade .
materials aggregate .
the aggregates shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
acceptance will be based on random samples taken from each lift .
commercial mineral fillers .
portland cement shall conform to subsection num .
hydrated lime shall conform to subsection num .
construction requirements placing .
if the required compacted depth of the aggregate base course exceeds num inches it shall be constructed in two or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
the maximum compacted thickness of any one layer shall not exceed num inches .
when vibratory or other approved types of special compacting equipment are used the compacted depth of a single layer may be increased to num inches upon request provided that specified density is achieved and written approval is given .
mixing .
the contractor shall mix the aggregate by methods that insure a thorough and homogenous mixture .
shaping and compaction .
compaction of each layer shall continue until a density of at least num percent of the maximum density has been achieved as determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
the moisture content shall be at num percent of optimum moisture content .
the surface of each layer shall be maintained during the compaction operations so that a uniform texture is produced and the aggregates are firmly keyed .
moisture conditioning shall be performed uniformly during compaction .
compaction of each reclaimed asphalt pavement aggregate layer shall continue until a wet density of at least num percent of the maximum wet density when determined in accordance with a one point aashto t num method d test has been achieved .
the surface of the base course will be tested with a num foot straightedge or other num num approved device .
the surface shall be tested prior to the application of any primer or pavement .
the variation of the surface from the testing edge of the straightedge between any two contacts with the surface shall not exceed  inch .
all irregularities exceeding the specified tolerance shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
the above compaction and straightedge requirements shall not apply to shoulder gravel .
compaction of shoulder gravel shall be accomplished by wheel rolling as directed .
method of measurement aggregate base course will be measured by the ton or by the cubic yard compacted in place .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of aggregate base course of the class specified will be paid for at the contract price bid per ton or per cubic yard as shown in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit aggregate base course class ton cubic yard aggregate base course rap ton cubic yard water will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
commercial mineral fillers when used will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num or as provided in the contract .
num num section num reconditioning description this work consists of blading shaping wetting and compacting the existing subgrade with moisture and density control .
construction requirements the top num inches of the existing subgrade shall be reconditioned by blading and rolling .
sufficient water shall be added to meet the density requirements as specified in the contract .
the reconditioned surface shall not vary above or below the lines and grades as staked by more than num foot .
the surface shall be tested for smoothness and density prior to the application of any base course material .
where asphalt surfacing materials are to be placed directly on the subgrade the subgrade plane shall not vary more than num foot .
all irregularities exceeding the specified tolerance shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
the surface shall be satisfactorily maintained until base course has been placed .
method of measurement reconditioning will be measured by the square yard of subgrade including auxiliary lanes and shall include blading shaping scarifying compacting the subgrade finishing and maintenance of the finished surface .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of reconditioning will be paid for at the contract unit price for reconditioning .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit reconditioning square yard water will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num lime treated subgrade description this work consists of treating the earth subgrade by combining lime and water with the pulverized soil subgrade material to the specified depth and compaction requirements as shown on the plans .
materials lime .
lime for lime treated subgrade shall be applied in slurry form .
dry application of lime will not be allowed unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
commercial lime slurry shall be a pumpable suspension of solids in water .
lime for lime treated subgrade shall conform to the requirements of astm c num and rate of slaking test for moderate reactivity per astm c num and shall be the product of a highcalcium limestone as defined by astm c num .
water .
water used for mixing or curing shall be in accordance with subsection num with the additional requirement that the sulfate content shall be less than num ppm .
construction requirements general .
the contractor shall construct one or more compacted courses of treated material to the depth specified in the contract .
the treated material shall be a uniform blend of soil lime and water free from loose or segregated areas .
it shall have uniform density and moisture content and be void of all vegetation and other organic or manmade material .
the subgrade shall be well bound for its full depth and width with a smooth surface suitable for placing subsequent courses .
the contractor shall regulate the sequence of the work to accurately apply and uniformly blend the lime at the designated rate and rework the courses as necessary to meet the above requirements .
the contractor shall submit a mix design to the engineer for approval prior to constructing the test section .
the contractor shall mix hydrated or quicklime with water to produce lime slurry at the job site with equipment specifically manufactured for this purpose .
excessive aeration of lime slurry will not be permitted the limetreated subgrade shall not be mixed when it is raining or when the subgrade material is frozen .
the limetreated subgrade shall not be mixed or compacted if the temperature of the lime or soil is below num f. preparation of subgrade .
prior to beginning any lime treatment the subgrade shall be constructed and finished to smooth and uniform surfaces num num conforming to the grades and typical sections specified .
variation from the subgrade plane elevations specified shall not be more than num foot .
the subgrade shall also be proof rolled in accordance with subsection num .
soft or otherwise unsuitable subgrade disclosed by proof rolling shall be overexcavated and replaced to a compacted stable state .
the inplace density shall be at least num percent of aashto t num density within num percent of optimum moisture content .
test section .
prior to fullscale production the contractor shall construct a test section to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer subgrade stabilization using the materials equipment and methods to be used in fullscale production .
the test section shall be at least num feet long two spreading and mixing lanes wide and the same depth as the course represented in the plans .
the test section shall be constructed at a location approved by the engineer .
the test section shall be tested in accordance with the same test requirements for the lime and soil design mix and as determined by the contractor .
if the test section is unsatisfactory the contractor shall adjust the materials equipment and methods or combinations thereof as necessary to conform to the specifications .
additional test sections shall be constructed as required to produce a satisfactory test section prior to fullscale production .
unsatisfactory test sections shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
full production shall not begin until a satisfactory test section is completed and approved by the engineer .
prior to start of work the contractor shall determine the lime application rate and the maximum dry density and optimum moisture content of the material after it has been treated with lime .
all tests shall be performed in the presence of the engineer .
these test results will be used to determine the contract requirements for lime application .
proof rolling .
both prior to and after the lime treatment the contractor shall perform proof rolling in accordance with subsection num except that final proof rolling will take place a minimum of seven days after lime treatment unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
processing materials .
after the subgrade has been finished and approved as specified the subgrade shall then be cut and pulverized by a cutting and pulverizing machine to the depth and width shown on the plans .
precautions shall be taken to avoid forming furrows of loosened material below the depth specified for the limestabilized soil mixture .
the machine shall uniformly cut and pulverize the loosened material to a depth not greater than num percent over the thickness of the limetreated layer as specified in the contract and shall have cutters that plane the base of the cut and pulverize zone to a smooth surface over the entire width of the cut .
the machine must give visible indication at all times that it is cutting to the proper depth .
a lime application .
lime shall be applied in the form of a slurry on that area where the initial mixing operations can be completed during the same working num num day and at the specified percentage of hydrated lime by equipment capable of pumping and recirculating the mixture while in transit .
the slurry shall be applied through spray bars to assure a uniform flow and distribution .
b initial mixing .
initial mixing shall take place immediately after lime application .
the lime soil and water shall be thoroughly mixed and blended by a selfpropelled rotary type mixing machine until a uniform mixture throughout the required depth and width is obtained and all clods and lumps are reduced to a maximum num inch diameter size .
there shall be a minimum num inch overlap between passes to assure consistent mixing and breakdown .
the mixing machine shall make at least of two passes to uniformly mix the lime water and soil to the full depth of the pulverized layer .
nonuniformity of color reaction when the treated material is tested with the standard phenolphthalein alcohol indicator will be considered evidence of inadequate mixing .
streaks and pockets of lime will also be considered evidence of inadequate mixing and shall require additional mixing to correct .
the moisture content of the mixture immediately following the blending of water lime and soil shall not be less than optimum as determined by aashto t num plus necessary hydration moisture .
hydration moisture will be considered as one percentage point for each percent of lime being added .
when proper mixing has been accomplished the mixture shall be cured for at least num hours .
light rolling to seal the surface of the mixture shall be required .
the mixture shall be maintained in a moist condition throughout the entire curing period .
c final mixing .
after the required curing period the mixture shall be uniformly mixed by a selfpropelled rotary type mixing machine and maintained at approximate optimum moisture content as determined herein .
if the lime stabilized soil mixture contains clods they shall be reduced by approved pulverization so that the remainder of the material shall meet the gradation requirements of table num when tested dry by laboratory sieves .
if it is determined that additional lime needs to be added to the previously mixed subgrade the total depth of the subgrade shall be mixed .
compaction a compaction of the lime and soil mixture shall begin immediately after final mixing .
the material shall be aerated or sprinkled as necessary to maintain the mixture within the specified moisture content limits during and following compaction .
the field density for the compacted mixture shall be at least num percent of the maximum density of laboratory specimens prepared from samples taken from the lime soil material in place after curing and prior to compacting .
the specimens will be compacted and tested in accordance with aashto t num and the inplace field density will be determined in accordance with cp num .
any mixture that has not been compacted shall not be left undisturbed for more than num minutes .
the moisture content of the mixture at the start of compaction shall be at num num percent above the optimum num num moisture content .
the optimum moisture content will be determined in accordance with aashto t num. b the finished surface shall be smooth and uniform conforming to the typical sections specified .
all irregularities depressions or weak spots which develop shall be corrected immediately by scarifying the areas affected adding or removing material as required and reshaping and recompacting by sprinkling and rolling .
the surface of the course shall be maintained in a smooth condition free from undulations and ruts until other work is placed thereon or the work is accepted .
c in addition to the requirements specified for density the full depth of the materials shown on the plans shall be compacted to the extent necessary to remain firm and stable under construction equipment .
after each section is completed the engineer will conduct tests .
if the material fails to meet the density and strength requirements in accordance with the lime and soil design mix it shall be reworked to meet these requirements at the contractors expense .
throughout this entire operation the shape of the course shall be maintained by blading and the surface upon completion shall be smooth and shall conform with the typical section shown on the plans and to the established lines and grades .
variation from the subgrade plan elevations specified shall not exceed num foot .
should the material due to any reason or cause lose the required stability density or finish before the next course is placed or the work is accepted it shall be recompacted and refinished at the contractors expense .
finishing and curing .
when initial compaction of the top layer of the limestabilized soil mixture is nearing completion the surface shall be shaped to the required lines grades and cross section and compaction continued until uniform and adequate compaction is obtained .
the treated material shall be maintained at a moisture content satisfactory for proper curing by one of the following num sprinkling for a period of seven days .
num sprinkling for a period less than seven days until emulsified asphalt prime coat diluted num to num is applied in accordance with subsection num item num below .
num applying a protective film of emulsified asphalt prime coat diluted num to num with water immediately after the limetreated subgrade has been finished .
one application shall be made consisting of num gallon diluted mixture per square yard .
the completed section shall be cured for a minimum of seven days before further courses are added or any traffic is permitted unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
acceptable compressive strength test results shall be in a range from a minimum of num pounds per square inch to num pounds per square inch .
num num construction joints .
construction joints are not required after each days work unless there is a time lapse of seven days or more between the processing of adjacent sections .
if construction joints are required they shall be formed by cutting back into the completed work to form a vertical face .
damage to completed work shall be avoided .
thickness acceptance .
lime treated subgrade will be accepted for minimum thickness on a lot basis .
a lot will consist of num square yards .
one core shall be taken at random by the contractors process control inspector in each lot .
when the measurement of the core from a lot is not deficient by more than num inch from the minimum plan thickness full payment will be made .
when such measurement is deficient by more than num inch and not more than num inch from the plan thickness two additional cores shall be taken at random and used in determining the average thickness for that lot .
the thickness of the core shall be determined by average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with astm c num .
when the average measurement of the three cores is not deficient by more than num inch from the plan thickness full payment will be made .
if the average measurement of the three cores is deficient by more than num inch but less than num inch from the plan thickness the entire lot may be left in place and a num percent price reduction to the contract unit price will be made .
if the average measurement of the three cores is deficient more than num inch but less than num inches from the plan thickness the entire lot may be left in place and a of num percent price reduction to the contract unit price will be made .
when the average thickness is deficient by more than num inches the entire lot shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
num num table num schedule for minimum sampling and testing element and procedure process control acceptance remarks ph astm cnum app design astm gnum field num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof ph will be determined after lime has been established based on unconfined compressive strength atterburg limits aashto tnum tnum num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof reduce by  original pi swell potential astm dnum num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof  or less with num psf surcharge pressure unconfined compressive strength astm dnum procedure b num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof numsoil type num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof numsoil type .
determined by design plan criteria do not immerse in water after moistcure period .
the tests shall be conducted on samples cured in a moist environment for num days num f thickness acceptance astm cnum a lot is defined as num core per num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num sq.yds .
or fraction thereof when measurement is num num additional cores shall be taken in that lot and the average of num cores will determine the thickness of that lot gradation aashto tnum and tnum num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num num passing num num passing dry sieving after final mixing determining percent relative compaction soil aggregate by nuclear method cp num num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof num sq .
yds .
or fraction thereof minimum num of maximum dry density in accordance with aashto t num .
moisture content of mixture at the start of compaction shall be at num num above optimum moisture content moisture density curve aashto tnum numsoil type numsoil type sulfate cpl num numsoil type numsoil type water soluble sulfate content in soil shall be less than num by dry soil weight .
num num method of measurement hydrated lime will be measured by the ton .
if quicklime is used the pay quantity will be determined using the certified lime purity for each truckload as follows pure quicklime cao num hydrated lime caohnum quicklime delivered purity num a quicklime delivered inert material b a b total hydrated lime produced pay quantity processing limetreated subgrade will be measured by the square yard for the area completed and accepted .
overlap mixing will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment shall include all processing materials lime application and mixing compaction and materials used in curing .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit hydrated lime ton processing lime treated subgrade inch square yard test sections and coring will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
all proof rolling will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num division num pavements section num plant mix pavementsgeneral description these specifications include general requirements that are applicable to all types of hot mix asphalts irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and quantity of asphalt cement or pavement use .
deviations from these general requirements will be indicated in the specific requirements for each type .
this work consists of one or more courses of asphalt mixture constructed on a prepared foundation in accordance with these specifications and the specific requirements of the type under contract and in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
materials composition of mixtures .
the asphalt plant mix shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate filler or additives if required and approved asphalt cement and reclaimed material if permitted and used .
a mix design .
the contractor shall submit the following to the engineer num a proposed hot mix asphalt mix design prepared in accordance with colorado procedure num including a proposed jobmix gradation for each mixture required by the contract which shall be wholly within the master range table in subsection num before the tolerances shown in section num are applied .
the weight of lime shall be included in the total weight of the material passing the num m no .
num sieve .
num the name of the refinery supplying the asphalt cement and the source of the antistripping additive .
num a sufficient quantity of each aggregate for the department to perform the tests specified in sectionnum of cp num .
the contractors proposed jobmix formula for each hot mix asphalt grading will be tested by the department utilizing materials actually produced and stockpiled for use on the project .
the jobmix formula for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size a single percentage of asphalt cement to be added to the aggregate and a single temperature for the mixture at the discharge point of the plant .
when laboratory tests indicate that a proposed jobmix formula complies with the specifications as revised for the project a form num shall be executed between the engineer and the contractor to establish the jobmix formula .
num num b mixtures furnished to the project .
after the jobmix formula is established all mixtures furnished for the project shall conform thereto within the ranges of tolerances listed in table num table num numtolerances for hot mix asphalt asphalt content num asphalt recycling agent num numhot mix asphalt item num gradations numpassing the num mm num inch and larger sieves num numpassing the num mm no .
num and num mm no .
num sieves num numpassing the num m no .
num sieve num numpassing the num m no .
num sieve num num when num passing is designated there shall be no tolerance .
when num num passing is designated num shall be the minimum no tolerance shall be used .
num these tolerances apply to the contractors process control testing .
the jobmix formula for each mixture shall be in effect unless modified in writing on form num .
should a change in sources of materials be made a new jobmix formula shall be established before the new material is used .
this new jobmix formula shall be in effect until modified by the engineer .
requests made in writing by the contractor for changes in the jobmix formula will be considered .
the job mix formula may be changed by the engineer if the change will produce a mixture of equal or better quality and will num permit better utilization of available material or num result in a saving in cost to the department through an adjustment in unit price .
tests for cleanliness abrasion loss and percent of fractured faces will be made on representative samples of aggregate taken during production or from the stockpiles .
hot mix asphalt hma will be tested for moisture susceptibility by the department in accordance with table num .
if a sample fails to meet the criteria shown in table num the contractor shall take corrective action before being permitted to continue production .
if proper corrective action can not be readily determined the engineer will suspend the use of such material until laboratory tests indicate that the corrective measures taken by the contractor will provide material that is in compliance .
num num if one or more samples fail to meet the requirements of table num material from the area represented by the failing sample will be evaluated as follows if the area represented by the failing sample contains num tons of the new pavement or less then the result for the failing sample shall be considered a lot of one and will be evaluated according to the formulas and procedures in subsection num .
if the area represented by the failing sample contains more than num tons of the new pavement then the material from the area represented by the failing sample will be sampled and tested according to the following method pavement samples for possible moisture susceptibility testing will be taken at a minimum frequency of once every num tons throughout the project .
the engineer will observe the sampling take possession of the samples and retain these samples for possible testing .
sample size shall be a minimum of num pounds .
if a num ton sample fails then the four num ton samples from the area represented by that failing num ton sample will be tested for moisture susceptibility .
the num ton result and the four num ton results will be considered a lot of five and will be evaluated according to the formulas and procedures in subsection num .
if less than four retained samples are on hand because the num ton sample represents less than num tons of hot mix asphalt the price adjustment will be based on the test results from the retained samples on hand plus the test result from the num ton sample .
for the above evaluation the f factor used in calculating p factors shall be num .
the p value shall be applied to price of the hma item .
if asphalt cement is not paid for separately the price reduction shall be multiplied by num .
lottman p values will not be combined with pay factors for other elements determined in accordance with process controlowner acceptance pcoa specifications .
table num grading test procedure minimum test result sampling frequency all gradings cp lnum method b num one per num tons or fraction thereof minimum aggregates .
aggregates shall meet the applicable requirements of subsection num .
mineral filler .
mineral filler shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
hydrated lime .
hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
num num asphalt cements .
the type and grade of asphalt cement will be specified in the contract .
the asphalt cement shall meet the applicable requirements of subsection num .
construction requirements weather limitations and placement temperatures .
hot mix asphalt shall be placed only on properly prepared unfrozen surfaces which are free of water snow and ice .
the hot mix asphalt shall be placed only when both the air and surface temperatures equal or exceed the temperatures specified in table num num and the engineer determines that the weather conditions permit the pavement to be properly placed and compacted .
table num placement temperature limitations in f compacted layer thickness in inches minimum surface and air temperature f top layer layers below top layer num num num num num num num num or more num num note air temperature is taken in the shade .
surface is defined as the existing base on which the new pavement is to be placed .
if the temperature falls below the minimum air or surface temperatures paving shall stop .
the contractor shall schedule the work so that no planed or recycled surface is left without resurfacing for more than ten calendar days during the period specified in table num below .
the contractor shall immediately place a temporary hot mix asphalt layer on any surface that has been planed or recycled and can not be resurfaced in accordance with the above temperature requirements within ten calendar days after being planed or recycled .
the minimum thickness of the temporary hot mix asphalt layer shall be num inches .
the contractor shall perform the process control required to assure adequate quality of the hot mix asphalt used in the temporary layer .
all applicable pavement markings shall be applied to the temporary layer surface .
the contractor shall maintain the temporary layer for the entire period that it is open to traffic .
distress which affects the ride safety or serviceability of the temporary layer shall be immediately corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the temporary hot mix asphalt layer shall be removed when work resumes .
num num table num periods requiring overlay of treated surfaces location by elevation period during which planned or recycled surfaces must be overlaid within ten days all areas below and including num feet october num to march num all areas above num feet up to and including num feet september num to april num all areas above num feet august num to may num asphalt mixing plant .
the asphalt mixing plant shall be capable of producing a uniform material have adequate capacity and be maintained in good mechanical condition .
defective parts shall be replaced or repaired immediately if they adversely affect the proper functioning of the plant or plant units or adversely affect the quality of the hot asphalt plant mix .
dust smoke or other contaminants shall be controlled at the plant site to meet all air quality requirements in accordance with subsections num and num .
acceptable safety equipment shall be provided by the contractor to accommodate sampling and testing .
hot asphalt plant mix shall not be stored longer than nine hours unless additional protective measures are used and approved .
when hot asphalt plant mix is obtained from a commercial plant the contractor shall make arrangements for approved laboratory facilities at the plant site for testing hot asphalt paving mixtures .
the plant laboratory shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
hauling equipment .
trucks used for hauling asphalt mixtures shall have tight clean smooth metal beds thinly coated with a minimum amount of paraffin oil lime solution or other approved release agent .
petroleum distillates such as kerosene or fuel oil will not be permitted .
each truck shall have a cover of canvas or other suitable material to protect the mixture from the weather .
asphalt pavers .
selfpropelled asphalt pavers shall be provided and equipped with an activated screed assembly heated if necessary capable of spreading and finishing the asphalt plant mix material in lane widths applicable to the typical section and thicknesses shown in the contract .
pavers used for shoulders and similar construction shall be capable of spreading and finishing courses of asphalt plant mix material in widths shown in the contract .
the pavers receiving hopper shall have sufficient capacity for a uniform spreading operation and shall have an automatic distribution system that will place the mixture uniformly in front of the screed .
num num the screed or strikeoff assembly shall produce the specified finished surface without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture .
the paver shall include an approved longitudinal paver wedge system to create a sloped safety edge as shown on the plans .
the wedge system shall be attached to the screed and shall compact the hma to a density at least as dense as the compaction imparted to the rest of the hma layer by the paving screed .
the system shall provide a sloped safety edge equal to num degrees plus or minus num degrees measured from the pavement surface cross slope extended .
a single plate strike off shall not be used .
the system shall be adjustable to accommodate varying paving thicknesses .
the engineer may allow the contractor to use handwork for short sections or to saw cut the sloped safety edge after paving operations are completed in areas such as transitions at driveways intersections interchanges .
the contractor shall submit the proposed paver wedge system for approval at the preconstruction conference .
the engineer may require proof that the system has been used on previous projects with acceptable results or may require a test section constructed prior to the beginning of work to demonstrate that it creates an acceptable wedge shape and compaction .
paving shall not begin until the system is approved in writing by the engineer .
the safety edge may be constructed on each lift of hma or on the full specified plan depth on the final lift .
the finished shape of the safety edge shall extend for the full depth of the asphalt pavement or for the top num inches whichever is less .
the paver shall be capable of operating at forward speeds consistent with uniform and continuous laying of the mixture .
stop and go operations of the paver shall be avoided .
the asphalt paver shall be equipped with a means of preventing the segregation of the coarse aggregate particles from the remainder of the asphalt plant mix when that mix is carried from the paver hopper back to the paver augers .
the means and methods used shall be approved by the paver manufacturer and may consist of chain curtains deflector plates or other such devices and any combination of these .
the following specific requirements shall apply to the identified asphalt pavers num blawknox asphalt pavers shall be equipped with the blawknox materials management kit mmk .
num cedarapids asphalt pavers shall be those that were manufactured in num or later .
num caterpillar asphalt pavers shall be equipped with deflector plates as identified in the december num service magazine entitled new asphalt deflector kit num num num .
prior to the start of using the paver for placing plant mix the contractor shall submit for approval a full description in writing of the means and methodologies that will be used to prevent asphalt paver segregation .
use of the paver shall not commence prior to receiving approval from the engineer .
num num the contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance that verifies that the approved means and methods used to prevent asphalt paver segregation have been implemented on all pavers used on the project .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line and maintaining the screed at the specified longitudinal grade and transverse slope .
the sensor shall be constructed to operate from either or both sides of the paver and shall be capable of working with the following devices num skitype device at least num feet in length .
num short ski or short shoe .
num at least num feet of control line and stakes .
the type or types of devices to be furnished shall be as provided in the contract .
the controls shall be capable of maintaining the screed at the specified transverse slope within plus or minus num percent .
manual operation will be permitted for constructing irregularly shaped and minor areas .
if the automatic controls fail or malfunction the equipment may be operated manually for t.he remainder of the normal working day provided specified results are obtained .
if the contractor fails to obtain and maintain the specified surface tolerances the paving operations shall be suspended until satisfactory corrections repairs or equipment replacements are made .
placement of hot mix asphalt on a waterproofed bridge deck shall be accomplished with equipment that will not damage the membrane or protective covering .
tack coat .
when ordered by the engineer or specified in the contract a tack coat shall be applied between pavement courses and paid for in accordance with section num .
surface conditioning .
irregularities in the existing pavement or base shall be brought to uniform grade and cross section .
prior to placing tack coat and beginning overlay work the surface to be tack coated shall be swept to remove accumulations of loose gravel and debris .
asphalt plant mix shall be placed only on properly constructed surfaces that are free from substances that would adversely affect the pavement quality .
contact surfaces of curbing gutters manholes and other structures shall be painted with a uniform coating of asphalt cement prior to placing asphalt mixture against them .
preparation of asphalt cement .
the asphalt cement shall be heated to the specified temperature without local overheating and shall be continuously supplied to the mixer at a uniform temperature within the specified range .
num num preparation of aggregates .
heating and drying of the aggregates shall be accomplished without damaging the aggregate .
when hydrated lime is used it shall be added to the aggregate in accordance with one of the following methods num lime slurry added to aggregate .
the hydrated lime shall be added to the aggregate in the form of a slurry and then thoroughly mixed in an approved pugmill .
the slurry shall contain a minimum of num percent water by weight .
num dry lime added to wet aggregate .
the dry hydrated lime shall be added to the blended aggregate wetted a minimum of num percent above the surface saturated dry condition ssd as shown on the form num and then thoroughly mixed in an approved pugmill .
the engineer will not require the contractor to increase the moisture above num percent total although the contractor may elect to do so if the added water is necessary to meet the minimum lottman specification see table num .
the contractor may request that the num percent above ssd requirement be waived provided the requirements of cpl num have been met .
if the hma fails to meet the minimum tsr requirements defined in table num at any point during production the contractor shall immediately be required to add the minimum amount of moisture as defined above .
the limeaggregate mixture may be fed directly into the hot plant after mixing or it may be stockpiled for not more than num days before introduction into the plant for mixing with the asphalt cement .
the hydrated lime may be added to different sized aggregates and stockpiled by adding num percent of the lime to the aggregate passing the num mm no .
num sieve and num percent to the aggregate retained on the num mm no .
num sieve .
in order to ensure the required lime and water quantities are introduced lime and water feed for lime operation shall have control systems that change introduction rates in conjunction with changes in plant mix production .
the control systems shall be documented in the contractors pc plan .
when a test for aggregate percent moisture falls below the required minimum the contractor will receive a warning .
when two consecutive tests for aggregate percent moisture fall below the required minimum a follow up test will immediately be performed .
a failure on the follow up test will result in suspension of work .
production will remain suspended until the source of the problem is identified and corrected .
each time production is suspended corrective actions shall be proposed in writing by the contractor and approved in writing by the engineer before production may resume .
mixing .
the dried aggregates and asphalt shall be combined in the mixer in the quantities required to meet the jobmix formula .
the materials shall be mixed until the aggregate is completely and uniformly coated and the asphalt is uniformly distributed throughout the aggregate .
num num the minimum temperature of the mixture when discharged from the mixer and when delivered for use shall be as shown in table num table num asphalt grade minimum mix discharge temperature fnum minimum delivered mix temperature fnum pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num num the maximum mix discharge temperature shall not exceed the minimum discharge temperature by more than num f .
num delivered mix temperature shall be measured behind the paver screed .
hot mix asphalt mixture shall be produced at the lowest temperature within the specified temperature range that produces a workable mix and provides for uniform coating of aggregates num percent minimum in accordance with aashto t num and that allows the required compaction to be achieved .
storing or holding of asphalt mixture will be permitted provided the characteristics of the mixture are not altered .
if storing or holding of the mixture causes segregation excessive heat loss or adversely affects the quality of the finished product corrective action shall be taken .
unsuitable mixture shall be disposed of at the contractors expense .
when placing hot asphalt mixture over bridge decks covered by waterproofing membrane the minimum temperature of the mixture when rolling operations begin shall be num f .
the jobmix formula temperature may be increased up to num f to obtain this temperature .
spreading and finishing .
asphalt pavers shall be used to distribute the mixture to the established grade and required thickness over the entire width or partial width as practicable .
the longitudinal joint in both a new pavement and an overlay pavement layer shall offset the joint in the layer immediately below by num inches .
in every pavement layer the longitudinal joints shall not be constructed in the wheel paths .
the contractor shall submit a longitudinal joint and pavement marking plan three days prior to the prepaving conference .
the plan shall show the location and configuration of the proposed longitudinal joints and pavement markings and shall detail the methods to be used to field establish a control line .
the contractor shall use a continuous string line to delineate every longitudinal joint during paving num num operations .
all exposed string line shall be picked up and disposed of at the end of each days paving .
paving shall not commence until the plan has been approved in writing by the engineer .
the joints in the top layer of pavement shall be located as follows unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer num for numlane roadways offset num to num inches from the center of pavement and from the outside edge of travel lanes .
num for roadways of more than num lanes offset num to num inches from lane lines and outside edge of travel lanes .
longitudinal joints shall not cross the centerline lane line or edge line unless approved by the engineer .
where paving operations are on the present traveled roadway the contractor shall arrange paving operations so there will be no exposed longitudinal joints between adjacent travel lanes at the end of a days run .
with the approval of the engineer the contractor may leave an exposed longitudinal joint conforming to the following num when the thickness of the pavement course being placed is num inches or less a vertical exposed longitudinal joint may be constructed .
num when the thickness of the pavement course being placed is greater than num inches the joint shall be constructed according to one of the following i the entire joint shall be tapered num or flatter .
a taper steeper than num shall be considered vertical .
ii the top portion of the longitudinal joint may be vertical .
the vertical portion shall be a maximum of num vertical inches .
the remainder of the joint below the vertical portion shall be tapered num or flatter .
on areas where the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment is impracticable the mixture shall be dumped spread raked screeded and luted by hand tools to the required compacted thickness and grades .
production of the mixture shall be maintained so pavers can be used in echelon to place the wearing course in adjacent lanes .
the asphalt mixture shall be transported and placed on the roadway without segregation .
all segregated areas behind the paver shall be removed immediately upon discovery .
the segregated material shall be replaced with specification material before the initial rolling has taken place .
if more than num square feet of segregated pavement is ordered removed and replaced in any continuous num linear feet of paver width laydown operations shall be discontinued until the source of the segregation has been found and corrected .
if at any time the engineer observes segregated areas of pavement he will notify the contractor immediately .
num num after rolling segregated areas will be delineated by the engineer and evaluated as follows num the engineer will delineate the segregated areas to be evaluated and inform the contractor of the location and extent of these areas within two calendar days excluding weekends and holidays of placement .
num in each segregated area or group of areas to be evaluated the contractor shall take five num inch cores at random locations designated by the engineer .
in accordance with cp num the contractor shall also take five num inch cores at random locations designated by the engineer in nonsegregated pavement adjacent to the segregated area .
these cores shall be within num feet of the boundary of the segregated area and in the newly placed pavement .
the coring shall be in the presence of the engineer and the engineer will take immediate possession of the cores .
the contractor may take additional cores at the contractors expense .
num gradation of the aggregate of the cores will be determined by cdot in accordance with cp num .
num the core aggregate gradations from the segregated area will be compared to the core aggregate gradations of the corresponding nonsegregated area .
num two key sieves of the core gradations from the segregated area will be compared to the core gradations from the corresponding nonsegregated area to determine the difference .
if differences for both key sieves exceed the allowable difference specified in the table below the area is segregated .
table for segregation determination mix grading key sieves allowable difference sx num mm num num mm num num s num mm num num mm num num num segregated areas in the top lift shall be removed and replaced full lane width at the contractors expense .
the engineer may approve a method equivalent to removal and replacement that results in a nonsegregated top lift .
segregated areas in lifts below the top lift that are smaller than num square feet per num linear feet of lane width shall be corrected by the contractor at the contractors expense in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
segregated areas larger than num square feet per num linear feet of lane width in any lift shall be removed and replaced full lane width by the contractor at the contractors expense .
if the area is determined to be segregated the coring shall be at the expense of the contractor .
if the area is determined to be nonsegregated the engineer will reimburse the contractor num for obtaining the ten cores .
num num the engineer will perform a systematic segregation check in accordance with cp num as early in the project as is feasible to determine if temperature segregation problems exist .
temperature segregation will be of concern on the project if across the width of the mat temperatures vary by num f or more .
densities will not need to be taken in the systematic segregation check .
the engineer will discuss the temperature findings of the systematic segregation check with the contractor .
the engineer may evaluate the hma for low density due to temperature segregation whenever industry best practices as detailed on form num are not being followed or the engineer suspects temperature segregation is occurring .
the engineer will first meet with the contractor to discuss the paving practices that are triggering the temperature investigation .
areas across the mat excluding the outside num foot of both edges of the mat that are more than num f cooler than other material across the width may be marked for density testing .
material for temperature comparison will be evaluated in numfoot intervals behind the paver across the width of the mat .
the material shall be marked and tested in accordance with cp num .
if four or more areas within a lot of num tons have densities of less than num percent of the materials maximum specific gravity for sma mixes or less than num percent of the materials maximum specific gravity for all other hma mixes a num percent price disincentive will be applied to the num ton lot .
the num ton count begins when the engineer starts looking for cold areas not when the first cold area is detected .
this price disincentive will be in addition to those described in sections num and num .
only one area per delivered truck will be counted toward the number of low density areas .
temperature segregation checks will be performed only in areas where continuous paving is possible .
compaction .
the hot mix asphalt shall be compacted by rolling .
both steel wheel and pneumatic tire rollers will be required .
the number weight and type of rollers furnished shall be sufficient to obtain the required density while the mixture is in a workable condition .
compaction shall begin immediately after the mixture is placed and be continuous until the required density is obtained .
when the mixture contains unmodified asphalt cement pg num num or pg num num or modified pg num num and the surface temperature falls below num f further compaction effort shall not be applied unless approved provided the contractor can demonstrate that there is no damage to the finished mat .
if the mixture contains modified asphalt cement pg num num pg num or pg num num and the surface temperature falls below num f further compaction effort shall not be applied unless approved provided the contractor can demonstrate that there is no damage to the finished mat .
warm mix asphalt compaction requirements shall conform to cp num .
all roller marks shall be removed with the finish rolling .
use of vibratory rollers with the vibrator on will not be permitted during surface course final rolling and will not be permitted on any rolling on bridge decks covered with waterproofing membrane .
num num sma shall be compacted to a density of num to num percent of the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity determined according to cp num .
all other hma shall be compacted to a density of num to num percent of the daily theoretical maximum specific gravity determined according to cp num .
if more than one theoretical maximum specific gravity test is taken in a day the average of the theoretical maximum specific gravity results will be used to determine the percent compaction .
field density determinations will be made in accordance with cp num or num .
the longitudinal joints shall be compacted to a target density of num percent of the theoretical maximum specific gravity .
the tolerance shall be num percent .
the theoretical maximum specific gravity used to determine the joint density will be the average of the daily theoretical maximum specific gravities for the material that was placed on either side of the joint .
density percent relative compaction will be determined in accordance with cp num .
the contractor shall obtain one numinch diameter core at a random location within each longitudinal joint sampling section for determination of the joint density .
the contractor shall mark and drill the cores at the location directed by the engineer and in the presence of the engineer .
the engineer will take possession of the cores for testing .
the contractor may take additional cores at his own expense .
coring locations shall be centered on the visible line where the joint between the two adjacent lifts abuts the surface .
the center of all joint cores shall be within num inch of this visible joint line .
core holes shall be repaired by the contractor using materials and methods approved by the engineer .
pc and oa joint coring shall be completed within five calendar days of joint construction .
longitudinal joint coring applies to all pavement layers .
when constructing joints in an echelon paving process the joints shall be clearly marked to ensure consistent coring location .
in small areas such as intersections where the engineer prescribes paving and phasing methods the engineer may temporarily waive the requirement for joint density testing incentive or disincentive payment determined for joint density in accordance with subsection num will apply to the hma on each side of the joint .
if a layer of pavement has joints constructed on both sides incentive or disincentive payment for each of those joints will apply to one half of the pavement between the joints .
along forms curbs headers walls and all other places not accessible to the rollers the mixture shall be thoroughly compacted with mechanical tampers .
any mixture that becomes loose and broken mixed with dirt or is in any way defective shall be immediately removed and replaced with fresh hot mixture and compacted to conform to the surrounding area .
the contractor shall construct a compaction pavement test section cts for each job mix for which num or more tons are required for the project .
the cts will be used to evaluate the number of rollers and the most effective combination of rollers and rolling patterns for achieving the specified densities .
factors to be considered include but are not limited to the following num num num number size and type of rollers .
num amplitude frequency size and speed of vibratory rollers .
num size speed and tire pressure of rubber tire rollers .
num temperature of mixture being compacted .
num roller patterns .
the cts shall be constructed according to the following procedures the cts shall be constructed to provide the nominal layer thickness specified .
the first num tons of hot mix asphalt on the project location shall constitute the cts .
the production and placement rates of the cts shall closely approximate the anticipated production and placement rates for the remainder of the contract .
compaction of the cts shall commence immediately after the hot mix asphalt has been spread and shall be continuous and uniform over the entire cts .
for the cts compaction shall continue until no discernible increase in density is obtained by additional compactive efforts .
all compaction shall be completed before the surface temperature of the mixture drops below num f. approved types of rollers shall be used to achieve the specified density .
the contractor shall determine what methods and procedures are to be used for the compaction operation .
the compaction methods and procedures shall be used uniformly over the entire last num tons .
the contractor shall record the following information and a copy of this data shall be furnished to the engineer .
num type size amplitude frequency and speed of roller .
num tire pressure for rubber tire rollers and whether the pass for vibratory rollers is vibratory or static .
num surface temperature of mixture behind the laydown machine and subsequent temperatures and densities after each roller pass .
num sequence and distance from laydown machine for each roller and number of passes of each roller to obtain specified density .
two sets of random cores shall be taken within the last num tons of the cts .
each set shall consist of seven random cores .
the engineer will determine the coring locations using a stratified random sampling process .
the locations of these cores will be such that one set can serve as a duplicate of the other .
one set of these cores shall be immediately submitted to the engineer .
this set will be used for determining acceptance of the cts and determining density correction factors for nuclear density equipment .
densities of the random samples will be determined by cores according to cp num .
density correction factors for nuclear density equipment will be determined according to cp num .
coring shall be performed under cdot observation .
coring will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
for sma a cts is not used .
the contractor shall num num follow the requirements for the demonstration control strip in accordance with the revision of section num stone matrix asphalt pavement .
the cts meets requirements if the quality level of the random samples is greater than or equal to num .
the quality level will be determined according to cp num .
once constructed and accepted the cts shall remain in place and become part of the hot mix asphalt on the project .
when the quality level is less than num the contractor shall construct an additional test section utilizing different rollers or roller positions or roller patterns as required .
a written proposal detailing the changes in methods and procedures that will be used to obtain density is to be submitted to the engineer for review before constructing the additional test section .
if the quality level of a cts is less than num and greater than or equal to num the engineer may accept the material at a reduced price in accordance with section num .
if the quality level of a cts is less than num the engineer may num require complete removal and replacement with specification material at the contractors expense .
num where the finished product is found to be capable of performing the intended purpose and the value of the finished product is not affected as determined by the engineer permit the contractor to leave the material in place with a pay factor but not more than num percent of the bid price .
each cts shall be num tons .
if inplace densities of the cts as determined by nuclear density equipment prior to determining density of the cores meet the cts density requirements the contractor may begin production paving and continue to place hot mix asphalt pavement under the following conditions num the period during which the contractor continues to pave without test results from cores shall not exceed one working day .
num construction proceeds at the contractors risk .
if correlation with the cores reveals that the densities do not meet the cts requirements the hot mix asphalt pavement placed subsequently will be subject to price reduction or removal and replacement .
after production paving work has begun a new roller pattern shall be demonstrated when a change in the compaction process is implemented .
all additional costs associated with construction of the cts shall be at the contractors expense .
the hot mix asphalt placed in the cts will be paid for in accordance with subsection num at the contract price for the hot mix asphalt .
joints .
placing of the hot mix asphalt shall be continuous and rollers shall not pass over the unprotected end of a freshly laid mixture .
transverse joints shall be formed by cutting back on the previous run to expose the full depth of the num num course .
a coat of asphalt cement shall be applied to contact surfaces of all joints just before additional mixture is placed against the previously compacted material .
location and configuration of longitudinal joints shall be in accordance with subsection num .
pavement samples .
the engineer may take samples of the compacted pavement at random locations on the project for testing .
where samples have been taken new material shall be placed and compacted by the contractor to conform with the surrounding area .
surface smoothness .
the roadway surface smoothness shall be tested in accordance with subsection num .
method of measurement hot mix asphalt and asphalt cement will be measured by the ton .
batch weights will not be permitted as a method of measurement .
the tonnage shall be the weight used in the accepted pavement .
deduction will not be made for the weight of asphalt cement in the mixture .
basis of payment all work performed and measured as described above will be paid for as provided in the respective sections for each type specified .
if there is no pay item for asphalt cement of the type specified it will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
water used in the mixing plant in accordance with subsection num to bring the limeaggregate mixture to approved moisture content will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
facilities for testing hot asphalt plant mix at the site of the commercial plant will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
when asphalt cement is a separate pay item the amount of asphalt cement contained in reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material will not be measured or paid for but shall be included in the work .
coring for longitudinal joint density testing core hole repair and associated expenses will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
traffic control for this work will be paid for in accordance with the contract .
all costs of the temporary hot mix asphalt layer required according to subsection num maintenance and removal of the temporary pavement layer temporary pavement marking and traffic control will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
all costs associated with the construction of the safety edge specified in subsection num will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num hot mix asphalt description this work consists of constructing one or more courses of hot mix asphalt hma on a prepared base in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
the asphalt pavement shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate filler if required and asphalt cement .
hot mix asphalt patching consists of those quantities required for the replacement of unstable corrugated areas in the existing pavement pipe trenches areas removed for curb gutter forms areas between the curb gutter or sidewalk and the existing paved parking lots and areas designated on the plans .
these quantities will be restricted to small areas which require hand placement methods and where conventional paving equipment can not be utilized .
materials the materials shall conform to the requirements of subsections num through num .
construction requirements the construction requirements shall be as prescribed in subsections num through num .
areas to be patched shall be excavated and squared to a neat line leaving the sides of the excavation vertical .
prior to placement of the patch the exposed sides of the existing pavement shall be thoroughly coated with emulsified asphalt slowsetting .
hot mix asphalt shall then be placed and compacted in succeeding layers not to exceed num inches in depth .
method of measurement hot mix asphalt will be measured as prescribed in subsection num .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of hot mix asphalt will be paid for in accordance with subsection num at the contract unit price per ton for the asphalt mixture .
num num payment will be made under pay item pay unit hot mix asphalt grading ton hot mix asphalt grading asphalt ton hot mix asphalt patching asphalt ton aggregate asphalt cement asphalt recycling agent additives hydrated lime and all other work necessary to complete each hot mix asphalt item will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the unit price bid .
excavation preparation and tack coat of areas to be patched will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num heating and scarifying treatment description this work consists of recycling the top portion of the existing asphalt pavement as shown in the contract by cleaning heating scarifying redistributing releveling compacting and rejuvenating the existing asphaltic material .
materials asphalt rejuvenating agent shall meet the requirements of subsection numf .
construction requirements weather limitations shall be as provided in subsection num .
prior to commencing heating and scarifying operations the pavement shall be cleaned of all loose material .
power brooms shall be supplemented by hand brooming and use of other tools as required to bring the surface to a clean suitable condition free of deleterious material .
equipment used to heat and scarify the asphalt surface shall meet the following requirements num capable of uniformly applying heat under totally insulated enclosed hoods to produce radiant heat .
num selfpropelled and capable of scarifying to the depth specified .
num capable of covering a minimum of num square yards per hour while heating the existing surface to the extent that it will be remixed by the scarifiers to a depth not less than specified .
the heating operation shall extend at least num inches beyond the width of scarifying on both sides .
when a pass is made adjacent to a previously placed mat the longitudinal seam shall extend at least num inches into the previously placed mat .
the temperature of the scarified material shall be between num and num f when measured immediately behind the scarifier .
the scarified material shall be distributed and leveled by a paving machine .
the paving machine shall be capable of screeding the full width of the scarified material to produce a uniform cross section as shown in the contract .
while the scarified material is still hot and before it is placed by the paving machine an application of asphalt rejuvenating agent shall be applied as specified .
the asphalt surface shall be compacted immediately after it has been distributed and leveled and while it is still workable .
two rollers shall be used to compact the num num scarified material .
a steel wheel roller shall be used first to provide breakdown rolling followed by a pneumatic tire roller with a minimum weight of num tons to complete compaction to num to num percent of maximum theoretical density .
when the mixture surface temperature falls below num f no further compaction effort shall be done unless approved .
a minimum of num hours shall elapse before an asphalt pavement overlay is applied to the scarified pavement .
the weight per cubic foot of the existing asphalt surface shall be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
scarification depth will be acceptable when the moving average of a minimum of three consecutive random tests per hour indicates that the required amount per square foot based on the weight per cubic foot of the existing asphalt surface has been scarified .
testing shall be performed by the contractor in lots of three per hour or as often as necessary to maintain process control .
the longitudinal surface smoothness of the roadway prior to and after heating and scarifying shall be tested in accordance with subsection numf .
method of measurement heating and scarifying treatment will be measured by the square yard of work completed and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of heating and scarifying treatment will be paid at the contract unit price per square yard for heating and scarifying treatment and shall include cleaning heating scarifying redistributing releveling and compacting the existing asphalt surfacing .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit heating and scarifying treatment square yard asphalt rejuvenating agent will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num cold asphalt pavement recycle description this work consists of pulverizing the existing asphalt surfacing to the depth shown on the plans mixing a recycling agent and water if required with the pulverized material then spreading and compacting the mixed material .
materials the recycling agent shall be either a high float emulsified asphalt polymerized or emulsified recycling agent meeting the requirements of subsection nume .
the pulverized material shall meet the following gradation requirements sieve size percent passing num mm num inch num num mm num inch num num the sealing emulsion shall be high float emulsion diluted emulsified asphalt ss or approved equal .
construction requirements weather limitations .
daily recycling operations shall not begin until the atmospheric temperature is num f and rising .
recycling operations shall be discontinued when the temperature is num f and falling .
recycling operations shall not be performed when the weather is foggy or rainy or when weather conditions are such that the proper mixing spreading compacting and curing of the recycled material can not be accomplished .
cold recycled pavement damaged by precipitation shall be reprocessed or repaired by methods approved by the engineer at the contractors expense .
the construction of cold recycled pavement will not be allowed from september num through may num unless otherwise approved .
the contractors progress schedule shall show the methods to be used to comply with this requirement .
milling .
the existing asphalt surfacing shall be cold recycled in a manner that does not disturb the underlying material in the existing roadway .
adjacent recycling passes shall overlap at the longitudinal joint a minimum of num inches .
the beginning of each days recycling operation shall overlap the end of the preceding recycling operation a minimum of num feet unless otherwise directed .
any fillet of fine pulverized material which forms adjacent to a vertical face shall be removed prior to spreading the mixed material except that such fillet adjacent to num num existing pavement which will be removed by a subsequent overlapping milling operation need not be removed .
vertical cuts in the roadway shall not be left overnight .
mixing .
when commencing recycling operations the recycling agent shall be applied to the pulverized material at the initial design rate determined by the materials laboratory based on samples obtained by the department prior to construction .
the exact application rate of the recycling agent will be determined and may be varied as required by existing pavement conditions .
an allowable tolerance of plus or minus num percent of the initial design rate or directed rate of application shall be maintained at all times .
a representative of the recycling agent supplier shall be present on the project during recycling operations until an acceptable production sequence is established as determined by the engineer .
the contractor may add water to the pulverized material to facilitate uniform mixing with the recycling agent .
water may be added prior to or concurrently with the recycling agent provided that this water does not adversely affect the recycling agent .
spreading .
recycling and placing recycled material shall be at a rate sufficient to provide continuous operation of the paving machine .
if paving operations result in being excessively behind or in excessive stopping of the paving machine as determined by the engineer recycling operations shall be suspended .
recycling may resume when the contractor can synchronize the rate of recycling with the capacity of the paving machine .
if segregation occurs behind the paver the contractor shall make changes in equipment operations or both to eliminate the segregation .
compacting and finishing .
after the recycled material has been spread traffic including contractors equipment shall not be allowed on the recycled material until it starts its initial break as determined by the engineer .
however if precipitation is imminent compaction may proceed to seal the surface from additional moisture .
initial rolling shall be performed with one or more pneumatic tire rollers and be continued until no displacement is observed .
final rolling to eliminate pneumatic tire marks and achieve the required density shall be done by steel wheel rollers either in static or vibratory mode .
the use of vibratory rollers shall be approved by the engineer .
if rollers are used in the vibratory mode vibration shall be at low amplitudes to prevent transverse cracks .
the recycled material shall be compacted to a minimum of num percent of the density of a laboratory specimen compacted in accordance with cp num .
if the area tested fails to meet the required density the area shall be reworked until it attains num percent compaction .
the frequency of density testing for project acceptance will be one per num square yards .
the engineer will perform one cp num for calculation of the percent relative compaction with each field density taken .
rollers shall not be started or stopped on uncompacted recycled material .
rolling shall be accomplished so that starting and stopping will be on previously compacted cold recycled pavement or existing pavement .
num num any type of rolling that results in cracking movement or other types of pavement distress shall be discontinued until the problem is resolved .
after the recycled material has been compacted traffic including the contractors equipment shall not be permitted on the cold recycled pavement for at least two hours unless otherwise approved .
before placing the sealing emulsion or hot mix asphalt overlay the cold recycled pavement shall be allowed to cure until the free moisture is reduced to num percent free moisture or less by total weight of mix .
free moisture will be measured according to cp num .
after the free moisture content of the cold recycled pavement has reached the acceptable level the hot mix asphalt overlay or sealing emulsion if required shall be placed .
however unless otherwise approved by the engineer the cold recycled pavement shall be covered with a minimum thickness of num inches of hot mix asphalt within ten calendar days after it is laid and compacted .
the sealing emulsion if required shall be applied to the surface at an approximate rate of num to num gallons per square yard .
the sealing emulsion shall be applied when the engineer determines that it is necessary to prevent raveling progressive separation of aggregate particles .
damage caused by the contractor to the cold recycled pavement shall be repaired at contractors expense as directed prior to placing any hot asphalt surfacing .
soft areas that are not caused by the contractor or weather shall also be repaired prior to placing the hot mix asphalt .
recycling train .
the contractor shall furnish a selfpropelled machine capable of pulverizing the existing asphalt surfacing to the depth shown on the plans in one pass .
the machine shall have a minimum rotor cutting width of num feet .
the rotor cutting width selected for the project shall allow for the longitudinal joint to be offset from the longitudinal joint of the layer placed above by at least num inches .
the longitudinal joint shall not fall in the wheel path .
the machine shall have standard automatic depth controls and maintain a constant cutting depth .
the machine shall also have screening and crushing capabilities to reduce or remove oversize particles prior to mixing with recycling agent .
oversize particles shall be reduced to size by crushing .
the machine shall perform continuous weight measurement of the pulverized material interlocked with the recycling agent metering device so the required recycling agent content will be maintained .
positive means shall be provided for calibrating the weight measurement device and the recycling agent metering device .
a positive displacement pump capable of accurately metering the required quantity of recycling agent at rates as low as num gallons per minute shall be used to apply the recycling agent .
the interlock system shall allow addition of the recycling agent only when pulverized material is present in the mixing chamber .
each mixing machine shall be equipped with a meter capable of registering the rate of flow and the total amount of recycling agent introduced into the mixed material .
the recycling agent shall be applied through a separate mixing machine capable of mixing the pulverized material and the recycling agent to a homogeneous mixture num num and placing the mixture in a windrow .
the mixture shall be placed in a windrow in a manner that prevents segregation .
paver .
the recycled material shall be placed with a selfpropelled asphalt paver meeting the requirements of subsection num except that the screed shall not be heated .
the mixed material shall be spread in one continuous pass without segregation to the lines and grades established on the plans .
when a pickup machine is used to feed the windrow into the paver hopper the pickup machine shall be capable of picking up the entire windrow to the underlying materials .
compactors .
rollers shall be steel wheel pneumatic tire vibratory or combination of these types .
the number and weight of rollers shall be sufficient to obtain the required compaction while the recycled material is in a workable condition except that each pneumatic tire roller shall be num tons minimum weight .
smoothness .
the longitudinal surface smoothness of the roadway prior to and after cold recycling shall be tested by the contractor in accordance with subsection num .
method of measurement inplace cold recycled pavement will be measured by the square yard of paved surface actually recycled complete in place and accepted .
repair of cold recycled pavement will be measured by the square yard of paved surface repaired and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantity of inplace cold recycled pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit cold asphalt pavement recycle square yard repair of cold asphalt pavement recycle square yard asphalt materials will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
water will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
repair of cold recycled pavement damaged by the contractor or by weather will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
overlaps of preceding recycling operations will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num prime coat tack coat and rejuvenating agent description this work consists of preparing and treating an existing surface with asphalt material and blotter material if required in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines shown on the plans or established .
materials asphalt material .
the type and grade of asphalt material for prime and tack coating will be specified in the contract .
the asphalt material for all coatings shall meet the applicable requirements of section num .
the asphalt material for prime and tack coating may be conditionally accepted at the source .
the rejuvenating agent shall be accepted before loading into the distributor .
blotter material .
blotter material for prime coating shall consist of aggregate base course conforming to the requirements specified for base course aggregate on the project .
blotter material for rejuvenating agent shall consist of dry gritty sand conforming to the fine aggregate gradation of table num or as approved .
blotter material may be accepted in the stockpile at the source or at the roadway prior to placement .
construction requirements weather limitations .
prime coat and tack coat shall not be applied under the following conditions num when the surface is wet .
num when weather conditions would prevent the proper construction of the prime or tack coat .
equipment .
the contractor shall provide equipment for heating and uniformly applying asphalt material and blotter material .
the distributor and equipment shall be capable of uniformly distributing asphalt material at even temperature and uniform pressure on variable widths of surface up to num feet at readily determined and controlled rates from num to num gallons per square yard .
the allowable variation from any specified rate shall not exceed plus or minus num gallon per square yard .
distributor equipment shall include a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents .
distributors num num shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump and full circulation spray bars adjustable laterally and vertically .
the distributor for rejuvenating agent shall also be equipped with the following num heating facilities with controls to reach a temperature of num f. num circulating system to maintain proper mixture of the rejuvenating agent .
preparation of surface .
preparation of the surface to be treated shall include all work necessary to provide a smooth dry uniform surface .
the work shall include patching brooming shaping to required grade and section compaction and removal of unstable corrugated areas .
the edges of existing pavements which are to be adjacent to new pavement shall be cleaned to permit the adhesion of asphalt materials .
application of asphalt material .
asphalt material shall be applied by a pressure distributor in a uniform and continuous spread .
when traffic is maintained not more than  of the width of the section shall be treated in one application or sufficient width shall be left to adequately handle traffic .
care shall be taken so the application of asphalt material at the junctions of spreads is not in excess of the specified quantity .
excess asphalt material shall be removed or distributed as directed .
skipped areas or deficiencies shall be corrected .
asphalt material shall not be placed on any surface where traffic will travel on the freshly applied material .
the rate of application temperatures and areas to be treated shall be approved prior to application of the coating .
application of blotter material .
if after the application of the prime coat or rejuvenating agent the asphalt material fails to penetrate and the roadway must be used by traffic blotter material shall be spread in the quantity required to absorb excess asphalt material .
method of measurement and basis of payment asphalt material will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
blotter material will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for patching will be made at the contract unit price for the various items used for patching .
num num section num joint and crack sealant description this work consists of furnishing and placing an approved hot poured joint and crack sealant in properly prepared cracks in asphalt pavements .
cracks with a width greater than  inch and less than num inch are to be filled with this material .
materials materials for hot poured joint and crack sealant shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
using a mixture of different manufacturers brands or different types of sealant is prohibited .
construction requirements immediately before applying hot poured joint and crack sealant the cracks shall be cleaned of loose and foreign matter to a depth approximately twice the crack width .
cleaning shall be performed using a hot compressed air lance .
this lance shall be used to dry and warm the adjacent asphalt immediately prior to sealing .
direct flame dryers shall not be used .
these cracks shall be filled with hot poured joint and crack sealant flush with the pavement surface .
immediately following the filling of the crack excess sealant shall be leveled off at the wearing surface by squeegee a shoe attached to the applicator wand or other suitable means approved by the engineer .
the squeegeed material shall be centered on the cracks and shall not exceed num inches in width or num inch in depth .
the sealant material shall be heated and applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the equipment for heating the material shall be an indirect heating type double boiler using oil or other heat transfer medium and shall be capable of constant agitation .
the heating equipment shall be capable of controlling the sealant material temperature within the manufacturers recommended temperature range and shall be equipped with a calibrated thermometer capable of num f accuracy from num to num f. this thermometer shall be located so the engineer can safely check the temperature of the sealant material .
overheating of the sealant material will not be permitted .
the face of the crack shall be surface dry and the air and pavement temperatures shall both be at least num f and rising at the time of sealant application .
sealant material picked up or pulled out after being placed shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
the contractor shall have blotter material available on the project in the event it is required to prevent tracking or pulling .
if required blotter material shall be approved by the engineer and placed at the contractors expense .
num num method of measurement hot poured joint and crack sealant will be measured by the ton of material used .
the engineer may require the weighing of equipment for determination of actual quantities of material used .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit hot poured joint and crack sealant ton all materials equipment and costs incidental to the preparation of the surface prior to application of the hot poured joint and crack sealant will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num chip seal description this work consists of furnishing and applying asphalt emulsion and cover coat material on an existing surface in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines shown on the plans or established .
when rejuvenating agent or emulsified asphalt is used as a fog seal cover coat material will not be required .
materials asphalt emulsion .
emulsified asphalt shall be polymerized or latex modified and shall be rapid set or medium set conforming to the requirements of subsection numb .
rejuvenating agent shall conform to the requirements of subsection numf .
cover coat material .
cover coat material shall meet the requirements of subsection num for the type specified .
the material will be accepted at the spreader .
construction requirements weather limitations .
asphalt emulsion shall not be applied on a damp surface when either the air or pavement surface temperature is below num f or when weather conditions would prevent the proper construction of the chip seal .
equipment .
the following equipment or its equivalent shall be used num asphalt distributor and equipment shall be capable of uniformly distributing asphalt emulsion at even temperature and uniform pressure on variable widths of surface up to num feet at readily determined and controlled rates from num to num gallons per square yard .
the allowable variation from any specified rate shall not exceed plus or minus num gallon per square yard .
the distributors spreading capabilities shall be computer controlled or it shall be calibrated to conform to the distributor manufacturers procedure prior to applying the emulsified asphalt .
distributor equipment shall include a tachometer pressure gauges accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents .
distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump and full circulation spray bars adjustable laterally and vertically .
distributors shall be equipped with an automatic heater capable of maintaining the asphalt emulsion at the manufacturers recommended application temperature or at num f whichever is higher .
num a rotary power broom .
num a minimum of two pneumatic tire rollers that weigh at least num tons each .
num num num one selfpropelled aggregate spreader of approved design supported by at least four wheels equipped with pneumatic tires on two axles .
the aggregate spreader shall be capable of applying the larger cover coat material to the surface ahead of the smaller cover coat material and shall have positive controls so the required quantity of material is deposited uniformly over the full width of the asphalt emulsion .
other types of aggregate spreaders may be used provided they accomplish equivalent results and are approved .
preparation of surface .
the entire surface that is to receive a chip seal shall be cleaned of loose sand dust rock mud and all other debris that could prevent proper adhesion of the asphalt coating .
the cleaning shall be accomplished by power broom scraping blading or other approved measures .
chip sealing operations shall not be started until the surface is approved .
applying asphalt emulsion .
asphalt emulsion shall be applied by a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread and within the temperature range specified .
the distributors spreading capability shall be computer controlled or calibrated to conform to the distributor manufacturers procedure prior to applying the emulsified asphalt .
if streaking occurs the distributor operation shall be stopped immediately until the cause is determined and corrected .
streaking is alternating narrow longitudinal areas of excessive and then insufficient quantities of asphalt emulsion .
the quantity of asphalt emulsion per square yard may vary from the rate shown in the contract as directed .
a strip of building paper at least num feet in width and with a length equal to that of the spray bar of the distributor plus num foot shall be used at the beginning of each spread .
if the distributor does not have a positive cutoff the paper shall be used at the end of each spread .
the paper shall be removed and disposed of in a satisfactory manner .
the distributor shall be moving forward at proper application speed at the time the spray bar is opened .
skipped areas and deficiencies shall be corrected .
junctions of spreads shall be carefully made to assure a smooth riding surface .
the length of spread of asphalt emulsion shall not be in excess of the area that trucks loaded with cover coat material can immediately cover .
the spread of asphalt emulsion shall not be more than num inches wider than the width covered by the cover coat material from the spreading device .
under no circumstances shall operations proceed so asphalt emulsion will be allowed to chill set up dry or otherwise impair retention of the cover coat .
the distributor shall be parked so that asphalt emulsion will not drip on the surface of the traveled way .
application of cover coat material .
immediately following the application of the asphalt emulsion cover coat material shall be spread in quantities as designated .
the spreading rate may vary from the rate shown in the contract when approved .
spreading shall be accomplished so the tires of the trucks or aggregate spreader do not contact the uncovered and newly applied asphalt emulsion .
num num the cover coat material shall be moistened with a sufficient amount of water to reduce the dust coating of the aggregate prior to spreading .
the cover coat material shall not contain free moisture as evidenced by drain down in the delivery truck bed .
immediately after the cover coat material is spread deficient areas shall be covered with additional material .
rolling shall begin immediately behind the spreader and shall continue until three complete coverages are obtained .
rolling shall be completed the same day the asphalt emulsion and cover coat materials are applied .
the completed roadway surface shall be lightly broomed the following morning to remove any excess material without removing any imbedded material .
the contractor shall conduct additional brooming if so directed .
a fog seal shall be applied to the surface of the completed chip seal at the rate of num num gallon per square yard of diluted emulsion when directed .
the fog seal shall have a num emulsion to water dilution rate .
the application rate and the dilution rate may be changed by the engineer .
method of measurement chip seal will be measured by the number of tons cubic yards or square yards of the designated type of cover coat aggregate .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of chip seal will be paid for at the contract price per ton cubic yard or square yard for cover coat material .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit cover coat material type ton cover coat material type lightweight cubic yard cover coat material type __ square yard asphalt emulsion including the asphalt emulsion used for fog seal will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num asphalt materials description this work consists of furnishing asphalt materials of all types and the application of these materials in accordance with these specifications and details shown on the plans .
materials all asphalt materials shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the type and grade of asphalt material will be specified in the contract .
the grade may be changed one step by the engineer at no change in unit price except as provided for under subsection num .
emulsion used for seal coat will be identified as rapid setting or medium setting emulsion and conform to the requirements of subsection num .
construction requirements asphalt materials shall be fortified when required by the contract with an additive of an approved type .
additive shall be uniformly blended with asphalt materials at the refinery or through an approved inline blender as specified in the contract .
asphaltic application methods which result in the discoloration of concrete structures concrete curbs and concrete gutters will not be permitted .
coatings shall be applied so as to cause the least inconvenience to traffic and to permit one way traffic .
traffic will be permitted to travel on fresh asphalt material when it can be accomplished without pickup or tracking of the asphalt material .
asphaltic materials used as fuel or lubricant shall be stored separately .
emulsified asphalt for tack coat shall be diluted before use as shown in the contract or as directed .
method of measurement asphalt cement will be measured by the ton by one of the following methods as determined by the engineer num the pay quantity of asphalt cement will be determined by multiplying the total accepted tons of paving mix by the weighted average of all asphalt content percentages obtained from the field acceptance tests for that item or num the pay quantity of asphalt cement will be determined from the invoices for the asphalt cement delivered to the job corrected by tank stabs .
num num emulsified asphalt and liquid asphaltic materials will be measured by the gallon .
the pay quantity for emulsified asphalt shall be the number of gallons before dilution with water .
concentrated asphalt rejuvenating agent will be measured by the gallon before any water is added .
emulsified asphalt used for seal coat will be measured by the actual number of tons placed and accepted .
the pay quantity of emulsified asphalt will be determined from the invoices of emulsified asphalt delivered to the project corrected by any weight of remaining emulsion in the distributor truck or tanker at the conclusion of the project .
the engineer may elect to calculate the remaining weight in a distributor by use of the average specific gravity of materials delivered or by tank stabs .
the average specific gravity for this calculation will be as determined by central laboratory testing .
if tank stabs are to be utilized for this measurement the contractors process control plan shall include appropriate information for calculations on the distributor used on the project .
this calculation will be limited to less than num gallons of material .
all other material shall require weigh back for proper calculation of payment .
the weight shall be determined by certified scales in accordance with section num .
this will also be monitored and documented by daily distributor gauge readings and yield calculations .
all proposed methods of weighing materials calibrating distributor rates and monitoring the yields shall be included in the process control plan in accordance with section num .
diluted emulsified asphalt used for fog seal on chip seals will be measured by the actual number of tons of asphalt prior to dilution with water .
correction for the final diluted emulsion at the conclusion of a project will assume a num emulsion to water dilution rate and the water subtracted from the weight of the remaining product unless otherwise approved .
basis of payment the accepted quantities measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton or gallon as the case may be for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit asphalt cement ton emulsified asphalt gallon emulsified asphalt rapidsetting polymerized ton emulsified asphalt mediumsetting polymerized ton liquid asphaltic material gallon num num asphalt rejuvenating agent gallon recycling agent gallon high float emulsified asphalt polymerized or emulsified recycling agent used in item num cold asphalt pavement recycle will be paid for by the gallon under the pay item recycling agent .
water used to dilute emulsified asphalt or asphalt rejuvenating agent will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num portland cement concrete pavement description this work consists of constructing a pavement composed of portland cement concrete on a prepared subgrade or base course in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall meet the requirements of the following subsections fine aggregate num coarse aggregate num portland cement num fly ash num water num air entraining admixtures num joint sealant with backer rod num curing materials num reinforcing steel num chemical admixtures num dowel bars and tie bars num construction requirements classification .
concrete shall conform to the requirements for class p concrete as specified in section num unless it is fast track concrete pavement which shall conform to the requirements for class e concrete as specified in section num .
proportioning .
proportioning shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
batching .
batching shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the contractor shall provide a process control plan pcp to minimize voids in the concrete pavement such as clay balls mud balls and other deleterious materials .
it shall also identify the contractors method for ensuring that the provisions of the pcp are met .
this pcp shall be submitted to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
paving operations shall not begin until the engineer has approved the pcp .
this pcp shall identify and address issues affecting the quality of aggregates incorporated into the concrete mix including but not limited to num num num washing aggregates .
num inspection at the pits plants and aggregate storage areas .
num base or floor of pits plants and aggregate storage areas .
num inspection of truck beds .
num methods and frequency of aggregate testing .
num training of operators haulers and inspectors in regards to aggregate quality .
num plant site selection and layout .
num grizzlies and screens on conveyors .
num stabilization of haul roads and construction accesses .
when the engineer determines that any element of the approved pcp is not being implemented the paving shall stop the cause shall be identified and corrected by the contractor before paving operations resume .
mixing .
mixing shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
equipment .
equipment and tools shall be capable of handling materials performing the work producing a product of specified quality and shall be approved .
the equipment shall be at the job site sufficiently ahead of the start of paving operations to be examined and approved .
a hauling equipment .
concrete may be hauled and placed with nonagitator equipment .
bodies of nonagitating equipment shall be smooth mortar tight containers and shall be capable of discharging the concrete at a controlled rate without segregation .
b consolidating and finishing equipment .
concrete shall be spread struckoff and finished by mechanical equipment either from fixed forms or by slip form method unless otherwise permitted .
the contractor shall use an approved longitudinal paver wedge system to create a sloped safety edge .
the contractor shall modify the paver screed to create a safety edge that meets the final crosssection shown on the plans .
the system shall provide a sloped safety edge equal to num degrees plus or minus num degrees measured from the pavement surface cross slope extended .
there may be areas where it is not possible to place the safety edge in conjunction with mainline paving but where the safety edge is required such as transitions at driveways intersections interchanges etc .
in these areas the engineer may allow the contractor to use handwork for short sections or to saw cut the sloped safety edge after paving operations are completed .
the contractor shall submit the proposed paver wedge system for approval at the preconstruction conference .
the engineer may require proof that the system has been used on previous projects with acceptable results or may num num require a test section constructed prior to the beginning of work to demonstrate that it creates an acceptable wedge shape .
paving shall not begin until the system is approved in writing by the engineer .
the finished shape of the safety edge shall extend for the full depth of the concrete pavement or for the top num inches whichever is less .
the full width and depth of concrete requiring a finishing machine shall be consolidated by a single pass of an approved internal vibrator .
internal vibrators shall be operated within a frequency range of num to num vibrations per minute vpm .
vibrators shall not be operated in a manner to cause a separation of the mix ingredients either a downward displacement of large aggregate particles or an accumulation or laitance on the surface of the concrete .
avoidance of separation of the mix may require reduction in the vibrator frequency when forward motion of the paver is reduced .
paving machine operations shall stop if any vibrator fails to operate within specifications .
vibration shall be stopped whenever forward motion of the paver is stopped .
the use of surface vibrators shall be approved by the engineer prior to use .
surface vibrators shall be operated within a frequency range of num to num vpm .
an electronic monitoring device displaying the operating frequency of each individual internal vibrator shall be required for mainline pavement exceeding num feet in length .
the monitoring device shall have a readout display near the operators controls visible to the paver operator and to the engineer .
it shall operate continuously while paving and shall display all vibrator frequencies with manual or automatic sequencing among all individual vibrators .
if a vibrator monitor fails to function properly a hand held device may be used until the monitor is repaired .
the contractor shall measure the vibrations of each vibrator at least once an hour .
the vibrator monitor repair must be made within num hours .
the depth of penetration into the concrete pavement slab of internal vibrators shall be between the surface and mid slab and passing above any reinforcing steel .
an operating position locking device shall be provided so that no part of the vibrating unit can be lowered to the extent that it will come in contact with reinforcing steel or tie bars while paving .
vibrators shall have a minimum eccentric diameter of num inches or as approved by the engineer .
horizontal spacing of vibrators shall not exceed the manufacturers recommendations and shall not exceed num inches from center to center .
the longitudinal axis of the vibrator body shall be mounted approximately parallel to the direction of paving .
vibrators shall meet or exceed the following specifications at manufacturers design frequency of num vpm num amplitude peak to peak num inch .
num centrifuge force num pounds .
num num within the frequency range the contractor shall adjust the frequency to provide optimum consolidation for the mix and placement conditions .
if any vibrator ceases to function properly the paving operation shall be stopped immediately and not resumed until the faulty vibrator has been repaired or replaced .
concrete shall be thoroughly consolidated against and along the faces of all forms and along the full length and on both sides of all joint assemblies by means of vibrators inserted in the concrete .
vibrators shall not come in contact with or cause displacement of the joint load transfer devices subgrade or side forms and shall not interfere with placement of reinforcing steel .
any variation from the above method must have prior written approval from the engineer .
the contractors documentation shall include evidence that the proposed method of consolidation will provide equal or better consolidation than the method described above .
c concrete saw .
when sawed joints are required the contractor shall provide sawing equipment adequate in number onumf units and power to complete the sawing to the required dimensions and at a rate that will control cracking .
the contractor shall provide at least one standby concrete saw in good working order at all times .
an ample supply of saw blades shall be maintained at the site of the work at all times during sawing operations .
the contractor shall provide adequate artificial lighting facilities for night sawing .
all of this equipment shall be on the job during concrete placement .
wastewater generated from concrete saw operations shall be contained and disposed of in accordance with subsection num. d test bridge .
the contractor shall furnish a movable bridge that conforms to subsection numg for use by the department .
preparation of subgrade .
after the roadbed has been graded and compacted the subgrade shall be trimmed to the correct elevation and slope .
for slip form paving the elevation and slope of the trimmer shall be automatically controlled from outside reference lines established for this purpose .
the trimmed subgrade shall extend at least num feet beyond each edge of the proposed concrete pavement when forms are used and at least num foot outside the track width of finishing curing and tining equipment for slip form operations .
any work required beyond the planned roadbed necessary to support the contractors paving equipment or hauling vehicles will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the subbase or base course shall be brought to the specified cross section .
high areas shall be trimmed to the proper elevation .
low areas in untreated bases may be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of the surrounding grade or filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
low areas in treated bases shall be filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
the finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
num num untreated subgrade or base course shall be uniformly moist during concrete placement .
if it becomes too dry the untreated subgrade or base course shall be sprinkled without forming mud or pools of water .
limitations of placing concrete .
limitations on the placing of concrete shall conform to subsections num b and c and num .
placing concrete .
the concrete shall be uniformly deposited on the grade in a manner that requires as little rehandling as possible .
concrete for areas which contain load transfer devices shall not be dumped directly from the hauling vehicles onto the grade .
concrete shall be placed by an approved placer spreader machine .
concrete shall be deposited as near to expansion and contraction joints as possible without disturbing them but shall not be dumped from the discharge bucket or hopper onto a joint assembly unless the discharge is well centered on the joint assembly .
necessary hand spreading shall be done with shovels not rakes .
workers shall not walkin freshly mixed concrete with footwear coated with earth or foreign substances .
all footprints in the fresh concrete shall be vibrated and finished flush with the adjacent surface .
construction equipment other than standard paving equipment will not be allowed to handle plastic concrete in advance of the paver in the roadway without approval .
where concrete is placed adjacent to a newly constructed lane of pavement with the concrete paving equipment operating on the newly constructed pavement the concrete shall have attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi prior to commencing paving .
determination that the concrete has reached num psi shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for protecting the pavement .
any concrete or foreign material that falls on or is worked into the surface of a completed slab shall be removed immediately .
following placement the concrete shall be struck off to conform to the cross section shown on the plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation shown on the plans or established .
the contractor shall provide a mitscannum which is manufactured by mit gmbh .
the contractor shall ensure the mitscannum is calibrated for the specific dowel bar size or load transfer device being placed and is operating within the manufacturers tolerances .
the contractor shall also ensure that the operator of the mitscannum is fully competent in the use of the device .
the contractor shall supply the serial number of the device to be used on the project .
test specimens .
the contractor shall furnish the concrete necessary for casting test cylinders and performing air and slump tests .
finishing .
the sequence of operations shall be strikeoff and consolidation floating and final surface finish .
num num water shall not be added to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations .
the surface shall be finished to a uniform texture true to grade and cross section and free from porous areas .
when the finishing machine either form slip form or hand finishing method leaves a surface that is not acceptable the operation shall stop and corrective action shall be taken .
inability of the finishing machine to provide an acceptable surface finish after corrective action will be cause for requiring replacement of the finishing machine .
wastewater generated from concrete finishing operations shall be contained and disposed of in accordance with subsection num. a hand finishing .
hand finishing shall be minimized wherever possible .
the engineer shall be notified prior to hand finishing work and the proposed hand finished work shall be addressed in the process control plan for concrete finishing .
unless otherwise specified hand finishing methods will be permitted only under the following conditions .
hand finished concrete shall be struck off and screeded with a portable screed that is at least num feet longer than the maximum width of the slab to be struck off .
it shall be sufficiently rigid to retain its shape .
concrete shall be thoroughly consolidated by hand vibrators .
hand finishing shall not be allowed after concrete has been inplace for more than num minutes or when initial set has begun unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
finishing tools made of aluminum shall not be used .
the contractor shall provide a process control plan pcp to ensure that proper hand finishing is accomplished in accordance with current industry standards for concrete pavement placement .
it shall also identify the contractors method for ensuring that the provisions of the pcp are met .
the pcp shall be submitted to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
paving operations shall not begin until the engineer has approved the pcp .
the pcp shall identify and address issues affecting the quality of finished concrete pavement including but not limited to num timing of hand finishing operations num methodology to place and transport concrete num equipment and tools to be utilized num qualifications and training of finishers and supervisors when the engineer determines that any element of the approved pcp is not being implemented or that hand finished concrete is unacceptable work shall be suspended .
the contractor shall supply a written plan to address improperly placed material and how to remedy future hand finishing failures and bring the work into compliance with the pcp .
the engineer will review the plan for acceptability prior to authorizing the resumption of operations .
b floating .
hand floating will be permitted only as specified in subsection num a .
the contractor shall not use floats made of aluminum .
num num c final finish and stationing .
the final surface of the pavement shall be uniformly textured with a broom burlap drag artificial turf or diamond ground in order to obtain the specified texture depth .
the contractor shall submit the proposed method of pccp texturing at the preconstruction conference for approval by the engineer .
surface imperfections resulting from the texturing operation shall be corrected by the contractor at no additional cost .
broom burlap drag or artificial turf texture shall be installed within num minutes after strikeoff or as pavement conditions allow diamond grinding shall be performed using diamond blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for diamond grinding and texturing concrete pavement .
the equipment shall have a positive means of vacuuming the grinding residue from the pavement surface leaving the surface in a clean neardry condition .
diamond grinding shall not occur until the concrete has attained strength of at least num psi .
the diamond grinding process shall produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform in appearance .
the grooves shall be evenly spaced .
any ridges on the outside edge next to the shoulder auxiliary or ramp lanes greater than num inch high shall be feathered out to the satisfaction of the engineer in a separate feather pass operation .
the pavement surface after diamond grinding shall have no depressions or misalignment of slope in the longitudinal direction exceeding num inch in num feet when measured with a num foot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
all areas of deviation shall be reground at no additional cost .
stationing shall be stamped into the outside edge of the pavement as shown on the plans .
joints .
joints shall be constructed of the type dimensions and at locations required by the contract .
when a joint is saw cut more than num inches from the designated location the pavement shall be removed and replaced to the nearest correct joints .
when portions of concrete pavement are removed and replaced the portion removed shall be the full width of the lane and length of the affected slabs .
this corrective action shall be at the contractors expense .
immediately after sawing the sawed joints shall be flushed with water to remove any saw residue and the saw residue shall be completely removed from the surface of the pavement .
this residue shall be removed by approved methods .
all equipment other than saws shall be kept off the pavement until the sawing is complete .
after the proper curing period the sawed joint shall be thoroughly cleaned and immediately sealed in accordance with subsection num. a construction joints .
construction joints shall be slightly tooled while the concrete is plastic and later sawed to the dimensions specified in the contract .
the tooling shall not exceed the width of the sawed joint at any point .
num num in the event tie bars can not or are not placed in plastic state concrete then the tie bars shall be placed according to the following minimum requirements holes with a diameter  inch greater than the bar diameter shall be drilled laterally into the hardened concrete slabs at one half the slab depth num inches on center num to num inches deep .
each hole shall be cleaned out with compressed air using a wand attachment that fits into the hole and is long enough to reach to the back of the hole .
each hole shall be brushed out with a stiff bristled cylindrical brush that is at least  inch larger than the diameter of the hole .
each hole shall be blown out with compressed air a second time using a wand attachment that fits into the hole and is long enough to reach to the back of the hole .
each hole shall be blown out until there is no longer any evidence of dust debris or loose material in the hole .
an approved epoxy shall be used and installed according to the manufacturers instructions .
epoxy shall be placed in the back of each hole with an applicator that will reach the end of the drilled hole .
a sufficient amount of epoxy shall be placed in each hole to insure that the bar will be completely covered with epoxy .
epoxy shall be placed on the bar before inserting the bar into the hole .
the bar shall be inserted into the hole using a twisting motion to facilitate covering the bar and the inside surface of the hole with epoxy minimizing voids or air pockets .
when tie bars are placed in plastic state concrete or drilled and epoxied into a construction joint and if required by the engineer the contractor shall demonstrate by testing at least num of the tie bars that the bar pullout resistance is at least num pounds with slippage of num inch or less .
if two or more tie bars do not meet the required pullout resistance then another num tie bars shall be tested .
if any of the second num do not meet the required pullout resistance then all remaining tie bars shall be tested .
the contractor shall perform additional pullout tests and take corrective action when and as directed .
all steps taken to test bars and to correct repair or replace failed tie bars and the surrounding failed area shall be at the contractors expense .
concrete strength shall have a compressive strength of at least num psi before testing .
astm enum shall be used for performing pullout testing .
num .
longitudinal construction joints .
keyways and epoxy coated deformed steel tie bars shall be placed as specified in the contract .
tie bars shall be placed perpendicular to the longitudinal joint by an approved method .
when adjacent lanes of pavement are constructed separately tie bars may be bent at right angles against the edge of the first lane constructed and straightened into final position before the concrete of the adjacent lane is placed .
in lieu of bent tie bars approved two piece connectors may be used .
if the coating of epoxy coated tie bars is damaged the bars shall be repainted with epoxy paint prior to placement of concrete .
num .
transverse construction joints .
transverse construction joints shall be constructed at a transverse contraction joint as specified in the contract .
transverse construction joints shall be constructed when the concrete num num num. placement is interrupted for more than num minutes or initial set is imminent .
the concrete back to the preceding transverse joint shall be removed and the bulkhead placed in accordance with the requirements for a standard transverse contraction joint .
transverse construction joints shall be placed at the end of each days placement .
b weakened plane joints .
weakened plane joints shall be spaced and skewed as specified in the contract and formed by sawing .
the time of sawing shall be determined by the contractor to prevent random cracking and raveling from the sawing .
the time will depend upon weather conditions temperature and other factors affecting the setting of concrete .
if uncontrolled cracking occurs during or prior to joint sawing the contractor shall move the sawing operation ahead and if necessary add additional sawing units to eliminate uncontrolled cracking .
num .
longitudinal weakened plane joints .
epoxy coated deformed steel tie bars shall be inserted into the plastic state concrete after the auger .
in the event the tie bars are placed behind the machine paving mold vibration will be required during placement .
other methods of bar placement may be acceptable if the contractor can demonstrate satisfactory performance of the alternate method .
proposals of alternate methods or additional costs associated with other methods shall be at the contractors expense .
tie bars shall be placed according to a method approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall use an mit scannum to evaluate the location of tie bars that can not be visually inspected .
each longitudinal joint located within the dowel bar test locations described in subsection num b num that were not visually inspected shall be evaluated with the mit scannum .
the mit scannum shall be calibrated for the tie bar size placed .
the tie bars shall be located within the middle third of the slab and a minimum of  inch below the saw cut .
tie bars shall have a minimum embedment of num inches on each side of the joint .
the weakened plane joint shall be made by sawing in hardened concrete in accordance with the plan details .
tie bars that are cut during sawing operations shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
tie bars that are located less than num inches above the bottom of the slab shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
tie bars that are not embedded a minimum of num inches on each side of the joint shall be replaced .
when the spacing between two inplace tie bars exceeds num inches but less than num inches a tie bar will be installed halfway between the two tie bars unless this installation location is within num inches of a transverse weakened plane joint .
when the spacing between two inplace tie bars exceeds num inches tie bars will be installed at an even spacing not to exceed num inches but shall not be installed within num inches of a transverse weakened plane joint .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a method for replacing the tie bars .
the contractor shall not proceed to replace the tie bars until the method for replacement has been approved by the engineer .
num num num .
transverse weakened plane joints .
when dowel bars are specified in thecontract they shall be installed within the tolerances and of the size grade and spacing specified .
horizontal support wires or shipping braces shall be nondeformed bars or wires with a diameter less than or equal to num inches gauge num wire .
the number of horizontal support wires or shipping braces shall be limited to five per assembly .
the horizontal support wires or shipping braces shall not be cut prior to concrete placement .
the center of the dowel assembly or the insertion location shall be marked on both sides of the pavement slab for reference in sawing the joint .
dowel bars shall be furnished in a rigid welded assembly or placed by a dowel bar insertion dbi machine .
when a dbi is used the contractor shall submit details and specifications of the proposed slipform paver and dbi to the engineer a minimum of num calendar days prior to the concrete pavement prepaving conference .
the contractor shall detail his methodology for ensuring correct marking of dowel bar insertion points and correct sawing of the joints .
the contractor shall ensure that the slipform paver is compatible with the dbi .
the rigid assembly shall be fabricated from number num wire or heavier with vertical support wires every num foot .
assembly shall be securely fastened to the subbase and constructed to firmly hold all the dowel bars at tnum depth parallel to each other and to the pavement grade and alignment .
see standard plan mnum for schematic describing the measurement of each tolerance .
a weightedscore system will be used to conduct a jointbyjoint evaluation of rotational misalignments of the dowel bars .
the joint score is a measure of the combined effects of rotationally misaligned dowel bars at a joint .
a joint score is determined by summing the product of the weights given in table num and the number of bars in each misalignment category and adding num .
for example if a joint has four misaligned bars in the num to num inch range the joint score is num if a joint has one misaligned bar in the range num to num inch and one bar in the num to num inch range the score is num .
a joint score of num is the critical level above which the risk of joint locking is considered high .
num num table num weighting factors used to determine joint score range of rotational misalignment weight num in .
num num in and num in .. num num in and num in .
num num in num individual dowel bar rejection criteria num rotational alignment any bar with a misalignment greater than num in .
num longitudinal side shift any bar that is not embedded at least num inches on each side of the joint .
num depth any bar within the top num inches of the pavement or at a depth less than the sawcut depth .
any bar within the bottom num inches of the pavement .
when rigid assemblies are used to install dowel bars and the bars are rejected for depth the contractor may core the pavement to verify the mit scan depth results .
joint rejection criteria num any joint with a joint score greater than num .
an individual joint may be allowed if the two longitudinally adjacent joints each have a joint score less than or equal to num num any joint that does not have at least three acceptable dowel bars in each wheel path .
corrective measures the following corrective measures will be allowed for the bars or joints that are rejected .
num rotational misalignment .
sawcut the misaligned bars .
joints with less than three uncut bars in each wheel path will require the addition of dowel bars using an approved dowel bar retrofit method .
num longitudinal side shift and missing bars .
addition of dowel bars using an approved dowel bar retrofit method .
num depth .
inadequate cover above the barremove the bar and install a replacement bar using an approved dowel bar retrofit method .
num num inadequate cover below the bar addition of dowel bars using an approved dowel bar retrofit method .
retrofitted dowel bars shall not exceed the dowel bar rejection criteria .
in addition to the above procedures the contractor may propose removal and replacement of the affected slabs .
the contractor shall submit his method of repair to the engineer for approval .
the contractor shall demonstrate his ability to place dowel bars in conformance with the specifications by placement of a test section .
the test section shall be a minimum of num feet in length .
upon completion of the test section the contractor shall shut down paving operations .
during the shutdown period the contractor shall evaluate all joints in the test section using the mitscannum analyze the results and submit the results to the engineer .
paving operations shall not be restarted until the engineer approves the test section results .
the test section will be found acceptable if num of the dowel bars placed are found to be within the rejection criteria .
all dowel bars exceeding the rejection criteria must be addressed using the above corrective measures .
the contractor may continue paving at his own risk before the test section evaluation is complete .
if the project has less than num linear feet of pavement the test section will not be required .
if a project does not have sections of continuous pavement greater than num linear feet the test section will not be required .
upon completion of the test sections and for each week of production the contractor shall prepare an electronic report generated using magnoproof software and submit it to the engineer at the start of each working week during production for the previous weeks work .
all data shall be submitted in the manufacturers native file format along with the calibration files .
the electronic report shall include the following num contract number date highway number and direction of traffic .
num joint number lane number and station .
num bar number and xlocation of dowel bar .
num horizontal and vertical misalignment of each bar in inches .
num overall misalignment of each bar in inches of each bar .
num side shift of each bar in inches .
num depth to center of each bar in inches .
num joint score .
num all measurements exceeding the rejection criteria shall be highlighted in red .
num num due to potential magnetic interference from tie bars dowel bars located within num inches of a tied joint shall not be included in the evaluation .
when the test section is found to be unacceptable the contractor shall perform corrective actions and place a second test section .
if the second test section is found to be unacceptable the contractor shall pave no more than num feet per day until an acceptable test section has been achieved .
once a test section is successfully completed dowel bar placement testing frequency shall be a minimum of one location per num linear feet of each continuous lane including climbing lanes passing lanes acceleration and deceleration lanes and ramps .
sections greater than num linear feet and less than num linear feet require a minimum one of test location .
testing locations shall be determined by a random procedure so that each area has a randomly selected transverse joint location .
at each location five consecutive joints shall be tested .
sections of continuous pavement constructed by the project less than num linear feet will not require dowel bar placement testing .
when any joint score is greater than num or any one bar in a single joint exceeds the rejection criteria joints shall be tested in each direction from the rejected joint until two consecutive joints in each direction are found to be within the rejection criteria .
all delays or costs associated with equipment being rejected for use by the engineer will not be paid for by the department and will be considered a nonexcusable delay in accordance with subsection num c num .
when concrete shoulders or widenings are constructed subsequent to the driving lanes transverse weakened plane joints shall immediately be formed in the plastic concrete of these widenings to create an extension of the existing transverse joint .
this tooled joint shall be formed in such a manner that it controls the cracking and shall be sawed and sealed in accordance with the above requirements .
c expansion joints .
preformed joint filler expansion joints shall be constructed at all existing or proposed structures and features projecting through into or against the pavement and at other locations specified in the contract .
curing .
immediately after the finishing operations have been completed the entire surface and exposed sides of the newly placed concrete shall be sprayed uniformly with a curing compound meeting the requirements of astm cnum type num .
the astm cnum type num curing compound shall be volatile organic content voc compliant .
the curing compound shall be applied within num minutes after the final finish has been applied .
failure to cover the surface of the concrete within num minutes shall be cause for immediate suspension of the paving operations .
num num an initial application of curing compound shall be applied under pressure by mechanical sprayers at the rate of at least num gallon per num square feet of pavement surface .
a second application of curing compound shall be applied within num minutes after the initial application .
the second application rate shall be at least num gallon per num square feet of pavement surface .
alternatively the contractor may apply the curing compound in one application of at least num gallon per num square feet .
additional curing compound shall be applied as needed to ensure that num percent of the pavement is covered .
the spraying equipment shall be fully automated equipped with a tank agitator and a wind guard .
during application the compound shall be in a thoroughly mixed condition with the pigment uniformly dispersed throughout the vehicle and the compound shall be stirred continuously by effective mechanical means .
hand spraying of irregular widths or shapes and surfaces exposed by removal of forms will be permitted .
curing compounds shall not be applied to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
should the curing film become damaged from any cause within num hours after concrete placement except for class e concrete open to traffic the damaged portions shall be repaired immediately with additional curing compound payment for which shall be at the contractors expense .
the sides of pavement slabs shall be immediately sprayed with curing compound when the forms are removed .
cold weather concrete paving .
the contractor is responsible for the strength and quality of the concrete placed during cold weather .
before starting paving operations the contractor shall be prepared to protect the concrete from freezing .
maturity meters to monitor and record time and pavement temperature shall be installed at the time of placement when the air temperature is expected to fall below num f during the next three days or as requested by the engineer when the air temperature is expected to fall below num f during the next three days .
the contractor shall maintain the temperature of the pavement at or above num f until the pavement has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi .
the compressive strength of the concrete shall be determined by the use of maturity meters .
three maturity meters shall be used for each days concrete paving operations .
one maturity meter shall be placed in the final num feet of paving and the two other maturity meters shall be placed at locations designated by the engineer .
the maturity meters shall remain in place until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
the maturity meter probes shall be located on the outside edge of the slab at least num foot and not more than num feet from the edge .
each maturity meter shall be capable of recording the time and temperature at three depths  inch below the surface mid slab and  inch above the bottom of the pavement .
the contractor shall develop maturity relationships for each mix placed during the cold weather conditions described above in accordance with cp num the development of the maturity relationship is part of the trial mix and shall be submitted to the engineer prior to cold weather concrete paving .
num num the contractor shall provide the maturity meters and all necessary wires and connectors .
the contractor shall be responsible for the placement protection and maintenance of the maturity meters and wires .
locations where the maturity meters are placed shall be protected in the same manner as the rest of the concrete pavement .
the following procedures shall be followed if the temperature of the concrete pavement falls below num f before the concrete reaches num psi num the contractor will take cores at locations designated by the engineer .
num the engineer will take immediate possession of the cores and submit the cores to a petrographer for examination in accordance with astm cnum .
num all costs associated with coring transmittal of cores and petrographic examination shall be borne by the contractor regardless of the outcome of the petrographic examination .
num pavement damaged by frost as determined by the petrographic examination shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
repair of defective concrete pavement .
defective concrete pavement shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
this corrective work shall be accomplished prior to joint sealing and final smoothness measurement .
defective concrete pavement replaced after smoothness measurement shall be retested for localized roughness .
the contractors corrective work plan shall be approved prior to performing the work .
when necessary the extent of defects will be determined by the inspection of cores drilled at the contractors expense .
crack depth shall be determined by taking one core at the center of the crack or as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall take the cores and supply to the engineer immediately after the coring .
num pavement thickness t shall be as shown on the plans .
num pavement slabs with any of the following conditions are unacceptable and shall be removed and replaced num pavement slabs in driving lanes containing one or more cracks that are tnum in depth or greater that separate the slab into two or more parts .
num pavement slabs in driving lanes containing one or more cracks that are num inches or greater in length and tnum in depth or greater .
num pavement slabs containing honeycombed areas .
num pavement slabs containing an extreme void as defined below .
num pavement slabs containing more than one void greater in depth than half the pavement thickness .
num num num pavement slabs containing a cumulative surface area of moderate and severe voids as defined below greater than one percent of the slabs total area .
num pavement slabs containing num or more severe voids as defined below .
voids are a defects in a slab consisting of air pockets clay balls or foreign materials such as cans rags bottles etc .
voids may also consist of clumps of sand cement or reinforcing fibers caused by incomplete mixing .
the defect will be considered a moderate void when the largest dimension either height width or length is at least  inch but not more than num inches .
the defect will be considered a severe void when the largest dimension either height width or length is greater than num inches .
the defect will be considered an extreme void when the largest dimension either height width or length is greater than the thickness of the pavement .
when the engineer determines that voids are at an unacceptable level the paving shall stop and the cause shall be identified and corrected by the contractor before paving operations are allowed to resume .
concrete slabs that are determined by the engineer to be acceptable if repaired shall have voids filled using materials from the departments approved products list and methods approved by the engineer .
when portions of concrete pavement are removed and replaced the portion removed shall be the full width of the lane and length of the affected slab .
slabs with cracks penetrating the full depth of pavement shall be removed as required above .
cracks that are num inches or longer and are between num inch and tnum in depth shall be repaired .
the contractor shall submit in writing a plan to repair the partial depth cracks for approval by the engineer .
the engineer will have seven calendar days to review and approve the contractors repair plan in writing .
joints and cracks that are spalled shall be repaired as follows num a saw cut at least num inch outside the spalled area and to a minimum depth of tnum shall be made parallel to the joint or crack .
num the concrete between the saw cut and the joint or crack shall be chipped out to solid concrete to a minimum depth of tnum .
num the cavity formed shall be thoroughly cleaned .
num a prime coat of epoxyresin binder shall be applied to the dry cleaned surface on all sides of the cavity except the face of the joint .
the prime coat shall be applied by scrubbing prime coat material into the surface with a stiff bristle brush .
num placement of portland cement concrete or epoxyresin concrete shall immediately follow the application of the prime coat .
if the spalled area to be repaired abuts a working joint or a working crack which penetrates the full depth of the pavement an insert or other bondbreaking medium num num shall be used to maintain the working joint or crack during the repair work .
if concrete paving exhibits the above defects for two or more days production will be suspended .
the contractor shall submit a written plan to correct these defects .
the plan shall detail at a minimum changes in paving procedures materials and equipment required to construct concrete pavement that meets the specifications .
the engineer will approve the contractors plan prior to the continuation of the concrete paving operation .
surface smoothness .
the roadway surface smoothness shall be tested in accordance with subsection num .
sealing joints .
before installation of the backer rod or sealant the following shall be completed num repair of defective pavement slabs and repair and proper curing of cracks or spalls in accordance with subsection num .
num corrective work for texturing .
num corrective work for pavement smoothness in accordance with subsection num .
a copy of the manufacturers recommendations pertaining to the storage heating and application of the sealant shall be submitted to the engineer prior to commencing work .
these recommendations shall be adhered to by the contractor with such exceptions as required by these specifications .
the contractor shall cut the transverse and longitudinal joints to the width and depth required .
the cut shall be made with a power drive saw equipped with diamond blades .
the residue from sawing shall be removed from the pavement by the contractor .
the material shall be removed at the time of the sawing operation .
any damage to the concrete pavement such as spalling or fracturing shall be repaired by the contractor as directed by the engineer at no cost to the project .
sawing residue shall be immediately removed from all joints .
cleaning repairing and proper curing of all spalls fractures breaks and voids in the concrete surface of the joints shall be accomplished prior to installing the backer rod material or joint sealant .
the backer rod shall be placed in such a manner that the grade for the proper depth of the seal material is maintained .
the contractor shall thoroughly clean the joint and adjacent pavement for a width of at least num inch on each side of the joint of all scale dirt dust residue and other foreign material that will prevent bonding of the joint sealant .
this operation is to be accomplished by sandblasting or jet waterblasting on the same day as the joint sealing operation .
immediately prior to the placement of backer rod material and sealant the joints shall be cleaned using a minimum of num psi of compressed air .
work shall be num num stopped when and if it is found that there is oil or moisture in the compressed air .
work shall not resume until oil and moisture are removed from the compressed air .
sealant shall not be placed unless the surfaces of the joint and the pavement are dry and the weather is dry .
joint sealing will not be allowed when the air or surface temperature falls below num f. manufacturers recommendations shall be followed if a higher temperature is recommended .
sealant shall not be placed prior to expiration of the sealant manufacturers recommended concrete pavement curing period if any .
the contractor shall not place the sealant if there is dust moisture oil or foreign material on that portion of the concrete that is to receive the backer rod or sealant .
the contractor shall prevent smearing of the joint sealant material onto the concrete pavement driving surface .
smeared joint sealant shall be removed from the pavement before it is opened to traffic .
sealing shall be completed before opening the pavement to traffic unless otherwise specified or approved .
construction by form method .
straight side forms shall be made of a metal having a thickness of at least num inch and shall be furnished in sections at least num feet in length .
forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the specified edge thickness of the concrete without horizontal joint and a base width equal to or greater than the depth of the forms .
top surface of the forms shall be set flush with the proposed concrete surface .
flexible or curved forms of proper radius shall be used for curves of num feet radius or less .
flexible or curved forms shall be of a design acceptable to the engineer .
forms shall be provided with adequate devices for secure setting so that when in place they will withstand without visible spring or settlement the impact and vibration of the consolidating and finishing equipment .
flange braces shall extend outward on the base at least  the height of the form .
forms with battered top surfaces and forms that are bent twisted or broken shall not be used .
repaired forms shall not be used until inspected and approved .
builtup forms shall not be used except where the total area of the pavement of any specified thickness on the project is less than num square yards .
the top face of the form shall not vary from a true plane by more than  inch in num feet and the vertical leg shall not vary more than  inch from vertical .
the forms shall contain provisions for locking the ends of abutting form sections together tightly and for secure setting .
forms for bridge approach slabs or for pavement areas with irregular dimensions shall be made of metal or straight sound timber .
forms shall be free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape .
forms shall be staked securely to line and grade to the satisfaction of the engineer .
all mortar and dirt shall be removed from the forms .
a setting forms .
the foundation under the forms shall be compacted true to grade so that the form when set will be firmly in contact for its whole length and at the specified grade .
the roadbed shall be prepared in accordance with subsection num however where the grade at the form line is found to be num num below specified grade it shall be filled and thoroughly compacted to specified grade with granular material in lifts of  inch or less .
imperfections or variations above grade shall be corrected by tamping or by trimming as necessary .
forms shall be set sufficiently in advance of concrete placement to provide time for the engineer to check the line and grade and allow a continuous concrete placement operation .
forms shall be staked in place and free from play or movement in any direction .
the forms shall not deviate from true line by more than  inch at any point .
no excessive settlement or springing of the forms under the finish machine will be tolerated .
forms shall be cleaned and coated with a form release agent or oiled prior to placement of concrete .
the alignment and grade elevations of the forms shall be checked and corrections made by the contractor immediately before concrete placement .
when any form has been disturbed or any grade has become unstable the form shall be reset and rechecked .
b removing forms .
unless otherwise provided forms shall not be removed from freshly placed concrete until the concrete is strong enough to withstand damage when the forms are removed .
after the forms have been removed the sides of the slab shall be cured in accordance with subsection num .
construction by slip form method .
the subgrade shall be completed in accordance with subsection num and then checked and approved by the engineer before installation of load transfer units if required and placement of concrete .
concrete shall not be placed on a subgrade that has not been approved .
if any traffic uses the finished subgrade the grade shall be checked and corrected immediately before placement of the concrete .
the concrete shall be finished with an approved self propelled slip form paver capable of spreading consolidating screeding and finishing the freshly placed concrete with one pass of the paver .
the paver shall be capable of providing a dense and homogeneous pavement with an even texture and no porous areas and to the slope and elevation specified .
the alignment and elevation of the paver shall be automatically controlled from outside reference lines established to obtain a smooth alignment and profile .
for mainline paving of pavement smoothness category i roadways as defined in table num all slip form paving shall be accomplished by a machine capable of paving at least a num feet minimum width as recommended by the equipment manufacturer .
a stabilized bases .
the contractor is responsible for irregularities in the stabilized base and payment will not be made for overruns in concrete quantities if extra concrete is used to correct the irregularities .
b concrete pavement overlays .
trimming will not be required .
the contractor shall place a bond breaker if specified in the contract before placing the concrete .
payment will be made for irregularities under pay item of furnish num num concrete pavement .
the contractor shall furnish a machine to develop and establish a profile grade for the new pavement .
the method used will be by dual slope laser mounted on a num foot ski .
the engineer may approve an alternative method of establishing the profile grade if the contractor demonstrates that equal or superior results will be achieved by the alternative method .
determining pavement thickness .
the contractor shall perform the process control pc testing for pavement thickness .
a process control testing plan shall be submitted and must be approved prior to the start of paving .
this pc testing plan shall include determining the thickness of freshly finished concrete pavement at a minimum frequency of one measurement per num linear feet of each traffic lane .
all shoulders num feet or greater in width shall be tested as a separate traffic lane .
shoulders less than num feet wide shall be included in the adjacent lane .
areas such as sections of mainline pavement that are less than num linear feet long intersections entrances crossovers ramps etc .
shall be grouped into units of num square feet or remaining fraction thereof .
a minimum of one random measurement shall be taken in each unit .
the engineer may inspect the contractors pc tests at any time during the paving operations .
approval and inspection of the contractors pc plan and operations does not constitute acceptance of the pavement thickness and does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for providing the required hardened pavement cores for project acceptance testing .
the contractor shall provide daily written reports to the engineer listing the results of the days pc thickness measurements .
project acceptance pa testing will be the responsibility of the engineer .
pa testing consists of determining pavement thickness by measuring the length of cores taken by the contractor from the hardened pavement as outlined below .
acceptance of the pavement thickness and price adjustment for deficient thickness will be based on project acceptance tests .
the engineer will designate the time and location of the coring and will be present during the coring operation .
the contractor shall obtain num inch or num inch nominal diameter cores from the hardened pavement that are suitable for measuring in accordance with aashto t num .
when the cores are removed from the pavement the engineer will take possession and determine their length in accordance with aashto t num .
the lower tolerance limit tl for pavement thickness shall be plan thickness pt minus num inches .
this tl shall be used in the formulas in section num for incentive and disincentive payments idp quality levels ql and pay factor pf determinations .
any pavement thickness test value that exceeds the pt by more than num inch shall be assigned a value of pt num inch for the purpose of calculating the ql pf and idp .
core locations shall be determined by a random procedure so that each area has a randomly selected coring location .
one core will be taken at each location .
num num where the new portland cement concrete pavement overlays an existing roadway cores for measuring pavement thickness shall be determined by a stratified random procedure in the longitudinal direction and by the point of minimum required thickness in the lateral direction as shown in the plans .
if existing field conditions show a condition where the point of minimum thickness in the lateral direction as shown in the plans is not appropriate the contractor shall identify the location and extent of the area to the engineer at least num hours before paving .
the engineer may exclude this area from pavement thickness measurements for incentive and disincentive payments .
pavement thickness tests will be evaluated in accordance with subsection num .
additional cores will be taken at the direction of the engineer as follows num one additional core at the location of each process control pc test that is less than tl but greater than pt minus num inch .
if the length of the additional core is greater than tl no additional actions will be taken and the original randomly selected acceptance test core will be used to compute idp for the process that includes this material .
num if the additional core or any randomly selected core is less than tl but greater than pt minus num inch the area represented by this core shall become a separate process and this core will not be used to compute an idp .
four additional randomly selected cores will be taken within the area represented by this core .
the four additional cores will be used to compute an idp in accordance with section num .
cores taken at locations not randomly determined such as process control cores will not be used to compute idp .
num when the measurement of any core is less than pt plan thickness minus num inch whether randomly located or not the area represented by this core shall become a separate process and this core will not be used to compute an idp .
the actual thickness of the pavement in this area will be determined by taking exploratory cores .
cores shall be taken at intervals of num feet or less parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until two consecutive cores are found in each direction which are not less than pt minus num inch .
pavement areas found to be less than pt minus num inch shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
exploratory cores taken at the contractors expense will be used to determine the extent of deficient pavement for pavement removal .
when the removal and replacement have been completed four additional randomly selected cores will be taken within the area represented by this core .
the four additional cores will be used to compute an idp in accordance with subsection num .
exploratory cores will not be used to compute idp .
the contractor shall repair all core holes by filling them with an approved nonshrink high strength grout .
num num opening to traffic .
the pavement shall not be opened to traffic until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of num psi .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters .
prior to opening the pavement to traffic the roadway shall be cleaned as approved .
prior to placement of concrete whose strength will be determined with maturity meters the contractor shall provide the engineer a report of maturity relationships in accordance with cp num .
the contractor shall provide maturity meters and all necessary wires and connectors .
the contractor shall be responsible for the placement and maintenance of the maturity meters and wires .
at a minimum a maturity meter will be placed once per day and then once per num square yards .
placement shall be as directed by the engineer .
for placements with multiple maturity meters the lowest compressive strength shall determine when the pavement may be opened to traffic .
if a maturity meter fails is tampered with is destroyed or was not placed the section of pavement represented by the maturity meter shall remain closed to traffic for a period of num days .
the contractor may choose at his own expense to core the section of pavement represented by the maturity meter .
cores will be obtained and tested according to cp num .
cores will be a minimum of num inches in diameter .
a minimum of three cores in a two square foot area will be obtained .
if the compressive strength of any one core differs from the average by more than num percent that compressive strength will be deleted and the average strength will be determined using the compressive strength of the remaining two cores .
if the compressive strength of more than one core differs from the average by more than num percent the average strength will be determined using all three compressive strengths of the cores .
to open the section of pavement the average compressive strength of the cores shall be a minimum of num psi .
method of measurement the quantities of concrete pavement and place concrete pavement to be paid for under these items will be the number of square yards completed and accepted .
the width for measurement will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the plans including additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed by the engineer in writing .
the length will be measured horizontally along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
the quantity of furnish concrete pavement to be paid for under this item will be the number of cubic yards of concrete delivered and accepted .
the concrete volume will be based on batch weights of the concrete converted to volumes by use of the conversion factor developed with the specific mix design .
quantities of concrete that are wasted spilled or used as a result of excessive thickness shall be deducted from the pay quantity .
excessive thickness shall be considered any thickness in excess of  inch greater than the specified depth that continues for a length of num feet or more .
yield shall be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
where concrete is paid for by cubic yard batched the pay num num quantities for all concrete produced with a relative yield less than num shall be corrected in accordance with the following formula corrected cubic yards cubic yards batched relative yield reinforcement other than dowels tie bars and other joint material will be measured by the pound .
basis of payment a general .
the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit concrete pavement inch square yard place concrete pavement square yard furnish concrete pavement cubic yard the price per square yard of concrete pavement shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including dowels tie bars joint materials texturing sawing finishing and rumble strips .
the price per square yard for place concrete pavement shall include everything included in the pay item concrete pavement except furnishing concrete .
the price per cubic yard for furnish concrete pavement shall be full compensation for furnishing the concrete to the project site .
reinforcing steel will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
furnishing installing and monitoring vibrators and vibrator monitoring device will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work for concrete pavement .
incentive and disincentive payments idp will not be made on interim estimates .
idp will be made when the concrete pavement or a major phase of the concrete pavement has been completed and all the data for computing the idp is available .
furnishing calibrating and use of maturity meters wire and other appurtenances including the molding curing and breaking of cylinders for calibration and placement of calibration slabs will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num b where the pavement thickness is more than plan thickness pt minus num inch idp for the element of pavement thickness will be applied to the contract unit price in accordance with subsections num and num .
idp for other elements will be applied to the contract unit in accordance with section num .
adjustments in payment because of deviations in air content will be in accordance with subsection num using num per cu .
yd .
for the unit bid price .
num num section num geosynthetics description this work consists of furnishing and installing geotextiles and geomembranes for paving impervious lining erosion control drainage separators and landscape weed barrier .
materials geotextiles and geomembranes shall meet the applicable requirements of subsections num and num for the use intended .
geotextiles for erosion control for drainage or for separators may be class num class num or class num conforming to subsection num if the class is not specified on the plans .
asphalt cement binder for the paving geotextile shall be the same grade as the asphalt cement used for item num .
paving geotextile shall be a minimum class num conforming to subsection num .
construction requirements areas on which the geosynthetic is to be placed shall have a uniform slope be reasonably smooth free from mounds and windrows and free of any debris or projections which could damage the material .
riprap or cobbles placed on the geosynthetic shall not be dropped from a free fall greater than num feet .
the cushion layer or initial layer of riprap may require careful placement without free fall to avoid geosynthetic damage .
geosynthetics damaged or displaced before or during placement of overlying layers shall be replaced or repaired in accordance with the requirements of this section and to the satisfaction of the engineer at the contractors expense .
paving .
the areas to be treated shall be as designated on the plans .
the pavement surface shall be broomed clean immediately prior to beginning the crack reduction geotextile treatment using a selfpropelled power broom .
the asphalt cement binder shall be applied to the pavement surface at the rate of approximately num gallon per square yard .
the exact application rate shall be as recommended by the geotextile manufacturer and at a temperature of num to num f. paving geotextile shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations immediately after the application of asphalt cement binder .
construction equipment including dump trucks shall not make sudden stops or starts or sharp turning movements on the geotextile .
dump trucks shall not park on the geotextile prior to dumping into the asphalt paver .
traffic shall be kept off all newly placed binder and geotextile material until the asphalt surface has been placed .
num num the minimum temperature of the hot mix asphalt at the time compaction begins shall be num f. the contractor shall make arrangements with the geotextile supplier to have a technician skilled in this paving geotextile work present at the project site during this work to give any technical assistance needed .
impervious lining .
geomembranes for lining shall be loosely laid not stretched to avoid any rupture of the lining .
if field lap joints are necessary the joints shall be formed by lapping the edges of panels in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the contact surfaces of the panels shall be cleaned to remove all dirt dust and other foreign materials .
sufficient cold applied vinyl to vinyl bonding adhesive shall be applied to the contact surfaces in the joint area and the two surfaces pressed together immediately .
wrinkles in the joints shall be smoothed out .
necessary repairs to the geomembrane shall be patched using the geomembrane material itself and coldapplied vinyl to vinyl bonding adhesive .
the bonding adhesive shall be applied to the contact surfaces of both the patch and the lining to be repaired and the two surfaces pressed together immediately .
any wrinkles in the repair joints shall be smoothed out .
erosion control and drainage .
geotextiles for erosion control or drainage shall be loosely laid not stretched with the roll direction the same as the anticipated water flow and in a manner that avoids any rupture of the cloth .
the geotextile may be anchored in place with securing pins at num foot spacing along but not closer than num inches to all edges and to the extent necessary to prevent displacement .
when shown on the plans erosion control geotextile may be held in place using num inches of clean embankment with a minimum num inch trench at the top of the slope .
overlaps shall be at least num inches on slopes num and flatter and at least num inches on slopes steeper than num .
laps shall be made with the uphill layer on top .
sewn seams in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations may be used in place of overlaps .
full rolls shall be used whenever possible in order to minimize the number of roll end laps .
lengths and widths of individual sheets shall be at the contractors option .
geotextile separator .
the geotextile shall be unrolled as smoothly as possible on the prepared subgrade in the direction of construction traffic .
the geotextile shall be placed by machinery or by hand labor .
the geotextile shall not be dragged across the subgrade .
wrinkles and folds in the geotextile not associated with roadway curves shall be removed by stretching and staking as required .
the geotextile may be held in place prior to placement of cover by pins staples or piles of fill or rock .
on curves the geotextile may be folded to conform to the curve .
the fold or overlap shall be in the direction of construction and held in place as prescribed above .
adjacent geotextile rolls shall be overlapped in the direction of subbase placement using the guidelines in table num .
before covering the condition of the geotextile will be inspected by the engineer to determine that no holes rips or other defects exist .
if any defects are observed the section of the geotextile containing the defect shall be repaired by placing a new num num layer of geotextile extending beyond the defect in all directions a minimum distance equal to the overlap shown in table num .
alternatively the defective section may be replaced .
either sewn seams or overlaps unsewn seams shall be used in construction .
the widths of the overlaps shall conform to table num .
sewn seams shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the first lift of cover material shall be enddumped or spread over the geotextile from the edges of the geotextile .
the height of the dumped pile shall be limited to avoid local bearing capacity failures .
the first lift of cover material shall be graded to a num inch thickness or to top of grade whichever is less and compacted .
equipment shall not be on the treated area with less than the minimum thickness of compacted cover material over the geotextile .
small dozer equipment or front end loader shall be used to spread the cover material .
construction vehicles shall be limited in size and weight such that rutting in the initial lift is no deeper than num inches .
if rut depths exceed num inches the contractor shall use a smaller size and weight of construction vehicles .
ruts shall be filled in with cover material .
compaction of lifts shall be accomplished without damaging the geotextile .
construction equipment shall not make turns on the first lift of cover material .
table num minimum required overlap subgrade strength rvalue overlap width unsewn seam inches num num num num num num num num landscape weed barrier .
landscaped and mulched areas to be covered by geotextile shall be brought to finish grade below the depth of the mulch material shown on the plans .
all soil preparation shall be completed prior to geotextile application .
geotextile for landscape weed barrier shall be a minimum class num conforming to subsection num .
the geotextile shall be rolled directly onto prepared soil in the direction of water flow .
the geotextile shall be applied loosely without stretching .
the top edge of the geotextile shall be buried in a num inch check slot at the top of the slope and stapled .
when specified metal landscape border shall be placed adjacent to check slot on the uphill side so as not to puncture the geotextile .
num num where one roll of geotextile ends and a second roll begins the upslope piece shall be brought over the start of the second roll and overlapped in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
where two or more widths of geotextile are applied side by side they shall be overlapped in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
staples shall be inserted at a num foot spacing along the outer edges of the geotextile where a metal border is not used .
in level planting beds geotextile shall be secured under metal landscape border by extending the geotextile num inches beyond the metal landscape border and driving stakes through the geotextile .
method of measurement geomembranes and geotextiles will be measured by the square yard of surface area covered complete in place .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit geomembrane square yard geotextile erosion controlclass square yard geotextile drainageclass square yard geotextile weed barrier square yard geotextile paving square yard geotextile separatorclass square yard securing pins staples adhesives sewn seams asphalt cement brooming skilled technician and other work and materials necessary for placement will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num division num structures section num steel sheet piling description this work consists of furnishing and driving corrugated steel sheeting or steel sheet piling in accordance with these specifications and in conformity to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials type i steel sheet piling shall be used where shown on the plans and shall be a corrugated steel sheeting nongalvanized interlocking type at least num gauge in thickness with a minimum section modulus of num cubic inches per unit of num inches in width .
steel sheeting shall conform to astm a num grade num for num gauge or num gauge steel grade num for heavier gauges .
the sides for each piece of sheeting shall be furnished with an interlock that is continuous for the full length of the sheeting .
the interlock shall have an opening of sufficient width to allow free slippage of the adjoining sheet .
type ii steel sheet piling shall be of the type and weight shown on the plans and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num or aashto m num grade num .
construction requirements steel sheet piling shall be driven to form a tight bulkhead .
a driving head shall be used and any piling which does not provide a tight bulkhead shall be pulled and replaced at the contractors expense .
steel sheet piling that is full length as shown on the plans and is required to be driven below the specified cutoff elevation shall be spliced with additional steel sheet piling with a full penetration butt weld .
splicing will be limited to three per pile sheet .
a splice shall not be less than num feet from another splice on the same pile .
welding shall conform to the applicable requirements of ansiaws d num .
where specified on the plans sheet piling shall be painted as described in subsection num .
method of measurement steel sheet piling will be measured by the square foot complete in place and accepted to cutoff elevation .
each approved splice will be measured as an additional num square feet of sheet pile .
num num the area of sheet piling cutoff to be measured will be those random areas of sheet piling which result from cutting off the tops of driven sheet piling and not used in the work .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of steel sheet piling will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot of each type used .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit steel sheet piling type square foot sheet piling cutoffs num square feet or less in area will be paid for at the contract unit price less num percent .
these cutoffs shall become the property of the contractor .
sheet pile cutoffs greater than num square feet will not be paid for .
num num section num piling description this work consists of furnishing and driving all types of piling shown in the contract other than sheet piling in accordance with these specifications and at the locations shown on the plans or established .
materials steel piling .
structural steel shapes used as piling shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num .
steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm a num grade num .
closure ends shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num .
steel shell piles shall conform to the requirements of aisi c num or c num steel .
closure plates driving points and their connecting welds shall not project beyond the perimeter of the pile tip for steel pipe and steel shell piles .
commercial driving points may be used for end bearing piles .
all steel pipe piles and steel shell piles shall be filled with class b concrete conforming to subsection num .
steel piling may be ordered in plan lengths or in num to num foot lengths .
construction requirements pile driving equipment .
a pile hammers .
steam air diesel or hydraulic impact hammers may be used to drive all types of piles .
vibratory or gravity hammers shall not be used to drive bearing piles .
num .
for steam air and diesel hammers a minimum manufacturers rated energy as shown in table num shall be used .
table num pile size area square inches minimum energy footpounds hp numxnum num num hp numxnum num num hp numxnum num num hp numxnum num num hp numxnum num num hp numxnum num num num num the rated energy of the hammer shall not be greater than num foot pounds per square inch of unit area .
exceptions to these limits are permissible if it is demonstrated by wave equation analysis that the piles can be safely and efficiently installed with hammers having ratings outside of these energy limits .
if more than one size of piling is designated in the contract the contractor shall provide the necessary hammer or hammers to meet these requirements for all sizes of piles used .
num .
hydraulic hammers may be substituted for steam air and diesel hammers .
the minimum energy requirement for hydraulic hammers shall meet the value specified in table num .
num .
when designated in the contract a hammer with a rated energy determined by the wave equation analysis from an approved program such as weap shall be used .
when wave equation analysis is used in the design phase of a project a range of acceptable hammer energies will be included in the contract .
b hammer cushion .
all impact pile driving equipment except hydraulic hammers shall be equipped with a suitable hammer cushion to prevent damage to the hammer or piles and to ensure uniform driving behavior .
wood wire rope and asbestos cushion material shall not be used .
a striker plate as recommended by the hammer manufacturer shall be used .
the hammer cushion may be inspected by the engineer at any time during progress of the work .
any hammer cushion whose thickness is reduced by num percent or more of the original thickness shall be replaced at the contractors expense before driving is permitted to continue .
c pile driving head .
appropriate driving heads mandrels or other devices shall be provided in accordance with the driving head manufacturers recommendations .
the driving head or insert shall be capable of capturing the pile in alignment such that the center of the pile is held within num percent or num inches whichever is less of the center of the force of the hammer .
d leads .
pile driving leads shall be constructed in a manner that affords the pile hammer freedom of movement while maintaining alignment of the pile hammer and the pile to insure concentric impact for each blow .
leads may be either fixed or swinging .
swinging leads shall be fitted with a pile gate at the bottom of the leads and shall be long enough to be securely fixed at the ground at all times .
e followers .
followers shall be used only when specified on the plans or approved in writing by the engineer .
approval of pile driving equipment .
all pile driving equipment proposed in conformance with subsection num shall be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to delivery to the site .
approval will be based upon num num pile driving equipment data such as rated energy impact energy or striking ram weight which the contractor shall submit .
if the contract requires hammers determined by subsection numanum the contractor will be notified of the acceptance or rejection of the driving system within ten calendar days of the engineers receipt of the pile and driving equipment data .
the approval criteria for wave equation analysis will consist of num the pile stress at the required ultimate pile capacity and num pile drivability .
the driving stresses in the pile indicated by the wave equation analysis shall not exceed num percent of the yield stress of the steel .
once approved changes in the pile driving equipment shall not be made without additional approval and will be considered only after the contractor has submitted the necessary information for a revised wave equation analysis .
the approval process outlined above shall be applied to the revised driving equipment .
all pile hammers delivered to the job site which the engineer determines either by observation or by pile driving analyzer pda are not in good working condition will be rejected .
driving piles .
foundation piles shall not be driven until the excavation is complete unless authorized by the engineer .
after driving is complete all loose and displaced material shall be removed from around the piling before pouring any concrete .
piles shall be driven within a variation of not more than  inch or less per foot from the vertical or from the batter shown in the contract .
foundation piles shall not be more than within num inches out of the position shown in the contract after driving .
a minimum pile penetration of num feet in natural ground is required for all piles .
this requirement may be waived by the engineer if the subsurface material at the pile tip location is bedrock or other acceptable bearing material provided that the bearing elevation is below scour depth .
if a minimum pile tip elevation is specified in the contract all piles shall be driven to or below this elevation unless otherwise approved in writing .
if the pile can not be driven to the minimum tip elevation the engineer will determine if predrilling is required .
any predrilling not required by the contract and ordered by the engineer will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
the depth of the predrilling will be determined by the engineer .
unless otherwise specified in the contract a minimum of two piles per structure will be monitored each at a separate foundation element abutment or pier foundation .
monitoring will be conducted using a pda to determine the condition of the pile the efficiency of the hammer and the static bearing capacity of the pile and to establish the pile driving criteria .
monitoring will be conducted by the engineer or the contractors engineer .
the plans will designate the party responsible for monitoring .
the pda measurement equipment takes approximately one hour per pile to install .
all necessary work num num performed by the contractor associated with the dynamic monitoring will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
if the engineer requests additional piles to be monitored or requests the contractor to monitor the pile or piles all necessary time required and work performed by the contractor will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
if piles are monitored by the contractor the contractor shall provide to the engineer a written pile driving summary from the contractors engineer .
the summary shall detail the driving criteria including driving resistance and driving stresses based on the wave equation analysis using program such as weap .
and the summary shall also detail the pile capacity criteria based upon signal matching analysis using an approved program such as capwap .
the criteria shall be approved by the engineer prior to the driving of additional piles .
piles shall be driven to refusal in natural ground as determined by the pda at or below the estimated minimum tip elevations specified on the plans .
refusal criteria will be established by the engineer after pda monitoring has been performed .
if refusal criteria has been reached in natural ground and piles have not been driven to the estimated tip elevation but have been driven below minimum tip elevation the engineer may order the driving to be continued for num additional blows .
if changes are made to the pile driving system hammer fuel setting piling cushioning etc .
after the pda monitoring has been completed and refusal criteria established new refusal criteria shall be determined using the pda .
new criteria shall be determined at the contractors expense .
water jets may be used in conjunction with the hammer to obtain the specified penetration only with approval .
the last num feet of penetration shall be obtained by driving without the use of water jets .
test blows to determine average penetration shall be applied after the jets have been removed .
the use of water jets will not modify any of the requirements of this section .
drilling holes to facilitate pile driving .
holes to facilitate pile driving shall be drilled at all locations shown on the plans and to elevations shown .
when test piles are shown on the plans they shall be used to determine if drilling holes to facilitate pile driving is required .
if the test pile or piles do not reach the estimated tip elevation as specified in subsection num holes shall be drilled to facilitate pile driving .
if the test pile or piles reach the estimated tip elevation shown on the plans and develop the required bearing capacity as determined in subsection num drilling holes will not be required and the remainder of the piles shall be driven in the normal manner .
the drilling of holes shall be done in such manner that the piling will stand accurately positioned as shown on the plans .
the diameter of the drilled holes and the material used to fill oversize holes shall be as stipulated herein unless otherwise designated on the plans .
num num the diameter of the drilled holes shall be num to num inches larger than the outside diameter of steel pipe piles .
the diameter of the drilled holes shall be num to num inches larger than the diagonal web depth for h piles .
if the maximum diameter of the drilled hole is exceeded due to sloughing drifting overdrilling or other causes the void area between the driven pile and the edge of the hole shall be filled with sand or pea gravel at the contractors expense .
the engineer will determine if shooting holes with explosives or redesign is necessary when piles can not be driven or holes drilled .
capping piles .
steel pipe or shell piles will be inspected after all adjacent piles within a num foot radius have been driven .
the contractor shall supply suitable lights for the inspection of the insides of these piles .
water or other foreign material shall be removed and the pipe or shell shall be filled with concrete .
the tops of all steel piles shall be cut off square and embedded in the concrete as shown on the plans .
extensions and splices .
there will not be a limit placed on the number of splices allowed for steel piles however payment will be limited to two splices per pile .
commercial splices may be used if approved by the engineer .
steel piling shall be spliced with a squaregroove buttjoint weld using a  inch root opening .
weld deposition on pipe piles shall be made in two separate passes around the outside perimeter of the pile .
weld deposition on steel h piles shall be made in two passes .
the first pass shall be made from one side of the part being welded and shall penetrate onehalf the thickness of the member .
the second pass shall be made on the side opposite from the first .
for both types of piles the slag left by the first pass shall be completely removed before making the second pass .
all cuts at splices are to be made normal to the longitudinal axis of the pile .
the cutoff portion may be driven to start the next pile or it may be welded to previously driven piles to provide the necessary extension length .
splices must be authorized .
welding shall conform to the applicable requirements of ansiaws dnum .
welders shall be prequalified in accordance with the standard qualification procedure of the american welding society and follow the required welding procedures specified in the plans .
the engineer may consider a welder qualified when the welders certificate states that the welder has been doing satisfactory welding of the required type within a one year period previous to the subject work .
a certification shall be submitted for each welder and for each project stating the name of the welder the name and title of the person who conducted the examination the kind of specimens the position of welds the results of the tests and the date of the examination .
such certification of prequalification may also be accepted as proof that a welder on field welding is qualified if the contractor who submits it is properly staffed and equipped to conduct such an examination or if the examining and testing is done by a recognized agency which is staffed and equipped for such purpose .
num num approved commercial splices may be used as an alternate for welded splices .
defective piling .
piles damaged in driving by reasons of internal defects or improper driving driven out of their proper location or driven below the elevation specified on the plans without approval shall be corrected at the contractors expense by one of the following approved methods num the pile shall be withdrawn and replaced by a new and if necessary longer pile .
num a second pile shall be driven adjacent to the defective pile .
num the pile shall be spliced or built up .
num a sufficient portion of the footing shall be extended to properly embed the pile .
all piles pushed up by the driving of adjacent piles shall be driven down again .
pile tips .
pile tips shall be placed on piles when shown on the plans .
pile tips and details for fastening tips to piles shall be in accordance with the plans or approved .
if difficult driving conditions are encountered the engineer may order the contractor to furnish and attach pile tips even though tips are not required by the plans .
in that event the tips will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
painting steel piles .
the exposed portion of steel piles not embedded in concrete including num feet below the stream bed or ground line shall be painted as described in section num .
method of measurement piling will be measured by the linear foot in place .
measurement shall be from the tip to the cutoff elevation .
the length of pile cutoff to be measured will be those random lengths of piling which result from cutting off the tops of driven piles and which are not used in the work .
where piling is driven to within num foot of the elevation of cutoff butt ends will be included in the length measured for piling actually driven .
measurement of splices will be limited to two per steel pile except when extra splices are ordered .
splices for piles will be measured as additional length of pile .
the additional length for each splice will be as follows steel h piles num linear feet steel pipe piles num linear feet .
pile tips and end closure plates for steel pipe piles will be measured by the actual number used .
drilled holes to facilitate pile driving will be measured by the linear foot to the nearest foot .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price per unit of measurement for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit steel piling size linear foot steel pipe piling size linear foot steel shell piling size linear foot drilling hole to facilitate pile driving linear foot end plate each pile tip each steel cutoffs num feet or less in length will be paid for at the contract unit price less num percent .
these cutoffs shall become the property of the contractor .
pile cutoffs greater than the above specified lengths will not be paid for .
authorized jetting blasting or other work necessary to obtain the specified penetration of piles will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
concrete used to fill steel pipe will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num drilled caissons description this work consists of drilling holes and placing reinforcing steel and concrete in the drilled holes in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades on the plans or established .
materials concrete shall be class bz or as specified in the contract and shall conform to the requirements of section num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
construction requirements drilled holes .
caisson excavation shall be performed by heavy duty drilling rigs suitable for penetrating the cobbles boulders and bedrock to the required depths .
blasting will not be allowed .
the top of the caissons shall be the elevation shown on the plans .
the elevations of the bottom of the caissons shown on the plans are approximate only and may be revised by the engineer depending on the conditions encountered .
the minimum embedment length into bedrock shall be as shown on the plans .
materials resulting from drilling shall be disposed of by the contractor .
the maximum permissible variation of the center axis of any shaft at the top from its plan location shall be the greater of num inches or num of the shaft diameter .
caissons shall not be out of plumb more than three percent of their length .
if a drilled hole does not meet these requirements it shall be reamed or redrilled as required to bring it to the proper alignment or drilled an additional distance as approved by the engineer .
additional concrete required as a result of these measures shall be provided at the contractors expense .
the excavation shall be protected with a suitable cover which will prevent persons or materials from failing into the hole .
when caving conditions are encountered drilling shall be discontinued until the construction method used will prevent excessive caving .
cleaning and inspection .
holes shall be pumped free of water cleaned of the loose material and inspected by the engineer .
a drilled hole may be entered for inspection when deemed necessary by the engineer but only when a protective casing is in place .
the contractor shall provide fresh air ventilation electric lights suitable means of access the protective casing and shall assist the engineer as directed in making the required inspection of the drilled excavation and foundation material .
num num reinforcing steel .
after a hole has been inspected and approved the reinforcing steel shall be installed and the concrete placed as soon as possible .
the required reinforcing steel cage for the drilled caisson shall be completely assembled and placed as a unit for the full length of the caisson immediately prior to the placing of any concrete .
if concrete placement does not immediately follow the cage placement the engineer may order the steel to be removed from the excavation so that the integrity of the excavation including the presence of loose material in the bottom of the hole and the surface condition of the reinforcing steel may be determined by inspection .
the reinforcing steel cage shall be supported from the top during the placement of the concrete to achieve the clearances shown on the plans .
setting the cage on the bottom of the hole will not be permitted .
the support system shall be concentric to prevent racking and displacement of the cage .
approved spacers shall be provided at intervals not to exceed num feet along the cage to insure concentric positioning for the entire length of the cage a minimum of three spacers shall be provided at each spacing interval .
additional reinforcement may be added to stiffen the cage at the contractors option and expense .
steel casing .
if casings are used they shall be steel of ample thickness and strength to withstand distortion due to handling the internal pressure of fresh concrete and the external pressure of the surrounding soil and ground water and shall be watertight .
the inside diameter of the casing shall be equal to or larger than the caisson dimensions shown on the plans .
the use of casings larger than the diameter of the caissons shown on the plans must have prior approval from the engineer .
additional concrete required due to the use of oversize casings shall be provided at the contractors expense .
casings shall be removed unless otherwise designated on the plans .
casings shall be removed in a manner such that voids between the excavation and the casing will be completely filled with fresh concrete .
the removal method shall prevent the intrusion of water sloughing of the excavation displacement of the reinforcing steel and lifting of the concrete .
the casing removal shall be performed in a manner that minimizes the displacement of the concrete from its initial placement point .
if the casing is stuck and cant be removed without damaging the hole it may be cut off and left in place with the engineers approval or other remedial measures taken as approved .
the top elevation of the reinforcing steel cage shall be checked before and after the casing removal .
upward movement in excess of num inches or downward movement in excess of num inches of the reinforcing steel cage will be cause for rejection of the caisson .
concrete settlement in the caisson will be determined by measuring the top surface of the concrete num immediately after the casing is removed and additional concrete poured to the desired elevation and num at least four hours later .
concrete settlements in excess of  of the caisson diameter will also be cause for rejection of the caisson .
num num concrete .
for any portion of the caisson socketed in shale if the concrete is not placed within four hours of drilling the contractor shall drill into the bedrock an additional  of the specified penetration prior to placing the concrete .
the reinforcing cage shall extend to the new tip elevation .
foundation piling shall not be driven nor excavation performed within a radius of num feet nor additional caissons drilled within a clear distance of num feet of concrete that has not attained a compressive strength of at least num psi as determined by the engineer .
other construction methods such as slurry displacement may be used if approved .
the procedure for stepbystep construction shall be approved prior to beginning the work .
concrete for each drilled caisson shall be placed in one continuous pour .
concrete may be placed in a dry hole by freedrop from the surface provided that a hopper or other approved device is used to force the concrete to drop straight down without hitting the sides of the hole or any reinforcing steel before striking the bottom .
a drilled hole may be considered dry at the time of concrete placement if without dewatering the water depth at the bottom of the hole is not in excess of num inches .
where an excavation can not be practically dewatered for the placement of concrete the engineer may authorize a portion of the concrete to be placed under water in accordance with subsection numf .
concrete placed below water shall be limited to a height sufficient to seal the excavation and to withstand hydrostatic pressure .
immediately following the placement of this sealing concrete the remaining portion of the hole shall be dewatered and the remainder of the concrete shall be placed .
concrete within the top num feet of the caisson shall be vibrated during placement .
the layer of waterdiluted concrete which has been floated to the top during placement shall be removed to the depth directed by the engineer and wasted .
the removed layer shall not be less than num inches thick .
only that concrete which meets specification requirements shall remain as part of the caisson .
immediately following the concrete placement and the casing removal the projecting reinforcing steel shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove accumulations of splashed mortar .
this work shall be completed before the concrete takes its initial set .
care shall be taken when cleaning the reinforcing steel to prevent damage to or breakage of the concretesteel bond .
method of measurement drilled caisson will be measured by the linear foot from the elevation shown on the plans to the bottom of the hole as drilled .
each approved splice of the reinforcing cage for additional length of caisson will be measured as  linear foot of additional length of drilled caisson .
num num basis of payment the unit price of drilled caissons shall be full compensation for making all excavations hauling and disposal of excavated material performing all necessary pumping furnishing and placing required concrete and reinforcement steel including the reinforcement projecting above the tops of the caissons necessary for splicing all backfilling removing casings and for furnishing all tools labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
no extra payment will be made for casing left in place .
a payment .
the accepted quantities for drilled caissons will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot except for price adjustments allowed in b below .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit drilled caisson inch linear foot b price adjustments .
when the engineer orders holes to be drilled to a lower elevation than shown on the plans compensation for additional depth will be as follows additional length compensation num to num feet contract unit price over num feet to num feet contract unit price plus num over num feet as provided in subsection num additional compensation will not be paid for the portions of a caisson that are extended due to the contractors method of operation as determined by the engineer .
num num section num walls description this work consists of constructing a concrete panel facing mechanically stabilized earth mse retaining wall system at the locations and to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
either metallic or geosynthetic reinforcement woven fabrics or geogrids as specified in this specification may be used as mse reinforcement in the reinforced structure backfill zone .
the retained structure backfill zone is the structure backfill retained by the reinforced structure backfill zone as shown on the plans .
materials shop drawings .
the contractor shall submit six sets of shop drawings and certified material test reports for review prior to construction of the wall .
see subsection num for a complete list of submittal requirements .
shop drawings shall be submitted in accordance with subsection num .
the shop drawings shall provide the details necessary to demonstrate compliance with the contract including a wall layouts .
wall layouts shall conform to lines and grades on the plans including start corner and end stations leveling pad step breaks total number of panels and top and bottom of wall elevations .
for walls with rail anchoring slabs the top of panel elevations shall be within num inches of the elevation shown on the plans measured from the bottom of the anchoring slab .
the construction batter required to achieve the batter shown on the plans shall be shown on the shop drawings .
if temporary walls are required for the construction of the permanent wall the permanent wall vendor shall provide the shop drawings and certified material test reports for temporary walls .
b panel and reinforcement locations .
unless otherwise shown on the plans each layer of soil reinforcement shall be connected to the back of each facial panel and the panel numbering and placement sequence shall be shown .
the back of each panel shall be logically numbered with its location .
panel to panel panel to reinforcement connection detail and limits of special panels at curved wall corner shall be shown .
c wall elevations .
except for the top of the leveling pad wall elevations given on the plans are based on the desirable wall height .
the actual panel and reinforcement elevations shall be marked on the shop drawings by taking into account the supplied panel as well as special panel heights for matching the front and top finished grade .
d soil reinforcement material .
the soil reinforcement type minimum average roll value of the ultimate tensile strength tult marv for geosynthetic soil reinforcement or yield strength for metallic soil reinforcement spacing num num lengths elevations and the corresponding wall design height shall be shown on the shop drawings .
the starting and ending stations for change in grade of reinforcement material shall be shown for walls with different grade of reinforcement material at the same elevation .
material grade shall be clearly identified on each roll of reinforcement to avoid errors in placement .
elevations of the reinforcement layers shall be as specified on the shop drawings .
e soil reinforcement length rl .
the soil reinforcement length shall be measured from the back face of the concrete panel to the end of the soil reinforcement as measured to the last cross member .
except for secondary reinforcements soil reinforcement lengths shall not be less than the lengths specified on the plans .
for wall segments with a design height dh greater than or equal to num feet the soil reinforcement shall be the same length from top to bottom of the wall .
for wall segments with a design height dh less than num feet the length of the top layer of soil reinforcement shall be num feet and all other layers of soil reinforcement shall be the same length from top to bottom of the wall .
unless shown otherwise on the plans the soil reinforcement lengths shall be as follows design height dh reinforcement length rl reinforcement length top layer dh num num num num dh num dh num dh num num x dh but at least num num x dh but at least num the reinforcement lengths shown on the shop drawings shall be the reinforcement length required for internal stability and pullout only but they shall not be less than those shown in the table above .
external stability bearing pressure sliding and overturning and global stability have already been considered and checked in the design .
f panel size and soil reinforcement spacing .
num .
except for full height panels the maximum panel size is num square feet and the minimum panel height shall be num inches .
num .
for full height panels the maximum panel width shall be num feet and the maximum panel height shall be num feet .
differential deflection between adjacent panels shall be limited to num .
the vendor shall supply design calculations regarding panel concrete crack size control during shipment and construction and estimated joint width and differential deflection num num limits .
the use of full height panels with widths greater than num feet or heights greater than num feet is subject to the engineers approval .
num .
the maximum vertical spacing between layers of adjacent soil reinforcement shall not exceed num inches .
except the half height panel used at the top and bottom of the wall including all partial and extended height panels at the top of the wall there shall be at least two layers of reinforcement per panel .
num .
the first and bottom layers of reinforcement shall be within num inches measured from the top of panel and from the top of leveling pad accordingly .
num .
shiplap joints are required at horizontal and vertical joints for segmental panel walls and all vertical joints for full height panel walls .
the gap between two adjacent panels shall be  to num inch .
shiplap joints are not required at the vertical joints of segmental and full height panel when a minimum of num inches depth of continuous crushed rock wrapped with class num geotextile is installed behind the joints as shown in the shop drawings .
geotextile class num and crushed rock will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
neoprene cushions shall be provided at all horizontal joints as shown on the plans .
g long term design strength ltds of reinforcement .
num .
the design charts on the plans define the strengths required for the zone of mechanical reinforcement of soil .
based on the total summed ltds the reinforcement proposed by the shop drawings for a specific wall height shall meet or exceed the total ltds shown on the plans .
this proposed reinforcement shall allow for a maximum of plus or minus num percent variation in each individual layer .
num .
metallic inextensible soil reinforcement .
the net section at the soil reinforcement to panel connection shall be used for the sacrificial thickness calculation .
the following minimum sacrificial thickness for reinforcement shall be used for the num year ltds calculations galvanization loss num myear for first num years num myear for subsequent years carbon steel loss num myear after zinc depletion num .
geosynthetic extensible soil reinforcement .
geosynthetic soil reinforcement shall be a geogrid or woven geotextile .
for polyester pet polypropylene pp and highdensity polyethylene hdpe reinforcement the ltds of material shall be determined using the following factors of safety to ensure the required design life .
unless otherwise specified ltds shall not exceed the following k percent of its ultimate tensile strength tult marv i.e .
num num ltds k tult marv num geogrid reinforcement hdpe pet products k tensar num fortrac miragrid strata synteen and raugrid num num all products not listed above products k all geogrid or woven geotextile products meeting aashto standard specifications for highway bridges numth edition num products not meeting aashto standard specifications for highway bridges numth edition including nonwoven geotextile products num h design heights and supplied reinforcing material .
unless otherwise defined on the plans the wall design height shall be measured vertically from the top of the leveling pad to the top of the concrete rail anchoring slab for walls with railing or to the top of the castinplace concrete coping for walls without railing .
for walls that are in front of a bridge abutment that is founded on a deep foundation the design height used to determine the soil reinforcement length shall be measured vertically from the top of the leveling pad to the top of the roadway carried by the bridge and the wall .
bridge approach slabs shall not be considered in the design of the mse wall .
for both geosynthetic and metallic reinforcement the required reinforcement ltds and the supplied ltds determined in accordance with the k factors or depletion of material as defined above with corresponding brand and grade of material shall be marked clearly on the elevation view or in a tabulation summary .
the ltds of the supplied reinforcement grade must meet or exceed the required ltds corresponding to the reinforcement spacing provided .
i tiered walls .
for the reinforcement layouts of tiered walls the overall geometry the reinforcement length and the sum of the ltds provided from all layers in all tiers shall be in close conformity with the retaining wall system shown on the plans in order to ensure that local global and internal stability requirements have been met .
j obstructions .
details for the placement of soil reinforcement around obstructions i.e .
steel piles concrete piers concrete boxes pipes etc .
shall be shown on the shop drawings .
design calculations shall be provided num num showing that the internal stability of the wall meets the required safety factors in the area of the obstruction .
k table of quantities .
a table comparing the structure backfill class num mechanical reinforcement of soil geomembrane and panel facing quantities shown on the plans to the quantities shown in the shop drawings and the percent difference positive percent indicates an increase in shop drawing quantities from the plans shall be shown on the shop drawings .
structure backfill class num mechanical reinforcement of soil geomembrane and panel facing quantities shall be calculated in accordance with the contract .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the difference in plan and shop drawing quantities before wall construction begins .
l placement schedule .
geomembrane placement schedule and clearances to soil reinforcements shall be shown .
m vertical slip joints .
locations of vertical slip joints for differential settlement relief shall be as specified in subsection num .
backfill .
unless otherwise specified on the plans wall backfill material in the reinforced structure backfill zone and the associated trapezoidal retained structure backfill zone shall conform to the requirements for structure backfill class num of section num .
for reinforcement tensile stress and associated pullout a friction angle of num degrees shall be assumed for structure backfill class num .
structure backfill class num shall be considered to be nonaggressive soil for corrosion and durability computations .
all reinforcing elements shall be designed to ensure a minimum design life of num years for permanent structures .
leveling pad .
concrete for the leveling pad shall be concrete class d conforming to the requirements of section num .
unless specified on the plans the maximum vertical step shall be no greater than num inches .
the leveling pad shall be reinforced only at the steps .
when the toe of wall is founded on slope steeper than num h to num v the leveling pad shall be constructed with reinforced concrete with same reinforcing schedule as at its steps .
leveling pad concrete shall be cured for at least num hours before placement of the concrete panels .
to avoid panel cracking from high contact points a  inch thick expansion joint material with the same thickness as the panels may be installed between the first layer of panels and the leveling pad .
geomembrane and joint .
a geomembrane shall be installed on all walls at the top of the reinforced structure backfill zone and retained structure backfill zone to intercept surface runoff and prevent salt penetration into the backfill of the wall as shown on the plans .
the geomembrane shall meet the requirements of subsection num for geomembrane and shall have a minimum thickness of num mils .
it shall be spliced with a dual track field seamed joint in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum .
for small local coverage areas less than num square feet the membrane may be spliced using a num inch minimum overlap and an adhesive or a single seam portable thermal welding tool as suggested by the membrane manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
unless otherwise shown num num on the plans the membrane shall have a minimum coverage length measured perpendicular to the wall face of at least the wall design height dh plus soil reinforcement length rl plus num feet .
the membrane shall be installed with a slope between num minimum and num maximum as shown on the plans from the panel facing to a drainage system located at the cut or prefilled slope as shown on the plans .
the drainage system shall consist of a num inch wide geocomposite strip drain inserted into a slot in the geomembrane at num foot maximum spacing that collects the water from the membrane and conveys it to a water collector system at the toe of the num slope as shown on the plans .
the water collector system shall consist of a num inch diameter perforated collector pipe surrounded by filter material class b and wrapped with class num geotextile .
a num inch diameter nonperforated drain pipe at num foot maximum spacing shall be used to discharge the water in the water collector system out the face of the wall .
alternatives for the drainage system shown on the plans may be used by the contractor .
a detailed layout of this equivalent water collection system shall be provided by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
for tiered walls a geomembrane shall be installed between the top of the bottom wall and the toe of the top wall as shown on the plans .
precast concrete panel facing unit and panel joint material .
the precast concrete panels shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans and these specifications including the color texture dimensions and pattern .
these facing units shall be factory made with class b concrete with the following additional requirements num minimum cementitious content num lb.cu .
yd .
num no more than num percent fine aggregate aashto mnum by volume of total aggregate .
num ambient temperature shall be a minimum of num f and rising when casting panels .
num precast panels shall be cured in accordance with aashto mnum .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the concrete in the precast units shall be compacted using a vibrating table grid vibrator or screed vibrator .
all panels shall be cast face down on a flat level surface .
panel dimensions and facing treatment shall conform to the architectural requirements shown on the plans .
width of panel from center to center of joint shall be an even whole increment of the pattern dimensions selected to match the architectural treatment .
thickness shall be a minimum of num inches plus the depth of rustication .
panel shall be cast to the dimension that accommodates the architectural treatment .
num num panels may be longer than num feet provided their section strength can be shown to accommodate handling and erection without cracking .
soil reinforcement attachment devices shall be within num inch of shop drawing locations .
all unit dimensions shall be within  inch of plan .
concrete surface for the front face of the wall shall match the architectural treatment requirements and structural concrete color shown on the plans .
squareness determined by the difference between two diagonals shall not exceed  inch .
surface defects on the front face textured surface shall not exceed num inch when measured with a num foot straight edge except when intentionally roughened .
the engineer shall be allowed access to the manufacturers facilities to inspect and sample units from lots prior to delivery with a minimum of num working days advance notice .
the engineer will reject any concrete panels which do not meet the requirements of this specification .
panels shall not be shipped until the concrete strength at the time of shipping is greater than num times fc .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing at least num working days before shipment of panels begins .
cover on the back face of the wall for horizontal and vertical joints is required between panels and shall be a drainage geotextile conforming to subsection num a minimum of num inches wide nailed or glued in place prior to placing backfill .
at horizontal joints a cellular type or molded expansion joint material shall be placed and shall be a size suggested by the supplier and approved by the engineer .
certifications calculations and testing reports .
the contractor shall provide the following reports certifications calculations and checklists as needed to accompany the shop drawing submittal .
all engineering calculations as stated in subsections numf numg numj numk nume numf numg and numi shall be certified and stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the state of colorado .
a certification of tult marv .
for geosynthetic reinforced system only the contractor shall submit a certification letter from the manufacturer which provides the tult marv and certifies the tult marv of the supplied materials have been determined in accordance with astm dnum or astm dnum as appropriate .
b mill report for metallic reinforcements and connectors .
this includes but is not limited to mill certifications on weldability ultimate tensile strength and yield strength .
c report of the panelreinforcement connection test .
the test report shall be prepared and certified by an independent laboratory .
the panel to reinforcement connection test method shall conform to the industrial standards .
the report shall provide data on the ultimate as well as service limit state .
num num d report for soil to reinforcement interface pullout test .
the test report shall be prepared and certified by an independent laboratory .
the soil to reinforcement interface pullout test method shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
tests shall include the full range of overburden pressures defined by wall design heights .
e certification of facial panel to reinforcement longterm connection strength .
certification shall include calculations to demonstrate that the facial panel to reinforcement connection meets or exceeds current aashto num years design life requirements .
f certification of reinforcement pullout .
certification shall be provided with detail calculations to demonstrate that reinforcement pullouts meet or exceed current aashto requirements .
for metal reinforcement breakage and pullout calculations shall include a combination of num years material depletion of carbon steel and galvanization loss .
g report and certification for the initial concrete compression strength shipping and handling stress .
cylinder compressive test is acceptable to verify the initial concrete strength of panel at time of shipping .
concrete tensile stress shall not exceed the modulus of rupture .
the report shall include calculations of panel cracking stress according to the proposed method of lifting and shipping .
panels shall not be shipped from the precast yard to the wall site until the engineer has approved the time of shipping the method of lifting and the supporting condition during shipping as well as storage condition at the site before panel installation .
h calculations .
calculation of the ltds of reinforcement shall conform to the numth edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges efflorescence and air content test .
panel shall be visually efflorescence free .
efflorescence control agent shall be used in concrete mix design .
when fly ash is used as the efflorescence control agent the fly ash shall be astm cnum class f fly ash and shall be a minimum of num percent by weight of the total cementitious material content .
air content shall be determined in accordance with aashto tnum .
concrete shall be tested a minimum of the first three batches each day and then once per five batches for the rest of the day to assure specified air entrainment .
i submittal checklist .
the contractor shall submit the panel faced mse wall submittal checklist form num with the certifications calculations and testing report submittal package included with the shop drawing submittal .
hybrid mse wall systems .
a hybrid system is one which combines elements of both externally and internally stabilized systems .
an externally stabilized system uses a physical structure to hold the retained soil .
the stabilizing forces of this system are mobilized either through the weight of a num num shape stable structure or through the restraints provided by the embedment of wall into the soil if needed plus the tieback forces of anchorages .
an internally stabilized system involves reinforced soils to retain fills and sustain loads .
reinforcement may be added to either the selected fills as earth walls or to the retained earth directly to form a more coherent stable slope .
these reinforcements can either be layered reinforcements installed during the bottomto top construction of selected fills or be driven piles or drilled caissons built into the retained soil .
all this reinforcement must be oriented properly and extend beyond the potential failure mass .
hybrid mse wall systems may be used unless otherwise noted on the plans .
hybrid mse wall systems are subject to the same design requirements for mse walls and this specification .
the shop drawings for the hybrid mse wall system shall include a combination of design calculations and appropriate test results to demonstrate that it meets or exceeds the regular system .
hybrid mse wall systems shall have a facing area of num square feet and be stabilized by a counterfort .
the certifications calculations and testing reports in subsection nume are not required for hybrid mse wall systems .
the facing to soil reinforcement connection test subsection numc may be waived only if the soil reinforcing spacing is less than or equal to num inches or the facing is secured and stabilized by hybrid components with primary reinforcement spacing less than num inches .
the contractor shall provide the following additional reports certifications and calculations to accompany the shop drawing submittal for hybrid mse wall systems num the facing to counterfort longterm connection test .
the contractor shall submit the panel faced mse wall submittal checklist form num with the certifications calculations and testing report submittal package included with the shop drawing submittal .
construction requirements approval and qualifications of mse wall installer .
the job site wall foreman shall have experience in construction of at least five transportation related mse walls within the last three years .
transportation related mse walls are walls that carry or are adjacent to vehicular traffic and are constructed with mse reinforcement in the reinforced structure backfill zone .
the foreman must have prior experience or adequate training on the products that the contractor elects to use on the project .
the resume and credentials of the foreman shall be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to the preconstruction conference .
the foreman shall be on the site for num percent of the time during which the work is being done .
wall test segment .
the wall test segment shall be the first segment of the wall constructed .
the wall test segment shall be constructed in the presence of the technical representative and the engineer and shall include construction of num num each of the num elements listed in subsection num below .
the minimum length of the wall test segment shall be num feet or the full length of the wall if less than num feet .
a wall test segment shall be constructed for the first wall constructed from each wall product used on the project .
technical representative of wall product supplier .
the contractor shall arrange for a technical representative tech rep of the manufacturer of the selected wall products to be present during the construction of each wall test segment .
if the selected wall products are supplied from different manufacturers a tech rep from each wall product shall be present .
the tech rep shall be present for construction of the wall test segment and each of the following elements num placement of a minimum of the first four layers of primary soil reinforcement and backfill .
num if obstructions i.e .
steel piles concrete piersabutments concrete boxes pipes etc .
exist placement of primary soil reinforcement and backfill at obstructions .
num placement of a minimum of the first two rows of panels or a minimum of a four foot wall height .
num if a vertical slip joint is required construction of the vertical slip joint in a minimum of a two row portion of panels or a minimum of a four foot wall height .
num if corners are required construction of a corner representative of the corners in the wall in the project in a minimum of a two row portion of panels or a minimum of a four foot wall height .
before construction of the wall test segment the tech rep shall provide the contractor and the engineer the following num technical instructions as required for the construction of the earth retaining wall system .
num product specific specifications for the placement of the soil reinforcement and backfill in accordance with the wall system .
num guidelines for placing the facing units and attaching them to the soil reinforcement in accordance with the system requirements .
num technical assistance to the facing unit fabricator .
at the completion of the wall test segment the tech rep shall provide the following num documentation that the wall test segment was constructed in accordance with the product specific specifications .
this documentation shall include a location description starting and ending stations and elevations of the wall test segment .
num num num documentation that the job site wall foreman is familiar with the wall products used to construct the walls on the project .
after completion of the wall test segment the tech rep shall be available when there is any special field condition such as change of geological condition when there are equipment or personnel changes or when requested by the engineer .
facial panel process control placing plan and daily placement logs .
before the start of wall construction the contractor shall provide a panelplacing plan and shall supply daily placement logs to the engineer weekly and at the completion of the wall .
the daily placement log shall consist of an elevation view of the wall showing the dates number of panels placed and the serial numbers of the panels placed .
the panel process control log shall contain multiple submittals if required by subsections numg and h. panels shall be labeled with a serial number for each panel and corresponding certification with one set of random samples tested for each num panels or num square feet of wall face .
at least one certification with supporting test results is required for each wall .
test results will be reviewed and preapproved by the engineer before shipment .
the contractor shall coordinate and mark the panel and backfill placing sequence on the daily placement logs .
the log serves as means for the engineer to identify where each panel was placed .
wall with curved alignments tight curved corners and sections adjacent to bridge abutment .
the contractor shall provide a placement plan that shows curved layouts special corner panel sequence of panel placement and construction offsets as recommended by the manufacture .
to avoid panels with random cracks the contractor shall install vertical slip joints as shown on the shop drawings for tight curved corners num foot radius or less and dissimilar foundations such as bridge abutments .
excavation and backfill .
the base of leveling pad shall receive the same compaction as cut area required by subsection num .
the contractor shall report to the engineer in writing density test results for any unsatisfactory bearing material that does not meet the minimum num percent compaction for walls less than num feet high and num percent compaction for walls higher than num feet when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
if the excavation for the placement of the leveling pad exposes an unsatisfactory bearing material the engineer may require removal and replacement of that material .
the removed material shall be replaced with structure backfill class num compacted in conformance with subsection num .
the engineer with the assistance of the geotechnical engineer of record will provide the limits including the depth of removal .
as directed by the engineer and if required structure backfill class num shall be reinforced with soil reinforcements in conjunction with wick drains and outlet pipes the contractor shall grade the foundation for the bottom of the wall for a width equal to or exceeding the limits of the reinforcement length rl plus num inches as shown on the plans .
this graded area shall be compacted with an appropriate vibratory roller weighing a minimum of num tons for at least five passes or as directed by the engineer .
for cut wall with continuous seepage phasing of num num foundation construction or a different drainage and foundation improvement plan may be necessary .
the reinforced structure backfill zone and the retained structure backfill zone portion immediately behind the wall as defined on the plans shall be structure backfill class num .
recycled asphalt recycled concrete and flowfill material shall not be substituted for structure backfill class num .
each compacted layer of backfill within a distance equal to the reinforcement spacing away from the back of the panels shall not exceed num inches .
the triangular or trapezoidal portion behind the concrete panels and above the spill of backfill as shown on the plans shall be filled with  inch or larger crushed rock filter aggregates with filter fabric or wall system specific fill as approved by the engineer .
density tests behind and parallel to the wall in the triangular or trapezoidal portion above the backfill spill zone are not required .
each compacted layer of backfill shall be in even increments up to num inches thick .
the fill and compaction operation shall start num feet from the wall back face and progress toward the end of the reinforcement .
all structure backfill class num including fill material under the wall and onsite material as allowed by subsection num shall be compacted to a density of at least num percent of the maximum density according to aashto t num .
for on site foundation material containing more than num percent retained on the  inch sieve a method of compaction consisting of a conventional heavy vibratory roller starting with minimum num passes shall be used to establish the number of passes required to exceed the num percent compactionin accordance with aashto t num .
at least num inches of material shall be in place prior to operation of tracked vehicles over soil with reinforcement .
only power operated roller or plate compaction equipment weighing less than num pounds is allowed within num feet of the front of the wall face .
the reinforcement shall not be connected to the wall until the compacted fill is at or slightly higher than the location of the connector .
backfill containing frost or frozen lumps shall not be used .
backfill that has been placed and becomes frozen shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
if cold weather conditions prevent the placement of structure backfill class num the contractor may use filter material class b as backfill without compaction at the contractors expense if approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide a test report prepared and certified by an independent laboratory that the internal friction angle of soil for the filter material class b meets or exceeds that shown on the plans .
the contractor shall place additional panels including partial height panels and properly compacted fill material to return the finished grade to the plan elevations if settlement as determined by the engineer has occurred .
a final inspection before the installation of rail anchoring slab will be made after construction settlement if any has occurred or num days after the completion of the wall .
the contractor shall provide immediate temporary storm water protection and wind erosion control at the end of each day during construction .
if settlement occurs as the result of loss of backfill due to wind or water erosion nonconforming backfill such as frozen fill or oversaturated fill or if the backfill does not meet compaction requirements the contractor shall remove the backfill wash the soil num num reinforcement and bring the elevation to the finished grade at the contractors expense .
before final project acceptance the contractor shall repair all backfill losses due to wind and water erosion .
to avoid the foundation of the leveling pad being washed out by rain the area in front of the wall and around the leveling pad shall be backfilled as soon as practicable .
reinforcement .
steel reinforcement shall be slack free and geosynthetic reinforcement shall be slightly pretensioned .
the minimum coverage ratio for geogrid reinforcement shall be num percent and the spaces between rolls shall be staggered between layers of soil reinforcement .
the minimum coverage ratio for woven fabric reinforcement shall be num percent and an overlap between rolls is not required .
soil reinforcement shall not be cut to avoid obstruction unless shown on the shop drawings .
leveling pad .
the foundation of the leveling pads shall meet the requirement of subsection num .
the leveling pad shall be level within the tolerance of  inch for any two points along the length of a panel and within  inch for any two points num feet apart .
cushion or shimming material expansion joint material concrete mortar grout roofing felt or geosynthetic reinforcement shall be used to support panels directly founded on the leveling pad .
before starting a new course of panels the contractor shall take steps to ensure that the wall elevations are matched at the neighboring panels .
cushion or shimming material shall be used to obtain necessary panel elevations at next leveling pad step .
no more than num shims each num inch thick should be required to level the panels on the leveling pad .
wooden wedges .
wooden wedges may be used to help to hold the panels at the correct batter during the backfill operation .
the wooden wedges shall be made from hard wood such as oak maple or ash .
wooden wedges shall be removed as soon as the precast panels above the wedged panels are completely erected and backfilled .
there shall not be more than three rows of wooden wedges in place at one time .
panels that crack or spall due to failure to remove the wooden wedges shall be repaired or replaced .
panel facing .
for walls that support a roadway the wall layout line at the leveling pad shall be set back and premeasured with appropriate batter num to num percent from the top of the panels according to the offset with respect to the centerline of the road .
for walls adjacent to a roadway the wall layout line at the leveling pad shall be directly offset from the centerline of the road .
an overall negative batter wall face leaning outward between the bottom and the top of the wall is not allowed .
unless otherwise noted on the plans for battered walls the final wall face shall be vertical or have a positive batter of not greater than num percent for construction control purpose .
the surface of the wall face shall be tested with a num foot straightedge laid along the surface in horizontal and vertical directions .
except as necessary for horizontal alignment of the wall convex num num deviation of the wall face from the straightedge belly wall shall not be allowed and concave deviation from the straightedge shall be less than  inch .
walls without a railanchoring slab castinplace reinforced concrete coping with uniform exposed height is required to match the required finished elevations as well as to retain the panels lateral deformation .
for walls with rail anchoring slabs the top of panel elevations shall be within num inches of the bottom of the anchoring slab .
castinplace concrete or sawcut partial height panels may be used to accomplish this .
where the geomembrane for drainage interferes with the continuation of reinforcement the panels beyond the termination shall be reinforced with the same grade of additional soil reinforcing material to maintain the total amount of reinforcement per panel .
to avoid leaking or soil erosion through the joint a filter fabric at least num inches wide shall be glued to the panels behind all vertical joints .
as shown on the plans facing panels directly exposed to spray from deiced pavements and indirect windborne spray shall have three coats of water resistant or repellant concrete sealer applied to the front face of the wall before the wall is opened to traffic .
all damages to a completed wall or parts of a completed wall including blemishes and discoloring of panels shall be replaced or repaired before final payment is made .
sand blasting may be used if approved by the engineer .
fill under leveling pad .
for walls requiring fill under the planned elevation of the leveling pad the contractor may lower the elevation of the leveling pad as approved by the engineer except that the finished elevation at the top of the wall shall not be altered .
as requested by the contractor and with the engineers approval the higher wall shall be redesigned with longer reinforcement length and revised reinforcement schedule .
method of measurement mse retaining walls will not be measured for payment in the field but will be paid for by the calculated quantities shown on the plans for the five major components of the wall structure excavation structure backfill concrete panel facing mechanical reinforcement of soil and geomembrane .
the contractors construction of a system that requires increased or decreased quantities of any of the components to complete the wall to the dimensions shown will not result in a change in pay quantities .
exceptions will be made when field changes are ordered or when it is determined that there are discrepancies on the plans in an amount of at least plus or minus five percent of the plan quantity .
num the panel facing quantity was calculated for the square foot of wall front face area from the top of the leveling pad or average pad elevations as shown on the plans to the top of the anchoring slab for walls with railing or to the top of the cast in place coping for walls without railing .
num num num the structure excavation quantity was calculated for the total volume of earth to be removed before the installation of the reinforced zone as shown on the plans .
num the structure backfill quantity was calculated for the total volume behind the wall the retained structure backfill zone including the material in the reinforced zone as shown on the plans .
num the mechanical reinforcement of soil quantity was calculated for the total volume of the reinforced zone as shown on the plans .
num geomembrane was calculated as the design height dh plus soil reinforcement length rl plus num feet disregarding the slope of the membrane .
the square foot and cubic yard quantities computed for payment are the wall plan quantities based on the height measured at num foot maximum intervals along the wall layout line .
basis of payment the accepted quantity will be paid for at the contract unit price per unit of measurement for the pay items listed below payment will be made under pay item pay unit panel facing square foot structure excavation will be paid for under the section num pay item structure excavation .
structure backfill will be paid for under the section num pay item structure backfill class num .
soil reinforcement will be paid for under the section num pay item mechanical reinforcement of soil .
geomembrane will be paid for under the section num pay item geomembrane .
rail anchoring systems slabs at the tops of walls and leveling pads at the bottom of wall will be measured and paid for separately under the section numpay item concrete and the section num pay item reinforcing steel .
payment will be full compensation for all work and materials required to construct the concrete panel facing mse wall .
miscellaneous items such as dual track welding of geomembrane drainage ditches rundowns filter material filter fabric grout pins shimming material  inch thick expansion joint material concrete coating and providing a technical representative will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
panel facing payment reductions .
in this subsection a panel refers to either a concrete panel or a hybrid unit .
each of the following shall be considered a defect num num num dislocated panel .
a dislocated panel is an individual panel or its corner located outward more than  inch from the adjacent panels .
num cracked panel .
a cracked panel is an individual panel with any visible crack when viewed from a distance equal to the wall height in natural light .
num corner knock off .
a corner knockoff is a panel with any missing facial corners or architectural edges .
num substandard panel .
substandard panels are concrete panels installed in any wall segments that do not meet the certified values for compressive strength .
each substandard panel counts as one defect .
num oversize joints .
panels with oversize joints are two adjacent panels that do not meet the required values in subsection numf .
num panels failing the num foot straightedge test .
straightedge test failures are joints that that deviate from even by more than  inch when measured by placing a num foot straightedge across the joint .
defects shared by two adjacent panels such as oversized joint dislocated panel and panels not passing num foot straight edge test will be count as one defect .
in the completed wall or completed portion of the wall the number of defects as described above in each num foot section horizontal or arc length will be counted .
if there are defects the number of defects in the num foot section will be considered for price reduction according to the table below .
for panels subjected to price reduction if the defects are repairable or the overall quality of wall can be improved with the consent from the engineer the contractor may elect to repair and reduce the percent of price reduction .
a walkthrough inspection will be made as requested by the contractor before final payment .
no .
of defects in num foot section percent of price reduction for that section num num num num num num num num num rejection when the number of defects exceeds num the engineer will reject the entire wall or portions thereof .
the contractor shall replace the rejected wall at his own expense .
num num section num riprap description this work consists of the construction of riprap in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials riprap shall consist of hard dense durable stone angular in shape and resistant to weathering .
rounded stone or boulders shall not be used as riprap material .
the stone shall have a specific gravity of at least num .
each piece shall have its greatest dimension not greater than three times its least dimension .
material used for riprap may be approved by the engineer if by visual inspection the rock is determined to be sound and durable .
the engineer may require the contractor to furnish laboratory results if in the engineers opinion the material is marginal or unacceptable .
at the request of the engineer the contractor shall furnish laboratory test results indicating that the material meets the requirements for abrasion resistance or compressive strength as indicated in table num .
table num test description test method specification requirement abrasion resistance by los angeles machine astm c num num loss max .
unconfined compressive strength of drilled core specimen aashto t num num psi min .
riprap shall conform to the gradation requirements given in table num .
num num table num pay item percent of material smaller than typical stonenum typical stone dimensionsnum inches typical stone weightnum pounds stone size dnum inches riprap num num num num num num num num num num num num num riprap num num num num num num num num num num num num num riprap num num num num num num num num num num num num num riprap num num num num num num num num num num num num num riprap num num num num num num num num num num num num num numdnum nominal stone size numbased on typical rock mass numequivalent spherical diameter numbased on a specific gravity num nominal stone size and total thickness of the riprap shall be as shown on the plans .
control of gradation will be by visual inspection .
the contractor shall provide two samples of rock at least num tons each meeting the gradation specified .
one sample shall be provided at the construction site and may be a part of the finished riprap covering .
the other sample shall be provided at the quarry .
these samples will be used as a reference for judging the gradation of the riprap supplied .
when it is determined necessary conformance of the gradation will be verified by dumping and checking the gradation of two random truck loads of stone .
mechanical equipment a sorting site and labor needed to assist in checking gradation shall be provided at the contractors expense .
num num construction requirements stones with typical stone dimensions that are equal to dnum and larger shall be placed at the top surface with faces and shapes matched to minimize voids and form as smooth a surface as practical .
dumping and backhoe placement alone is not sufficient to ensure a properly interlocked system .
the material may be machineplaced and then arranged as necessary by use of an excavator with a multiprong grappling device or by hand to interlock and form a substantial bond .
excavation for toe or cutoff walls shall be made to the neat lines of the wall .
allowance will not be made for work outside the neat lines .
method of measurement riprap of the sizes specified in the contract will be measured by the ton or by the cubic yard .
cubic yards will be by the method of average end areas based on dimensions shown on the plans or ordered .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of riprap will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard or per ton .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit riprap ___inch cubic yard or ton structure excavation will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
riprap gabions and slope mattress description this work consists of the construction of riprap in wire mesh gabions and in wire mesh slope mattresses in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials the wire wire mesh cages anchor stakes and riprap shall conform to subsection num .
construction requirements gabions and slope mattresses .
gabions and slope mattresses shall be placed to conform to the plan details .
riprap material shall be placed in close contact in the unit so that maximum fill is obtained .
the units may be filled by machine with sufficient hand work to accomplish requirements of this specification .
num num where the length of the unit exceeds its horizontal width the gabion is to be equally divided by diaphragms of the same mesh and gauge as the body into cells whose length does not exceed the horizontal width .
the unit shall be furnished with the necessary diaphragms secured in proper position on the base section in such a manner that no additional tying at this juncture will be necessary .
a gabions .
all perimeter edges of gabions are to be securely selvedged or bound so that the joints formed by tying the selvedges have approximately the same strength as the body of the mesh .
the gabion bed shall be excavated to the width line and grade as staked by the engineer .
the gabions shall be founded on this bed and laid to the lines and dimensions required .
excavation for toe or cutoff walls shall be made to the neat lines of the wall .
all gabion units shall be tied together each to its neighbor along all contacting edges in order to form a continuous connecting structure .
b slope mattresses .
slope mattresses shall be filled with angular or fractured stone .
rounded boulders will not be permitted .
before the mattress units are filled the longitudinal and lateral edge surfaces of adjoining units shall be tightly connected by means of wire ties placed every num inches or by a spiral tie having a complete loop every num inches .
the lid edges of each unit shall be connected in a similar manner to adjacent units .
the slope mattress shall be anchored as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall determine whether the holes for the soil anchor stakes are to be drilled or whether the stakes may be driven .
care shall be taken to avoid drilling holes to a greater depth than is necessary to place the top of the finished stake slightly above the top of the finished mattress .
the contractor will be allowed to assemble partially fill and tie together mattressunits on the subgrade provided they can be placed on the slope without abrading the zinc coating on the wire mattress or permanently distorting the shape of the mattress in transporting and installing the units on the slope .
all prefabrication procedures shall be subject to approval .
method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this item will be the number of cubic yards of riprap required to fill the gabions and slope mattresses in accordance with the dimensions shown on the plans or ordered .
basis of payment the accepted quantity measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for riprap gabions or slope mattress as the case may be .
num num payment will be made under pay item pay unit riprap gabions cubic yard slope mattress cubic yard structure excavation and structure backfill will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num slope and ditch paving description this work consists of the construction of slope and ditch paving in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials concrete slope and ditch paving .
concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
concrete shall be macro fiberreinforced class b concrete .
dry rubble slope and ditch paving .
stone shall conform to the material requirements of subsection num .
size of stone and total thickness of paving shall be as shown on the plans .
grouted rubble slope and ditch paving .
stone shall conform to the material requirements of subsection num .
size of stone and total thickness of paving shall be as shown on the plans .
mortar shall consist of one part portland cement and three parts of fine aggregate by volume thoroughly mixed with as much water as is necessary to obtain the required consistency .
materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections hydraulic cement num fine aggregate num water num mortar shall be used within num minutes after mixing and shall not be retempered .
class b concrete conforming to the requirements of section num may be substituted for mortar .
grouted riprap slope and ditch paving .
concrete mortar for grouted riprap slope and ditch paving shall meet the requirements of section num and the following field compressive strength num days num psi not a specification requirement minimum cement content num lbs.cu .
yd .
air content num slump aashto designation tnum num inches fine aggregate aashto mnum num coarse aggregate aashto mnum  nominal maximum size polypropylene fibers num fiber length or equivalent num lbs.cu .
yd .
num num riprap stone shall conform to the quality requirements of subsection num and the classification and gradation requirements specified in the following table table num classification and gradation of rock for grouted riprap riprap designation percent smaller than given size by weight intermediate rock dimension inch num num dnum num type hg num num num num num num num num num dnum num type mg num num num num num num asphalt slope and ditch paving .
the mixture used shall conform to the requirements for the asphalt pavement used on the project .
construction requirements paving thickness shall be as specified on the plans .
in ditch construction the excavated areas adjacent to the paving which are not occupied by the paving shall be refilled to the level of original ground with acceptable material and thoroughly tamped .
excavation for toe or cutoff walls shall be made to the neat lines of the wall .
allowance will not be made for work outside the neat lines .
concrete slope and ditch paving .
concrete shall be mixed placed and cured in accordance with section num .
unsuitable soil shall be removed and replaced with a suitable soil as designated by the engineer .
where the thickness of concrete lined ditch as shown on the plans is less than num inches this concrete slope and ditch paving shall be installed with slipform machine except for the following num where it is deemed impossible to construct the ditch lining by the slipform method the lining shall be hand formed and the thickness shall be at least num inch greater than the thickness shown on the plans .
num the contractor may use hand method of placement in lieu of the slipform method provided the thickness of this handplaced lining is at least num inch greater than the thickness shown on the plans .
num num where the thickness of concrete lined ditch as shown on the plans is num inches or greater the contractor will be permitted to place the material with a slipform machine or by hand method .
dry rubble slope and ditch paving .
stones shall be placed with close joints which shall be broken to minimize straight construction joints .
the stones shall be placed to give the appearance of plating the fill slope .
larger stones shall be placed on the lower courses .
open joints shall be filled with spalls .
oversize stones and protrusions that present a safety hazard will not be permitted .
grouted rubble slope and ditch paving .
stones shall be laid as specified in subsection num with care to prevent earth and sand filling the joints .
joints shall be filled with grout from bottom to top and the surfaces swept with a stiff broom .
grouting shall not be done in freezing weather .
in hot dry weather the work shall be protected and kept moist for at least three days after grouting or clear membrane curing compound may be used .
grouted riprap slope and ditch paving .
all placement of concrete mortar shall be in conformance with subsection num with the following exceptions num all concrete mortar shall be delivered by means of a low pressure less than num psi grout pump using a num inch diameter nozzle .
num full depth penetration of the concrete mortar into the riprap shall be required .
to achieve this a pencil vibrator shall be used .
num the top num inches of the rock layer shall be left exposed .
num after placement all exposed rocks shall be cleaned with a wet broom .
num all concrete mortar between rocks shall be finished with a broom finish .
num weep holes constructed of num inch or num inch pvc pipe shall be installed when required by the engineer .
the pvc pipe shall be cut flush with the surrounding grout .
to alleviate plugging the pvc pipe shall be pushed into the bedding or if bedding is not required under the rock layer .
the pvc pipe shall be wrapped in a coarse geotextile fabric filled with num inch rock .
num all concrete mortar shall be sprayed with a clear liquid membrane curing compound as specified in subsection numb .
num cold weather curing shall be in accordance with subsection numd .
asphalt slope and ditch paving .
the asphalt mixture shall be properly shaped to the required cross section and thoroughly compacted .
a fog seal shall be placed on the exposed surfaces of the paving at the rate of approximately num gallon per square yard .
material for fog seal shall be emulsified asphalt cssnum or as designated .
num num method of measurement asphalt slope and ditch paving will be measured by the ton and shall include asphalt .
slope and ditch paving of the other various types will be measured by the cubic yard by the method of average end areas based on dimensions shown on the plans or ordered .
when the plans call for concrete lined ditch less than num inches thick but the actual thickness placed is greater than the plan thickness measurement and payment will be made only for the thickness shown on the plans .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for the various items below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit concrete slope and ditch paving cubic yard concrete slope and ditch paving reinforced cubic yard dry rubble slope and ditch paving cubic yard grouted rubble slope and ditch paving cubic yard grouted riprap slope and ditch paving cubic yard asphalt slope and ditch paving asphalt ton structure excavation will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
polyolefin fiber reinforcement will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
fog seal and asphalt required for asphalt slope and ditch paving will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
mortar or concrete used for grout in grouted rubble slope and ditch paving will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for grouted riprap slope and ditch paving will be full compensation for all work and materials required to complete the item .
num num section num timber structures description this work consists of the construction of timber structures and timber portions of other structures in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials sawn lumber and timber shall conform to aashto m num .
timber shall be douglas fir of the coast region or southern yellow pine .
native timber may be used when noted on the plans .
native timber shall be red cedar douglas fir of the inland region lodgepole pine ponderosa pine spruce as listed and described in aashto m num or any other native wood specifically approved for the intended purpose .
all timber shall be of the grade or shall meet the working stresses shown on the plans .
timber used in nonstructural applications whose working stresses are not shown on the plans shall be graded to produce a working stress of num pounds per square inch on the extreme fibers when subjected to bending and num pounds per square inch when subjected to compression parallel to the grain .
material of equal or greater stress values may be used .
all lumber shall be manufactured in accordance with product standard num as published by the department of commerce and shall be grademarked by a grading agency or have an accompanying certificate from a grading agency .
the grading agency shall be certified by the board of review of the american lumber standards committee .
treated timber .
the preservative to be used shall be as specified on the plans .
the preservatives and entire treatment process shall be as described in aashto m num .
inspection .
all timber furnished shall be covered by a certificate of inspection issued by an approved inspection agency .
inspection approval shall be marked on each piece .
the destination of the material and the project to which it is being shipped shall be shown on the certificate .
the department reserves the right to reexamine the timber at its destination and to reject any material not conforming to specification requirements .
shop drawings shall be submitted in accordance with subsection num for all major structures and for other structures when specified .
the department may provide an inspector at the treating plant for material quality review and inspection of the treatment process for treated timber .
the plant shall notify the engineer sufficiently in advance of time of treating so that inspection may be arranged .
num num hardware .
hardware shall include all bolts with necessary nuts and washers timber connectors drift pins dowels nails screws spikes metal pile protectors steel anchor plates and all other metal fastenings as shown on the plans .
bolts shall conform to the requirements of section num .
bolts over num inches long shall be threaded at least num inches .
drift bolts spikes boat spikes and other spikes shall be wrought iron or steel .
washers shall be standard cast iron ogee or malleable cast washers .
timber connectors and common nails shall be of the type and size specified on the plans .
all hardware except timber connectors and common nails shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
construction requirements timber for the various portions of the structure shall be treated or untreated as stipulated on the plans .
treated timbers shall not be sized or trimmed in the field except when ordered .
the contractor shall not make temporary use of treated timber .
all pieces that have been field cut shall be treated in accordance with awpa standard mnum .
untreated stringer ends shall be separated at least  inch and shall be secured to the timber on which they rest .
sway bracing shall be securely bolted to piling or post and caps as shown on the plans .
treated filling pieces shall be used in lieu of framing or dapping to bring bracing into a plane .
bulkheads where required shall be full size timber .
posts for framed bents shall be of the proper length for their position and provide an even bearing on cap and sill .
all untreated caps shall be sized over the piles or posts to a uniform thickness and even bearing on piles or posts .
caps shall be within  inch of nominal depth before treatment and may be surfaced on the vertical grain face .
before the timber capping is placed a no .
num gauge galvanized sheet metal cap shall be placed on each pile in accordance with the plans .
in lieu of the sheet metal cap three layers of heavy burlap may be used .
each layer of burlap shall be cut square to a dimension of num inches greater than the diameter of the pile head and shall be thoroughly swabbed with hot asphalt .
the overhanging ends shall be turned down and secured to the pile with galvanized wire .
the entire wrapping shall then be swabbed with a heavy application of hot asphalt .
longitudinal xbraces shall be properly framed and secured to piles or posts .
truss and bent timbers shall be cut and framed in such manner that they will have even bearing over the entire contact surface of the joint .
blocking or shimming will not be allowed in making joints .
open joints will not be accepted .
stringers shall not be more than  inch off nominal size before treatment .
floors shall be constructed as shown on the plans .
the plank shall be secured to each stringer with two num inch spikes .
half inch cracks between planks shall be left in plain plank floors without surfacing .
laminated floors shall be secured as shown on the plans .
num num holes and bolts .
all holes bored shall be treated in accordance with awpa mnum .
holes drilled for drift bolts shall be num inch smaller than the diameter of the bolt .
all other holes shall be bored to such size as to ensure a snug fit .
unless otherwise designated all bolts shall be provided with two ogee washers .
painting .
all paint shall conform to the requirements of section num .
timber to be painted shall be surfaced on four sides and shall be cleaned immediately preceding painting .
new timber to be painted shall receive one coat of primer .
white wood primer shall be used when the surface is to be finished with outside white paint .
for exterior black paint the specification paint shall be thinned by adding one part linseed oil and one part turpentine to eight parts paint for use as a primer .
the surfaces of all untreated timber to be painted shall be primed with one coat of primer immediately after the material is delivered to the project .
unless otherwise designated pieces shall be primed as specified for the finish coat of paint or white wood primer shall be used when additional painting is not required .
untreated timber will not require additional priming .
all handrails and handrail posts shall be of untreated timber and shall be painted as described hereafter .
contact surfaces shall receive the primer and one coat of paint before placing handrails .
parts specified herein parts shown on the plans and all exposed nongalvanized iron and steel shall after the prime coat be given two coats of the specified paint which shall be thoroughly brushed in .
paint shall be applied only to thoroughly dry surfaces .
all previous coats shall have thoroughly dried before subsequent coats are to be applied .
portions to be painted above the wheel guards or top wales shall be painted white and those portions below the wheelguards or top wales to be painted shall be painted black .
structure number .
the location letters figures and paint used for stenciling shall be in accordance with the plan details .
num num method of measurement timber will be measured by the thousand feet board measure mfbm actually incorporated in the structure and shall include hardware unless otherwise designated on the plans .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit untreated timber mfbm treated timber mfbm structure excavation and structure backfill will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
timber piling will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num steel structures description .
this work consists of furnishing fabricating erecting and painting structural steel in accordance with these specifications and to the dimensions shapes and design shown on the plans and to the lines and grades established .
structural steel shall include galvanizing bolting welding special and alloy steels electrodes and steel forgings .
when the term main stress carrying members or main members is used it shall include girder web and flange plates and splice plates pier and abutment diaphragm web and flange plates and splice plates .
the latest edition of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications with current interim specifications will govern the design of steel bridges unless otherwise noted on the plans .
welding and fabrication of steel structures shall conform to the bridge welding code ansiaashto aws dnum as amended by the contract documents .
when aws dnum is cited in the standard specifications the reference shall be to the latest edition of the bridge welding code .
materials structural carbon steel .
structural carbon steel for bolted or welded construction shall conform to aashto m num astm a num grade num .
material supplied for main members in tension as designated in the contract shall meet a longitudinal charpy vnotch cvn value of num footpounds at num f. testing shall be in accordance with aashto t num astm a num .
the h frequency of heat testing shall be used .
highstrength lowalloy structural steel .
highstrength lowalloy structural steel for welding shall conform to the following specifications highstrength lowalloy columbiumvanadium steels of structural quality grade num aashto m num astm a num highstrength lowalloy structural steel with num ksi minimum yield point to num inches thick aashto m num astm a num steel conforming to aashto m num astm a num grade numw shall not be painted unless otherwise shown on the plans .
material supplied for main members in tension as designated in the contract shall meet the longitudinal charpy vnotch tests as specified for zone num in aashto m num .
self weathering tubing .
self weathering structural steel tubing shall conform to astm a num coldformed welded and seamless high strength low alloy structural tubing with improved atmospheric corrosion resistance .
num num structural tubing .
steel base metal to be used for tubular structures including bridge rail shall conform to the plans or aws dnum section num .
the grade and specification to be used shall be specified in the contract .
bolts .
bolts not otherwise specified in the contract shall be zinc plated and meet the requirements of astm a num for grade a bolts .
bolts shall have single selflocking nuts or double nuts unless otherwise specified in the contract .
beveled washers shall be used when bearing surfaces have a slope exceeding num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
high strength bolts .
unless otherwise shown in the contract all bolts for fastening of structural steel shall be high strength bolts .
high strength bolts including suitable nuts and plain hardened washers shall conform to aashto m num .
type num bolts shall be used .
bolts for self weathering steels shall be type num unless otherwise shown in the contract .
bolt and nut dimensions shall conform to aisc section num .
threads for all bolts shall conform to the united standard series uncansi bnum class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads .
the length of the bolts shall be such that the point of the bolt will be flush with or outside of the face of the nut when completely installed .
sufficient thread must be provided to prevent the nut from encountering thread runout .
washers and beveled washers shall conform to astm fnum .
washers and beveled washers for aisc american standard beams and channels or when bearing surfaces have a slope exceeding num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis shall be square or rectangular shall taper in thickness and shall conform to the dimensions given in aisc section num .
pins and rollers .
steel for pins and rollers shall conform to astm a num class c d f or g as specified in the contract .
they shall be accurately manufactured to the dimensions shown in the contract .
pins larger than num inches in diameter shall have a hole at least num inches in diameter bored longitudinally through their centers .
the hole shall be bored before the pin is subjected to heat treatment .
threads for all pins shall conform to the united standard series uncansi bnum class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads except that pin ends having a diameter of num inches or more shall have six threads per num inch .
anchor bolts .
unless otherwise shown in the contract all anchor bolts shall conform to astm a num and shall be zinc plated .
galvanized and metallized steel .
when shown in the contract structural steel shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
steel surfaces to be metallized shall be coated in accordance with aws cnum recommended practice for metallizing with aluminum and zinc for protection of iron and steel .
when the contract specifies galvanizing metallizing may be substituted .
num num welded stud shear connectors .
studs shall meet the requirements of astm a num grades num through num killed or semikilled .
in addition studs shall conform to aws dnum paragraphs num and num type b studs unless otherwise noted .
furnishing testing and qualifying of stud welding procedures shall be at the contractors expense .
manufacturer shall furnish the engineer a certification as required by aws dnum paragraph num .
mill test reports .
the fabricator shall furnish the quality assurance inspector with copies of the certified mill test reports on all material that will be used .
mill test reports shall be furnished prior to cutting of the steel or any other fabrication .
the fabricator may furnish with approval of the engineer material from stock provided it can be identified by rolling direction where orientation is specified heat number and mill test reports .
material which has been used elsewhere shall not be used in any part of this work without written approval or unless specifically provided for in the contract .
shop fabrication and inspection requirements notice of fabrication .
a process control and quality assurance .
process control pc of structural steel fabrication is the responsibility of the contractor .
the pc inspector is the duly designated person who acts for and in behalf of the fabricator on inspection testing and quality matters within the scope of the contract documents .
pc inspection and testing shall be performed at least to the extent specified in chapter num of aws dnum and additionally as necessary to assure conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
quality assurance qa is the prerogative of the engineer .
the qa inspector is the duly designated person who acts for and in behalf of the engineer on all matters within the scope of the contract documents as delegated by the engineer .
qa inspection and testing shall be performed to the extent necessary to verify that an acceptable product is being finished in accordance with the provisions of the contract documents .
the qa inspector shall have the authority to verify the qualifications of pc inspectors and nondestructive testing ndt personnel to specified levels by written or performance tests or other means as determined necessary .
b start of shop work .
shop work shall not be started until the contractor notifies the engineer in writing where the shop orders were placed .
the fabricator shall give prior notice to beginning of shop work so that inspection may be provided .
the proposed production schedule including the start of production and shipment dates shall be submitted to the engineer .
c notice of shipment .
the departments qa inspector shall be notified seven days in advance of shipment of structural steel to the jobsite .
num num plans and shop drawings .
the contractor shall furnish shop drawings in conformity with subsection num for all structural steel bid under this section .
shop drawings shall specifically identify each piece the direction of rolling for plates where specific orientation is required the location of all welded splices and the location the extent and the criteria of nondestructive testing .
pieces of steel that require charpy vnotch tests shall be identified and listed as to the frequency of test used .
shop facilities for fabrication .
structural steel fabricators for all bridge structures other than rolled beams shall be certified under the aisc quality certification program major steel bridges .
portions of work exposed to view shall be neatly finished .
lifting chains shall be provided with adequate softeners to prevent damage to the material while lifting and turning .
if hooks are used for lifting they shall have sufficient width of jaw and throat to prevent overstress and distortion from handling .
spreader beams or multiple cranes shall be provided for lifting plates and long members to prevent overstress and distortion .
welds and tack welds shall not be cracked from moving of members .
such occurrence shall require a written distortion control plan and complete inspection until the problem is corrected .
the distortion control program and process control reports shall be forwarded to the qa inspector .
all cutting fitting welding and painting shall be done in areas that are kept dry .
inspection .
a process control plan .
the fabricator shall submit a written process control plan to the qa inspector prior to the beginning of fabrication .
the process control plan shall outline the process control tasks to be performed by the fabricator to ensure that all work conforms to the contract .
the fabricators personnel intended to be used for inspection and nondestructive testing shall be listed .
the process control plan shall be subject to approval by the qa inspector .
b frequency .
inspection of all intervals of fabrication welding including each shift on a daily basis shall be performed by an aws certified welding inspector or an aws certified assistant welding inspector under the direct supervision of the certified welding inspector .
direct supervision shall be defined as on site monitoring of all inspection activities on each shift on a daily basis .
c supervision .
adequate supervision and process control inspection of all welding shall be provided to ensure satisfactory consistent and uniform workmanship .
recurring weld defects shall be considered as evidence that proper control and supervision are not being provided .
welding and associated fabrication operations shall be suspended when in the opinion of the qa inspector there is a lack of proper process control .
operations shall not resume until the fabricator has made a significant change in procedure .
proposed changes shall be defined and submitted in writing and approved by the qa inspector prior to resuming fabrication .
num num d edge discontinuities .
all plates and shapes shall be inspected at the edges and ends of plates for the presence of laminar discontinuities and inclusions prior to welding or fitting to other pieces .
the extent of all areas to be repaired shall be reported to the qa inspector .
e welding meters .
verification of welding meters shall be performed no less than once every ten working days .
a calibrated tong ammeter and volt meter external to the welding machine shall be used .
records of these calibrations shall be available for review by the qa inspector .
f reports .
the pc inspector shall submit the following reports to the qa inspector prior to acceptance all nondestructive test reports including tests of all repaired areas the visual test report for all welds dimensions camber and sweep measurements welder qualification records welding procedure specifications procedure qualification records welding machine settings material traceability to each main member plate and paint inspection reports .
after each girder has been inspected by process control and has been accepted as conforming to the contract requirements but prior to painting the qa inspector shall be notified .
the qa inspector shall determine the acceptability of the girder .
all contract deficiencies discovered shall be corrected by the fabricator prior to acceptance .
the qa inspector will mark approval of the member with the departments stamp when accepted .
material subsequently found defective due to damage incurred in shipping and handling may be rejected even if previously accepted .
materials rejected by the qa inspector will be subject to reinspection prior to shipment .
reinspection will normally be made at the next regular inspection however if no regular inspection is scheduled and reinspection is deemed necessary by the engineer to assure compliance with the contract documents the contractor will be responsible for the transportation and per diem cost for the reinspection .
a deduction shall be made from the bid item cost for the item requiring reinspection .
materials will not be accepted at the project site if they do not bear the inspectors stamp of acceptance .
request for quality assurance inspection shall be given seven calendar days in advance .
if it is determined that materials are not acceptancestamped because they were not offered for shop inspection or shipped after rejection at the shop the materials shall be returned to the shop for inspection and correction as necessary .
the cost of inspection and corrections made to rejected material at the project site shall be borne by the contractor .
nondestructive testing .
a written practice and records .
the fabricators process control plan shall detail the nondestructive testing procedures including the weld identification and location system .
it shall also include the fabricators written practice for the administration of personnel qualification and certification program in accordance with the american society for nondestructive testing snttc num num numa .
the written practice shall indicate the specific requirements of the fabricator .
qualification records of all nondestructive testing personnel shall be included in the written practice .
each fabricators written practice shall be subject to the approval of the qa inspector .
all nondestructive test results shall be available for review during fabrication and forwarded to the qa inspector prior to acceptance of the assembly .
b ultrasonic inspection of complete penetration groove welds .
num .
weld stress categories .
the following weldments shall be categorized as follows a .
attachments .
longitudinal and transverse stiffeners gussets pintles and all other attachments shall be considered as part of the flange web end or pier diaphragm to which they are welded .
b. pier and end diaphragms .
pier and end diaphragms shall be considered as part of the web or flange to which they are welded .
c. splices .
splices of main members secondary members or backing when approved to be left in place which attach to a main member shall be ultrasonically tested and accepted prior to attaching to another member .
ultrasonic acceptancerejection criteria shall be in accordance with either table num or table num of aws dnum as determined by the category of stress of the main member to which the secondary member is attached .
all flanges which connect at a splice indicating a change from tension to compression shall be tested in accordance with the tension criteria of table num of aws dnum .
d. sequence .
all flange and web splices shall be welded and tested prior to fitting of the web to the flange .
num .
extent and acceptance criteria of ultrasonic testing .
ultrasonic testing of complete penetration groove welds shall be performed by pc to the extent listed in table num .
the percent inspection indicated for each category is the minimum percent of the total length of each weld that must be tested .
num num table num element tension compressionnum weld orientationnum percent inspectionnum flange flange flange flange tension tension compression compression transverse longitudinal transverse longitudinal num num num num web web web web tensionnum tensionnum compression compression transverse longitudinal transverse longitudinal num num num num pier end diaphragms tensionnum tensionnum compression compression transverse longitudinal transverse longitudinal num num num num notes num tension areas shall be tested in accordance with aws di.num table num .
compression areas shall be tested in accordance with table num of aws dnum .
num the orientation is referenced with respect to the longitudinal center line of the girder for flanges and webs .
the orientation is referenced parallel to the center line of bearing for end and pier diaphragms .
num if any rejectable discontinuities are found in any weld tested less than num the remaining length of that weld and all similar welds in that member shall be tested .
num the tension area of webs and end or pier diaphragms is defined as num the depth of the web from the tension flange .
num .
preparation of test material and testing procedures .
all groove welds shall be ground flush to a maximum surface roughness ansi bnum of num microinches and a medium range waviness such that no gap greater than num inch is present beneath a num inch long straightedge placed anywhere on the test surface .
the test surface shall be ground to bright metal and allow intimate coupling with the search unit .
failure to provide this condition shall result in repair or removal and rewelding of the joint or alternative nondestructive testing methods as determined by the qa inspector .
the testing procedures established in aws dnum section num shall be amended as follows a. splices .
all materials spliced shall be tested prior to attaching into the assembly .
b. alternate procedures .
scanning of welds may be made using other methods as approved by the engineer provided evaluation is made in accordance with chapter num part c of aws dnum .
c. butt joints .
all butt joints shall be ground flush and shall include mandatory scanning using pattern d figure num of aws dnum longitudinal to their axis .
num num d. scanning procedure .
table num of aws dnum shall be amended as follows num testing from both sides of the weld axis shall be made in both leg i and leg ii .
num face a on both connecting members of flanges at a butt weld must lie in a single plane .
scanning of butt welds in which face a and face b individually lie within the same plane shall be performed in leg i and leg ii from each side of the weld axis form viinum aws dnum .
should neither face a nor face b lie in a single plane the testing procedure shall be as follows face a from the thinner material shall be tested both in leg i and leg ii .
the thicker material shall be tested from leg i from both face a and face b .
leg ii from face a shall be evaluated when it originates from the thinner material .
transducers with frequencies greater than num mhz may be used to facilitate locating the discontinuities but evaluation for acceptance shall be made in accordance with chapter num part c of aws dnum .
num t joints shall be evaluated from both face a and face b in legs i ii and iii .
in addition scanning pattern e shall be performed .
all indications which are up to and including num db less critical than reject shall be recorded on the test report and reported to the engineer for acceptance evaluation .
num tables num and num of aws dnum shall include the following flaws evaluated with num or num degree search units and rejected but which have indication levels at or above the minimum level listed for a num degree search unit shall be evaluated with num num and num degree search units .
if this testing reveals that the sound beam of the num or num degree search unit is striking the flaw at num plus or minus num degrees the acceptance level listed for a num degree search unit shall be used as the basis for acceptance regardless of the angle of search unit used to evaluate the flaw .
num evaluation using reject may be used to evaluate flaws only if calibration in accordance with aws dnum num and the vertical linearity is within plus or minus num db for a num db range .
both aws dnum forms viinum and viinum shall be recorded and submitted to the qa inspector prior to approval whether or not reject is used .
e. index marking .
two low stress die stamp marks shall be located on face a num inches from the centerline of the joint on one side of the joint and num inches from each edge of the plate .
num .
through thickness tension plate .
ultrasonic testing of plates as identified in the plans as exhibiting tension in the through thickness direction shall be performed in accordance with astm a num .
plates num num greater than  inch thick shall be tested using num mhz num inch diameter transducers .
plates less than and including  inch thick shall be tested with a num mhz  inch diameter transducer .
supplementary requirement snum shall be used as the acceptance standard .
c dye penetrant testing .
dye penetrant testing in accordance with astm e num may be substituted for magnetic particle testing with approval of the engineer .
d magnetic particle testing .
magnetic particle testing shall be performed on areas defined in aws dnum and this subsection .
magnetic particle testing shall be conducted in accordance with astm e num and aws dnum except as amended herein .
alternating current shall be used .
the yoke spacing shall be between num and num inches .
the minimum lifting power shall be num pounds .
red dry particles shall be used .
the light intensity shall meet astm e num section num .
the yokes shall be set in two positions when testing the weld or base metal .
they shall be positioned both normal and parallel with respect to the weld axis and rolling direction of the base metal .
magnetic particle tests shall be performed at the following locations num .
base metal .
all areas contacted by the carbon arc gouge electrode the electrode cup and the welding electrode .
all three conditions are arc strikes .
num .
fillet welds .
each design weld size on main member to main member and secondary member to main member weldments .
all stopstarts and weld termini .
all linear indications shall further be evaluated with numx or numx magnification .
verification shall be resolved by excavation .
num .
groove welds .
all through thickness edges on transverse butt joint weldments in tension areas .
num .
repairs .
all repair welds to correct defects in groove and fillet welds plate cut edges correction of fabrication errors in cutting punching drilling or fitting and members which are tacked or welded and subsequently cut apart and rewelded .
e radiographic testing .
when radiographic testing is specified it shall be performed in accordance with chapter num part b of aws dnum except that edge blocks shall be used .
radiographs shall be identified as follows num .
contract number .
num .
weld identification number .
the fabrication number of the girder in which the radiographed weld occurs followed by a dash .
num .
letter designation .
letter combination designating the section as follows tf top flange bf bottom flange w web and when applicable n near side and f far side .
num num num .
joint designation .
a letter preceded by a space followed by a number .
the number shall designate the joint in which the radiograph occurs and shall correspond to the number of welded joints between the reference end of the section and the radiographed weld .
num .
defect description .
all defects shall be outlined on the radiograph clearly showing the rejected areas .
the report shall indicate the type of discontinuity and its location from a reference point on the film .
f hardness testing .
hardness testing shall be conducted as required by aws dnum .
oxygas cutting procedures used on tension flanges shall be qualified prior to fabrication .
the procedure shall be qualified on all of the following parameters the grade and type of steel thickest material cut highest carbon equivalency and lowest base metal temperature at the time of cutting .
tests shall be witnessed by the inspector .
the test equipment and procedures shall be in accordance with astm e num .
each test area shall be contained within num square inches .
the mean value of five readings within a test area shall not exceed num hrc .
excessive values shall require establishing higher material temperatures at the time of cutting .
the base metal temperature shall be measured on the surface opposite the cutting source num inches from the point on the surface nearest to the heat source .
production process control tests shall be performed by the contractor .
the number of tests shall be the next highest whole number calculated as follows total number of tension flanges on the bridge divided by num production process control tests shall include the first production cut of the thickest fabricated flange .
a minimum of num percent of production process control tests shall be performed on the thickest flanges fabricated .
all test results shall document the base metal thickness and temperature measured at the time of cutting .
test reports shall be forwarded to the qa inspector .
test values greater than rockwell c num shall be reported to the qa inspector immediately .
general fabrication requirements .
a identification of steels during fabrication .
materials received from the mill shall be stored so that heat numbers are visible .
plates shall be step stacked with the heat number of each plate marked at the end along with the contract number and size of the plate as received from the mill .
shapes bars and other materials that are furnished in tagged lifts or bundles shall be received and stored with identification as required by aashto m num .
pieces of steel which prior to assembling into members will be subject to painting galvanizing or any other operations that will obliterate the heat numbers shall be marked with the heat number and plate number cvn plate frequency if applicable with low stress die stamp spherical indent .
num num any excess material placed into stock for future use shall be marked with the heat number rolling direction and plate number if applicable and grade of steel .
secondary members shall be identified at a frequency of once for every num pieces or less per heat .
the fabricator shall furnish to the qa inspector cutting lists indicating the rolling direction heat numbers plate number for p frequency when applicable and fabrication piece number marked in a timely manner during fabrication .
the contractor shall furnish if requested by the engineer an affidavit certifying that throughout the fabrication the identification of steel has been maintained in accordance with this specification .
b location of splices .
groove welded splices shall be located a minimum of num feet from the centerline of field splices and num foot minimum from centerline of the nearest bolt hole .
c location of stiffeners and connections .
intermediate stiffeners or connection plates shall be placed at least num inches from a groove welded splice in the web or flange .
welder identification marks shall be made using low stress die stamps spherical indent near the weld but not closer than num inch from the heat affected zone .
d rolling direction and cutting .
unless otherwise shown on the plans steel plates for girder flanges webs and splice plates shall be cut and fabricated so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the girder .
abutment and pier diaphragm plates includes flanges webs and splice plates shall be cut and fabricated so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the centerline of bearing .
sheared edges of plates more than  inch thick and carrying calculated stress shall be milled or sawn to a depth of  inch .
reentrant corners shall be precut to a minimum radius of num inch before cutting .
the procedure for cutting plate edges of tension flanges shall be qualified in accordance with subsection numf .
e end treatment of webs and flanges .
the ends of webs and flanges shall be flush and within the same plane so as to leave no reentrant corners .
f minimum base metal temperature .
the minimum base metal temperature qualified to cut flanges and webs in tension shall be established by hardness testing in accordance with subsection numf .
g straightening material .
rolled material before being worked must be straight .
if straightening is necessary it shall be done by methods that will not injure the metal and is subject to the engineers approval .
h bent plates .
unwelded coldbent steel plates shall conform to the following num .
rolling direction .
the bend line shall be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
num num num .
minimum radii .
bending shall be such that no cracking of the plate occurs .
minimum bend radii measured to the concave face of the metal shall be as shown in table num .
num .
bending temperature .
if a shorter radius is essential the plates shall be bent hot at a temperature not greater than num f. hotbent plates shall conform to subsection numi .
num .
corner radii .
the corners of the plate shall be rounded to a radius of num inch before bending throughout the portion of the plate at which the bending is to occur .
table num thickness t in inches up to  over  to num over num to num over num to num minimum bend radius numt num t numt num t i curving and cambering of rolled beams and welded girders .
heat curving of beams and girders will be allowed when the horizontal radius of curvature measured to the centerline of the member web is greater than both values calculated by the following two equations and greater than num feet at any and all cross sections throughout the length of the member .
t f bd r y  num  fy b r num where f y specified minimum yield point in ksi of the member web .
 ratio of the total cross section area to the cross sectional area of both flanges .
b width of the widest flange in inches .
d clear distance between flanges in inches .
t web thickness in inches .
r radius in inches .
in addition to the above when the required radius of curvature is less than num feet and the flange thickness exceeds three inches or the flange width exceeds num inches heat curving will not be allowed .
heat curving requirements shall be as follows num .
materials .
steels that are manufactured to a yield point greater than num psi shall not be heat curved .
num .
type of heating .
beams and girders may be curved by either continuous or vtype heating as approved by the engineer .
for the continuous method a strip along the edge of the top and bottom flange shall be heated simultaneously the strip shall be of sufficient width and num num temperature to obtain the required curvature .
for the vtype heating the top and bottom flanges shall be heated in truncated triangular wedge shaped areas having their base along the flange edge and spaced at regular intervals along each flange the spacing and temperature shall be as required to obtain the required curvature and heating shall progress along the top and bottom flange at approximately the same rate .
for the vtype heating the apex of the truncated triangular area applied to the inside flange surface shall terminate just before the juncture of the web and the flange is reached .
to avoid unnecessary web distortion special care shall be taken when heating the inside flange surfaces the surfaces that intersect the web so the heat is not applied directly to the web .
asbestos sheet material  inch thick shall be placed against the web before applying heat to the inside flange surface .
when the radius of curvature is num feet or more the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface shall extend to the juncture of the flange and web .
when the radius of curvature is less than num feet the apex of the truncated triangular heating pattern applied to the outside flange surface shall extend past the web for a distance equal to  of the flange or num inches whichever is less .
the truncated triangular pattern shall have an included angle of approximately num to num degrees but the base of the triangle shall not exceed num inches .
variations in the patterns prescribed above may be made upon approval by the qa inspector .
for both types of heating the flange edges to be heated are those that will be on the inside of the horizontal curve after cooling .
heating both inside and outside flange surfaces is only mandatory when the flange thickness is num inches or greater in which case the two surfaces shall be heated concurrently .
the minimum temperature shall be as prescribed below .
preload compressive stresses will be permitted up to a maximum of num percent of the specified yield strength of the steel to reduce the number of heat patterns required to produce the desired curvature .
loading that causes the member to distort permanently yield without the application of heat will result in rejection of the member .
all nondestructive testing to evaluate damage and corrective work ordered by the engineer to compensate for overstressing shall be performed at the contractors expense .
num .
temperature .
the heat curving operation shall be conducted in such manner that the temperature of the steel does not exceed num f as measured by temperature indicating crayons or other suitable means .
the inspector shall take heat measurements after the heating flame has been removed from the steel .
the girder shall not be artificially cooled until after naturally cooling to num f the method of artificial cooling is subject to approval .
heat curving shall be directly supervised by the pc inspector .
num .
position for heating .
the girder may be heat curved with the web in either a vertical or a horizontal position .
when curved in the vertical position the girder must be braced or supported in such a manner that the num num tendency of the girder to deflect laterally during the heat curving process will not cause the girder to overturn .
when curved in the horizontal position the girder must be supported near its ends and at intermediate points if required to obtain a uniform curvature the bending stress in the flanges due to the dead weight of the girder must not exceed the usual allowable design stress .
when the girder is positioned horizontally for heating intermediate safety catch blocks must be maintained at the midlength of the girder within num inches of the flanges at all times during the heating process to guard against a sudden sag due to plastic flange buckling .
horizontal curvature shall be checked with the girder in the vertical position by measuring offsets from a string line or wire attached to both flanges or by using other suitable means .
num .
sequence of operation .
members shall be heat curved prior to the completion of the following a. attachment of end bearing stiffeners .
b. attachment of lateral gusset plates .
c. attachment of longitudinal stiffeners .
d. welding of intermediate stiffeners and connection plates to the flanges .
when longitudinal stiffeners are required they shall be heat curved or oxygencut to the required radius prior to being welded to the curved girder .
the girder shall be heat curved in the fabrication shop before it is painted .
when cover plates are to be attached to rolled beams they may be attached before heat curving if the total thickness of one flange and cover plate is less than num inches and the radius of curvature is greater than num feet .
for other rolled beams with cover plates the beams must be heat curved before the cover plates are attached cover plates must be either heat curved or oxygencut separately and then welded to the curved beam .
num .
camber .
cambering of welded plate girders except for minor adjustments required after welding shall be achieved by curved cutting of web plates prior to welding to flanges .
girders shall be cambered prior to heat curving .
heat cambering procedures shall be in accordance with subsection numi and shall be approved by the engineer prior to beginning of work .
vertical camber shall not be measured for final acceptance before all welding and heating operations are completed and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature .
triangular heating patterns shall be spaced throughout the length of the member .
the apex of the triangle shall be located in the web at a point not less than num percent of the depth of the member from the flange that will be concave after cambering .
heat shall begin at the apex and progress slowly toward the base .
the included angle shall not exceed num degrees .
the maximum width at the base shall not exceed num inches .
num num j facing of bearing surfaces .
the surface finish of bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or with concrete shall meet the following ansi bnum surface roughness requirements in microinches steel slabs ansi num heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded ansi num milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers ansi num bridge rollers and rockers ansi num pins and pin holes ansi num sliding bearings ansi num the maximum deviation from flatness of the contact area of every steel bearing surface shall not exceed num inch .
deviation shall be measured by placing measured offset blocks of equal dimension outside the bearing contact area and placing a straightedge across the blocks .
measurements from the flange surface to the bottom of the straight edge shall not deviate by more than num inch from the offset block dimension .
flatness shall be checked in both the longitudinal and transverse directions at num inch intervals within the area of bearing contact .
k holes for fasteners .
all holes for bolts in main members or secondary members that weld to main members shall be either subpunched and reamed subdrilled and reamed or drilled from the solid .
holes shall be subpunched or subdrilled num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the fastener and reamed to num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener or drilled to num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the fastener .
subsized holes prior to reaming shall not be offset more than num inch .
reaming or drilling full sized holes shall be done using a template with hardened bushings or with a numeric control nc machine such that no offset equal to num inch occurs in more than num percent of the connection .
enlarged or slotted holes for high strength bolts may be used only when shown on the plans or authorized .
holes shall be clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
all burrs shall be removed as well as oil and other foreign matter .
holes shall be cylindrical within num inch and perpendicular to the member .
connection parts requiring reaming or drilling shall be assembled and securely held and shall be match marked before disassembling .
poor matching of holes will be cause for rejection .
l boring pin holes .
pin holes shall be bored true to the specified diameter smooth and straight at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each other unless otherwise required .
the final surface shall be produced by a finishing cut .
the distance outside to outside of holes in tension members and inside to inside of holes in compression members shall not vary more than num inch from that specified .
boring of holes in builtup members shall be done after fabrication of the member is completed .
the diameter of the pin hole shall not exceed that of the pin by num num more than num inch for pins num inches or less in diameter or num inch for larger pins .
two pilot nuts and two driving nuts for each size pin shall be furnished unless otherwise specified .
welding .
a process .
welding of steel structures shall conform to aws dnum as amended herein .
all web and flange butt joints and web to flange welds shall be made using the submerged arc welding process saw .
alloy active fluxes shall not be used in groove welds or fillet welds with more than three passes .
repairs may be made using submerged arc welding or shielded metal arc welding smaw .
flux core arc welding fcaw will be permitted on secondary to main member attachments when performed in the flat or horizontal positions .
vertical or overhead fcaw welding shall be limited to only that work approved by the qa inspector .
the ratio of the width of the face to the depth of penetration of each submerged arc welding fillet pass shall be a minimum of num .
this shall be verified by macroetch testing and included in the procedure qualification record pqr .
the test heat input and voltage qualified shall establish the maximum values used in fabrication welding .
these values shall be indicated in the welding procedure specification .
the macroetch shall be performed in accordance with figure num of aws dnum with the following exception the tjoint shall contain an acute angle less than or equal to the smallest acute angle to be used in fabrication .
the acute angle tested qualifies all angles equal to or greater than this angle .
both sides of the tjoint shall be welded .
b base metal preparation .
the preparation of base metal shall be in accordance with aws dnum with the following exception all mill scale and rust shall be removed from the surfaces of main members on which all welds are made by any process .
surfaces and edges to be welded shall not exceed an ansi bnum roughness value of num microinches .
c run onoff plates .
runon and runoff plates shall be used on all butt joints .
they shall be of the same base metal as the material being welded .
removal of these plates shall be accomplished by cutting the plates off and grinding to a surface finish in accordance with aws d num. d undercut .
undercut in the stiffener web or flange shall not exceed num inch in areas of tension as indicated on the plans when the axis of the undercut is normal to the longitudinal centerline of the girder or normal to the centerline of bearings in the case of plate diaphragms .
undercut in compression areas shall not exceed num inch .
e temporary tack welds .
temporary tack welds will not be permitted on splice plates to facilitate stack drilling .
all temporary tack welds not incorporated into the final weld shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
temporary tack welds that are approved shall be removed by grinding such that the plate num num thickness is not reduced by more than five percent and tested in accordance with subsection numc .
f gusset plates .
lateral gusset plates welded to girder flanges in tension shall be preheated to num f. g repairs .
all welding required to repair cracks oxygen cut gouges porosity and undercut shall conform to the following num .
general .
repairs made to correct undercut craters undersized welds porosity excessive roughness on oxygen cut gouges and cracks shall not be performed without the knowledge of the pc inspector .
undercut may be prepared by contour grinding when approved by the engineer .
areas repaired shall be recorded in accordance with aws d num paragraph num .
surfaces that are air carbon arc gouged shall be ground to bright metal prior to welding .
repair areas shall be preheated to a temperature of num to num f prior to welding .
cracks removed prior to welding shall be penetrant tested or magnetic particle tested to assure their complete removal before welding .
all repairs shall be penetrant or magnetic particle tested for soundness .
this requirement applies equally to tack welds .
num .
groove welds .
the number of repairs shall be limited to three or fewer heat cycles in any groove weld .
num .
cut edges .
cavities resulting from the removal of cut edge discontinuities in plates shall be prepared prior to welding using a minimum  inch radius and a minimum num degree angle .
the base metal shall be ground to bright metal prior to welding .
num .
mislocated holes .
misfit holes shall not be repaired unless approved by the engineer .
when holes are repaired in accordance with an approved welding procedure the soundness shall be established by ultrasonic testing .
in addition the hardness of the heat affected zone of the repair area shall be less than or equal to rockwell c num when tested in accordance with astm e num .
post weld heat shall be num f per inch of thickness .
h stud welding .
stud welding shall conform to aws dnum section num as amended herein .
studs shall not be welded to top flanges until after the formwork for the deck is in place in accordance with occupational safety and health administration osha regulations num cfr num subpart r. num .
camber .
adequate provisions shall be made in fabrication of structural members to compensate for loss of camber due to welding of the shear connectors .
num .
production tests .
the first two studs welded on each beam or girder after being allowed to cool shall be bent num degrees by striking the stud with a hammer .
if failure occurs in the weld of either stud the weld procedure shall be corrected and two successive studs successfully num num welded and tested before any more studs are welded to the beam or girder .
the qa inspector shall be promptly informed of all changes in the welding procedure at any time during fabrication .
i weld termini treatment .
all gussets stiffeners diaphragms or other attachments at a corner of intersecting plates joined by a fillet or groove weld shall be clipped num inch minimum .
intersecting fillet welds will not be allowed .
treatment of all end weld termini on transverse secondary attachments to main members shall be such that the welds terminate  inch short of the end of the attachment .
j gas certification .
the contractor shall furnish certification that the gas or gas mixture is suitable for the intended application in accordance with aws dnum and the manufacturers recommendations .
k miscellaneous attachments .
attachments shall not be welded to main members unless approved .
shop assembly .
a the field connections of main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents towers each face plate girders and rigid frames shall be assembled in the shop with milled ends of compression members in full bearing and the subsize holes reamed to the specified size while the connections are assembled .
assembly may be full truss or girder assembly progressive truss or girder assembly full chord assembly progressive chord assembly or special complete structure assembly at the fabricators option unless assembly methods are specified on the plans .
b full truss or girder assembly .
full truss or girder assembly shall consist of assembling all members of each truss arch rib bent tower face continuous beam line plate girder or rigid frame at one time .
c progressive truss or girder assembly .
progressive truss or girder assembly shall consist of assembling initially for each truss arch rib bent tower face continuous beam line plate girder or rigid frame at least three contiguous shop sections or all members in at least three contiguous panels but not less than the number of panels associated with three contiguous chord lengths i.e .
length between field splices and not less than num feet in the case of structures longer than num feet .
at least one shop section or panel or as many panels as are associated with a chord length shall be added at the advancing end of the assembly before any member is removed from the rearward end so that the assembled portion of the structure is never less than specified above .
d full chord assembly .
full chord assembly shall consist of assembling with geometric angles at the joints the full length of each chord of each truss or open spandrel arch or each leg of each bent or tower then reaming the field connection holes while the members are assembled and reaming the web member connections to steel templates set at geometric not cambered angular relation to chord lines .
field connection holes in web members shall num num be reamed to steel templates .
at least one end of each web member shall be milled or scribed normal to the longitudinal axis of the member and the templates at both ends of the member shall be accurately located from one of the milled ends or scribed lines .
e progressive chord assembly .
progressive chord assembly shall consist of assembling contiguous chord members in the manner specified for full chord assembly and in the number and length specified for progressive truss or girder assembly .
f special complete structure assembly .
special complete structure assembly shall consist of assembling the entire structure including the floor system .
each assembly including camber alignment accuracy of holes and fit of milled joints shall be in accordance with dimensional requirements prior to reaming or full size drilling of holes .
g fit .
surfaces of metal in contact shall be cleaned before assembling .
the parts of members to be assembled shall be well pinned and firmly drawn together with bolts before reaming operations .
h match marking .
connecting parts assembled in the shop for field connections shall be matchmarked and a diagram showing such marks shall be furnished to the engineer .
i drifting of holes .
the drifting done during assembling shall be only that necessary to bring the parts into position and not sufficient to enlarge the holes or distort the metal .
if holes must be enlarged to admit bolts they shall be reamed .
j abutting joints .
abutting joints in compression members and girder flanges and in tension members when so specified on the plans shall be faced and brought to uniform bearing .
where joints are not faced the opening shall not exceed  inch .
k camber tolerance .
deviation from the design camber between any two supports points of fixed elevations shall be limited to lnum lnum where l length in feet between supports this requirement is in addition to the camber requirements of aws dnum subsection num .
shop connections using highstrength bolts .
unless otherwise specified all shop connections shall be made with highstrength bolts .
all shop connections shall be made in accordance with subsection num .
galvanizing .
bolts washers and nuts used in the assembly and erection of galvanized railing and posts or where specified shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num class c or shall be zinc coated in accordance with aashto m num .
num num structural steel shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
uncleaned slag lines bare spots blisters flux spots or inclusions dross acid or black spots that exceed num square inch or occur on more than num percent of the pieces in the lot shall be cause for rejection of the lot .
the materials may be stripped regalvanized and again submitted for test and inspection otherwise the entire lot shall be rejected .
pieces less than num percent of the lot may with the approval of the engineer be zinc coated by an approved zinc rod in accordance with astm a num if applied to correct areas less than num square inch .
shop cleaning and painting of steel .
graffiti shall be removed prior to painting or in the case of astm a num grade numw steel prior to shipping .
a cleaning of unpainted astm a num grade numw steel .
the exterior surfaces of unpainted astm a num grade numw steel shall be blasted to remove mill scale and foreign material which would prohibit rusting to a uniform color .
b cleaning of surfaces to be painted .
structural steel cleaning shall meet the requirements of the steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num sspcsp num commercial blast cleaning .
painting shall be accomplished before new rust forms .
c paint systems .
all structural steel shall be painted using a two coat system with inorganic zincrich primer shop coat and highbuild urethane top coat as described in subsection num .
the shop coat shall have a dry film thickness of num mils .
the top coat shall have a thickness of num mils .
d sequence .
unless otherwise specified steel work shall be given the shop coat of approved paint after it has been accepted by the qa inspector and before it is shipped from the plant .
shipping pieces shall not be loaded for shipment until they are thoroughly dry .
painting shall not be done after loading material on cars except for retouching areas damaged by loading or handling operations .
e procedure .
application of paint shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
f surfaces in contact with concrete .
the areas that will come in contact with concrete shall not be painted .
g field weld areas .
areas of structural steel to be field welded shall not be .painted before welding is completed .
h erection marks .
erection marks for field identification of members shall be readily visible on shop painted surfaces .
i faying surfaces of connections .
when splices are specified on the plans to be class b slip critical the contact surfaces of unpainted astm a num grade numw steel shall be blast cleaned to a sspcspnum commercial blast .
when the inorganic zincrich primer is provided the manufacturer shall qualify the paint by test in accordance with test method to determine the slip coefficient for coatings used in bolted joints as adopted by the research council on structural connections .
the manufacturer shall certify in writing that the slip coefficient is no less than num .
num num marking .
each member shall be painted or marked with an erection mark for identification and an erection diagram shall be furnished to the contractor and engineer with erection marks shown .
field construction requirements field welding and inspection .
field welding will not be permitted unless shown on the plans or approved by the engineer except to attach studs .
all field welding and inspection shall be performed in accordance with this specification and aws dnum .
studs shall be free from rust rust pits scale oil moisture paint and other deleterious matter that would adversely affect the welding operation .
surfaces to which studs are to be welded shall be free of scale rust moisture paint and other injurious material that would prevent proper welding or produce objectionable fumes .
additional studs shall be tested in accordance with aws dnum paragraph num when the base metal temperature is below num f at the time of welding .
stud welding shall not be done when the base metal temperature is below num f at the time of welding .
a stud welding in the field .
automatic stud welding guns shall be used to weld studs to girders .
the operator shall be qualified per aws dnum subsection num .
the base metal where the stud is to be welded shall be ground to bright metal immediately prior to the weld being made .
manual welding will not be allowed except to make repairs .
stud welding shall be in accordance with subsection num h. b repairing stud welds .
electrodes used to repair stud welds shall be kept in rod ovens in accordance with aws dnum subsection num .
the fillet weld size shall be a minimum of num inch .
the welder shall be prequalified for the welding process used and stud welding .
erection of steel structures .
structural steel members shall be erected to prevent damage to all elements of the structure and in a safe manner .
structural steel members to which the erection specification applies are those members that bear on the substructure of a bridge .
the primary members such as beams and girders shall be temporarily anchored and braced as they are erected to preclude detrimental movement in any direction and to prevent overturning and buckling .
struts bracing tie cables and other devices used for temporary restraint shall be considered falsework and shall be designed to resist all loads imposed during each stage of construction until the deck concrete has attained the field compressive strength shown in table num .
at least two steel girders shall be erected when girders are initially placed in any span unless the engineer provides a written waiver to this requirement .
diaphragms and cross frames between girders shall be connected to the girders and all diaphragm or cross frame connection bolt holes filled with bolts that are at least snug tight during erection .
the contractors engineer shall specify bolt torque requirements if any prior to releasing girders from the crane .
steel box girders need not be erected in pairs .
num num at least one week prior to the preerection conference the contractor shall approve sign and submit an erection plan to the engineer for record purposes only .
the erection plan shall be stamped approved for construction and signed by the contractor .
the erection plan will not be approved by the engineer .
if falsework drawings are required they shall conform to and be submitted in accordance with subsection num .
the erection plan and procedure shall provide complete details of the erection process with dimension tolerances including num temporary falsework support struts bracing tie cables and other devices material properties and specifications for temporary works bolt torque requirements prior to releasing girders from the cranes if required connection details and attachments to other structure components or objects .
num procedure and sequence of operations including a detailed schedule with completion times for work items that complies with the working hour limitations .
num minimum load chart lift capacity outrigger size and reactions for each crane .
num assumed loads and girder weights lift points lifting devices spreaders and angle of lifting cables .
num girder stresses at critical points along the girder length during progressive stages of erection shall be investigated to assure that the structural integrity and stability of the girders is maintained .
stresses at lift points induced as a result of lifting shall be investigated and adequate bracing provided as indicated by the analysis .
num locations of cranes trucks delivering girders and the location of cranes and outriggers relative to other structures including retaining walls wing walls and utilities .
num drawings notes catalog data showing the manufacturers recommendations or performance tests and calculations clearly showing the above listed details assumptions and dimensions .
num contingency plans detailing what measures the contractor will take in case of inclement weather forecast or actual equipment failure delivery interruption and slower than planned production .
a preerection conference will be held at least one week prior to the beginning of erection .
the engineer contractor erection subcontractor and the contractors engineer shall attend the meeting .
the erection subcontractor shall demonstrate his knowledge and familiarity of where the piece marks are located on the components to be erected their orientation in the erected structure and the shop drawing piece mark convention used by the girder fabricator at the preerection conference .
the girder fabricator shall participate in the conference by way of speaker telephone during only that portion in which the piece marks are discussed .
the girder fabricator shall state whether the erection subcontractor has demonstrated a correct understanding of the piece marks and if not correct any misunderstanding .
num num additional preerection conferences may be required for subsequent phases of construction or for phases that differ from the original construction plan as directed by the engineer .
additional conferences may also be requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall submit a final erection plan to the engineer prior to girder erection for record purposes only .
the contractors engineer shall sign and seal num num and num listed above in the final erection plan .
the final erection plan shall be stamped approved for construction and signed by the contractor .
when a bridge spans traffic of any kind except for construction traffic and the contractors employees the contractors engineer shall inspect and provide written approval of the erected girders prior to opening the area beneath the girders to traffic .
for this specification traffic is defined as the vehicles railroad pedestrians and watercraft moving along a route .
the contractor shall perform daily inspections of the erected girders and other permanent and temporary bridge elements until the deck concrete has attained the field compressive strength .
the contractors engineer shall provide an inspection form to the engineer and the contractor that lists the items the contractor will document during the daily inspection of the erected girders .
the inspection form shall include inspection items specific to each bridge being constructed .
the contractor shall provide the engineer and the contractors engineer with written documentation of these inspections within num hours of each inspection .
all temporary struts bracing tie cables other devices and extra material required shall be removed upon completion of the structure .
a equipment .
the contractor shall provide the falsework and all tools machinery and supplies including drift pins and fitting up bolts necessary to complete the work .
b field inspection .
material and work not previously inspected will be inspected after delivery to the job site .
the quality of all field welds including inspection and testing shall meet the requirements of this section .
c storage .
girders and beams shall be placed upright and shored .
long members such as columns and chords shall be supported on skids placed in such positions as to prevent damage by deflection .
d falsework .
falsework shall conform to subsection num. e bearings .
bearings and bearing seats shall conform to section num. f anchorage .
anchor bolts in piers abutments or pedestals shall be accurately set either in the concrete as it is being placed or in holes formed while the concrete is being placed or in holes drilled after the concrete has set .
bolts placed in formed or drilled holes shall be grouted in place with a nonshrink or epoxy grout which shall completely fill the holes .
location of anchors and setting of rockers shall take into account any variation from mean temperature at time of setting and anticipated lengthening of bottom flange due to dead num num load after setting .
at mean temperature and under dead load the rockers shall be set vertical and anchor bolts at expansion bearings shall be centered in their slots .
care shall be taken that full and free movement at the movable bearings is not restricted by improper setting or adjustment of bearings or anchor bolts and nuts .
g straightening .
the straightening of bent material when permitted shall be done by methods that will not produce fracture or other damage .
distorted members shall be straightened by mechanical means or if approved by application of a limited amount of localized heat .
heat shall not be applied directly on the weld metal .
the temperature of heated areas shall not exceed num f as controlled by temperature indication crayons .
the surfaces of metal for all steels will be inspected visually and by magnetic particle or dye penetrant tests for evidences of fracture following the straightening procedures .
h galvanizing .
galvanized units on which the spelter coating has been burned by welding or damaged during erection shall be repaired by a hot dip or metallizing process as described in aashto mnum or shall be painted with one full brush coat of a zincrich paint meeting military specification dodp numa .
spray can applications of zinc will not be allowed .
i handling and installation .
during erection the parts shall be accurately assembled as shown on the plans and matchmarks shall be followed .
the material shall be so handled that parts will not be bent broken or otherwise damaged .
hammering which will damage or distort the members will not be permitted .
bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact shall be cleaned before the members are assembled .
splices and field connections of main stress carrying members shall have a minimum of one half of the holes filled with high strength bolts and cylindrical erection pins with the bolts fully tightened before external support systems are removed and the connections completed by belting unless otherwise specified .
erection pins which are no less than num inch in diameter smaller than the drilled holes shall be used at the extreme corners of the pattern in main member connections .
this requirement does not apply to diaphragms and lateral bracing in straight girder spans provided the member is adequately supported prior to removal of the external support .
members that are assembled prior to being erected shall have all bolts installed and fully tightened .
the structure shall not carry traffic or construction loads without approval of the engineer .
j pin connections .
pilot and driving nuts shall be used in driving pins .
pins shall be so driven that the members will take full bearing on them .
pin nuts shall be screwed tight and the threads burred at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
k misfits .
the correction of minor misfits involving minor reaming cutting and chipping will be considered a legitimate part of the erection .
however any error in shop fabrication or deformation resulting from handling and transportation which prevents proper assembling and fitting up of parts by num num moderate use of drift pins or by a moderate amount of reaming and slight chipping or cutting shall be reported immediately to the engineer .
the engineers approval shall be obtained for methods of correction and the correction shall be made in the engineers presence .
l cleaning of connections .
when splices are designated class b slip critical on the plans the contact surfaces of splices shall be field inspected immediately prior to assembly .
all foreign material shall be removed prior to fitting and bolting of the splices .
connections using highstrength bolts .
a certification .
the contractor shall submit the suppliers certified test reports which provide a corresponding lot number appearing on the shipping package and the certification .
the suppliers certification shall state when and where all testing was done and indicate the zinc thickness when galvanized bolts and nuts are used .
b materials .
washer type direct tension indicators shall conform to astm f num .
bolts shall be aashto mnum type num for connections which are painted .
bolts for unpainted astm a num grade numw steel shall be aashto m num type num .
the maximum tensile strength shall be num ksi for bolts num inch or less in diameter and num ksi for larger bolts .
nuts shall be aashto m num grade numh or aashto mnum grade dh for plain or galvanized fasteners except connections for unpainted astm a num grade numw steel in which case nuts shall be aashto m num grade dhnum or cnum .
for galvanized fasteners the nuts shall be overtapped to the minimum amount required for the fastener assembly .
all nuts bolts and washers shall have the manufacturers markings on them .
all galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye so a visual check can be made for the lubricant at the time of field installation .
plain bolts shall be oily to the touch when installed .
weathered or rusty items shall be cleaned and relubricated prior to installation .
c test requirements .
all high strength fasteners including black bolts and nuts shall be subjected to a rotationalcapacity test in accordance with aashto m num section num and shall meet the following requirements num .
tension procedure .
fasteners shall be turned two times the required number of turns from snug tight conditions indicated in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridgestable numb in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or equivalent tension measuring device without stripping or failure .
num .
minimum tension .
during this test the maximum record tension shall be equal to or greater than num times the required fastener tension aashto standard specifications for highway bridges table numa .
num num num .
maximum torque .
the measured torque to produce the required fastener tension shall not exceed the following equation torque num pd where torque measured torque in footpounds p measured bolt tension in pounds d nominal diameter in feet num .
proof load tests .
proof load tests astm f num method num are required for the bolts .
wedge tests of full size bolts are required in accordance with section num of aashto m num .
galvanized bolts shall be wedge tested after galvanizing .
proof load tests in accordance with astm f num are required for the nuts .
the proof load tests for the nuts to be used with galvanized bolts shall be performed after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
num .
snug tight .
installation of all high strength bolts shall be in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges paragraph num .
the snug tight condition as defined in paragraph num or num shall be accomplished for any method of tightening .
d field connections .
unless otherwise specified all field connections shall be made with highstrength bolts which include direct tension indicators .
direct tension indicators shall be either washer type direct tension indicators or tension control bolts .
washer type indicators shall not be used with unpainted astm a num grade numw steel .
e bolted parts .
bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled and shall not be separated by gaskets or any other interposed compressible material .
all joint surfaces when assembled shall be free of scale except tight mill scale dirt burrs other foreign material and other defects that may prevent solid seating of the parts .
contact surfaces within frictiontype joints shall be free of oil paint lacquer or rust inhibiter .
contact surfaces may be galvanized only when specified on the plans .
f installation .
fasteners and contact surfaces of splices shall be protected from dirt and moisture at the jobsite .
all fasteners shall then be tightened progressing systematically from the center or most rigid part of the connection to the free edges in a manner that will minimize relaxation of previously tightened fasteners .
in some cases proper tensioning of the bolts may require more than a single cycle of systematic partial tightening prior to final tightening to obtain proper tension .
a minimum of num percent of the bolts must be at least six bolts in each splice shall be tightened sufficiently to assure all plates are in firm contact before final tensioning is started .
when all fasteners in the joint are tight each fastener shall have a tension no less than the minimum bolt tension shown in table num for the size of fastener used and a minimum of two threads shall project beyond the surface of the nut .
num .
impact wrenches .
impact wrenches if used shall be of adequate capacity to perform the required tightening of each bolt in approximately num seconds .
num num num .
washer location .
in addition to load indicating washers each fastener shall have a hardened washer under the turning element .
num .
beveled washers .
where the outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis a smooth beveled washer shall be used to compensate for lack of parallelism .
num .
reusing fasteners .
bolts may be reused once if approved .
direct tension indicators shall be tensioned only once and shall not be reused .
retightening of previously tightened bolts shall not be considered as reuse .
g locknuts and lock washers .
subsections num c e and f shall not apply to bolts for which the plans specify lock washers or locknuts .
fasteners with lock washers or locknuts shall be snug tight only .
h inspection .
the contractor shall provide an acceptable platform from which the engineer can inspect bolt tension and determine whether the work meets specification requirements .
the following inspection procedure shall be used unless a more extensive or different inspection is specified .
num .
quality assurance .
the engineer will inspect a sufficient number of fasteners to assure compliance with table num using a method commensurate with the type of fastener used .
all loose fasteners shall be brought into compliance .
num .
procedure qualification .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the bolt tightening method is providing tension in accordance with table num .
num .
frequency .
the demonstration shall be done daily on a minimum of three fasteners of each size and lot number using an accurate direct tension measuring device .
for short grip bolts direct tension indicators with solid plates may be used to perform this test .
the direct tension indicators shall be checked with a longer grip bolt in the tension measuring device first .
there shall be a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head turned to tighten each bolt .
the direct tension measurement device shall be furnished by the contractor and shall be certified by a testing laboratory at least once a year .
table num nominal bolt size required minimum bolt tension lbs .
 num  num  num  num num num num  num num  num num  num num  num num num field cleaning and painting of steel .
a self weathering steel .
unpainted astm a num grade numw steel shall be cleaned of foreign material after erection to assure uniform weathering of the steel .
b minimum surface preparation .
for painted steel when the erection is completed including all bolting and straightening of bent metal all adhering dirt grease and foreign material shall be removed .
rust and scale shall be removed to bare metal .
c damaged areas .
after the inspector has examined and approved the field connections and prior to application of top coats all uncoated areas and areas with damaged shop primer shall receive one coat of shop primer .
the shop primer shall be thoroughly cured prior to application of the top coat .
d top coat .
after retouching the shop coat and field cleaning has been satisfactorily completed all steel work shall be painted with the required top coat as specified in subsection num .
when the manufacturer of the top coat is different than the manufacturer of the shop primer the contractor shall submit written documentation that the paints are compatible .
e materials handling .
all paints solvents coatings and other chemical products or solutions shall be mixed handled applied stored and disposed of in such a manner that any spill splash or drip will be contained without contamination of the soil vegetation streams or other water bodies .
fracture control plan .
the fracture control plan fcp applies to all main stress carrying members identified on the plans as fracture critical .
welded butt joints spliced within fracture critical members fcms including weld and fillet weld attachments to fcms shall be welded and tested in accordance with this plan .
the fcp shall be in accordance with aws dnum section num .
chemical and mechanical tests as required by this plan shall be the responsibility of the fabricator .
structure number .
the location letters figures and paint used for stenciling shall be in accordance with the plan details .
payment for structure number shall be included in the work .
method of measurement a computed weight .
computed weight for unit measurement will be used for estimating the quantities shown on the design plans and for determining overruns or underruns .
num .
the weight of metal in pounds per cubic foot unless otherwise provided will be assumed as follows steel cast or rolled including alloy num cast iron num num num num .
the weight of rolled shapes pipe and structural tubing will be computed on the basis of their nominal weight and dimensions as shown in the latest edition of the manual of steel construction published by aisc .
num .
the weight of plates will be computed on the basis of their nominal dimensions as shown on the approved shop drawings with no additions for overrun .
num .
allowance will not be made for the weight of shop paint in computing the pay weight of metal .
num .
allowance will not be made for the weight of the spelter coating in computing the pay weight of galvanized steel .
num .
the pay weight will be computed on the basis of net finished dimensions of the part deducting for copes cuts clips and all open holes except bolt holes .
num .
the computed weight of highstrength bolts will be based on the portions outside the grip including one washer and one nut as tabulated in table num .
table num nominal bolt size in inches weight of num bolts in pounds  num unc num  num unc num  num unc num num num unc num num  num unc num num  num unc num num  num unc num num .
the weight of castings will be computed from the dimensions shown on the shop drawings with an additional five percent allowance for fillets and overruns .
num .
allowance will not be made for weight of welds in computing the pay weight of structural steel .
num .
all castings anchor bolts expansion devices shoes rollers rockers weld metal railing and rail posts will be paid for as structural steel unless otherwise specified .
num .
the weight of erection bolts or shapes field paint boxes crates or other containers used for packing together with sills struts or rods used for supporting members during transportation will not be included in the pay weight .
num num b the weight of structural steel will not be remeasured but shall be the quantities shown on the plans .
exception will be made for changes in design or for an error of plus or minus num percent of the total design weight shown on the plans for the project .
payment for increased quantity deduction due to decreased quantity or stipulated error will be made on the basis of the unit price bid in accordance with subsection num. c prospective bidders shall verify the weight of structural steel before submitting a bid .
adjustment other than for approved changes or for an error as stipulated in subsection numb will not be made in the design weight shown on the plans even though the actual weight may deviate from the design weight .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of structural steel will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit structural steel pound structural steel galvanized pound all costs associated with implementing the fracture control plan shall be included in the price paid for structural steel of which the fracture critical members are a part .
all costs associated with the preparation and implementation of the erection plan will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num structural plate structures description this work consists of the construction of structural plate structures of the shape and dimensions called for on the plans in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials steel structural plate materials shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
a copy of the base metal manufacturers certificate showing the results of tests plus the fabricators certificate showing the results of spelter tests shall be provided to the engineer prior to installation .
aluminum alloy structural plate materials shall conform to aashto m num .
there is no limit on overthickness .
bolt and washer shapes shall be as shown on the plans .
all bolts shall be sufficiently long to provide full penetration of the nut by the threaded end .
a field applied two coat coating system using materials specified in aashto m num shall be applied when called for in the contract .
the coating shall be uniformly applied by spray brush or trowel to the entire surface of the culvert both inside and outside .
each coating shall be applied at the approximate rate of num square feet per gallon .
the first coat shall be dry to touch before the second coat is applied and the second coat shall be dry to touch before any backfill operations .
thicker invert plates for round pipes shall be construed as the bottom plate .
this plate shall be installed with the center of the plate as nearly on the centerline of the pipe as practicable however it shall extend at least num inches on either side of centerline measured on the arc .
thicker invert plates for arch pipes shall be constructed as the bottom plate or plates between the corner plates .
the contractor shall state at the preconstruction conference the type of structural plate material steel or aluminum intended to be furnished unless a specific material is specified in the contract .
construction requirements fabrication .
when the completed structure is to be a full circle pipe the plates shall be so curved that when bolted together true circles shall be formed of the required diameter .
when the completed structure is to be an arch pipe the plates shall be so curved as to produce a structure with the span and rise dimensions shown on the plans .
each manufacturer of corrugated structural plates shall furnish data sheets showing the physical and chemical properties of all plates to be supplied under this specification .
num num each plate shall be curved to the proper radius and the bolt holes shall be so punched that all except end plates shall be interchangeable in the erection process .
all structural plates made from steel shall be made from plates formed and punched in accordance with section num of aashto m num .
all structural plates made from aluminum shall be made from plates formed and punched in accordance with section num of aashto m num .
plates for forming skewed or sloped ends shall be so cut as to give the angle of skew or slope specified .
units on which the spelter coating has been burned by welding or otherwise damaged in fabrication shall be repaired as provided in subsection num .
cut plates shall present a workmanlike finish with legible identification numerals placed on each plate to designate its proper position in the finished structure .
excavation .
trenches shall be excavated to the widths required by the plans .
when the installation is to be placed in embankment fill the excavation shall be made after the embankment has been completed to a height num times the diameter or num times the rise above the flow line of the structure .
the contractor shall excavate three test pits to a depth of approximately num feet below proposed flow line .
pits shall be located at each end and near the center of the trench as directed .
if the foundation is deemed unsuitable a minimum of num foot underlying the structure shall be excavated and backfilled with suitable material in accordance with section num .
erection .
plates at longitudinal and circumferential seams shall be connected by bolts .
joints shall be so staggered that no more than three plates come together at any one point .
nuts shall be so tightened that when tested with a calibrated torque wrench furnished by the contractor a torque of between num and num foot pounds is attained .
tightening of bolts to a torque in excess of num foot pounds will not be permitted .
the use of wrench sockets which will damage the metal or metal coating will not be permitted .
prior to backfilling operations the full length of each round culvert shall be distorted from a true circle by preforming to an elliptical shape .
this elongation shall approximate num percent of the nominal diameter of the culvert .
the preformed pipe shall be placed with its greatest dimension in the vertical axis .
backfilling .
backfilling shall conform to the details shown on the plans .
pipe damaged due to contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
num num method of measurement structural plate structures will be measured by the linear foot in place .
length of round or elliptical structures shall be the average of measurements along the top and bottom .
length of structural plate arch pipe will be measured along the bottom centerline only .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of structural plate structures will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit structural plate pipe ______ linear foot structural plate arch pipe ____x____ linear foot structure excavation and structure backfill including test pits will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
coating when specified will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num bearing device description this work consists of furnishing and placing bearing devices in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the plan details .
materials elastomeric bearing pads shall include plain bearings and laminated bearings .
plain bearings are unreinforced pads consisting of elastomer only and laminated bearings are reinforced with steel laminates .
the elastomer compound shall be classified as being of low temperature grade num num or num .
the grades are defined by the testing requirements of subsection num tables num and num .
a higher grade of elastomer may be substituted for a lower grade .
elastomer grade aashto design method a or b elastomer shear modulus and elastomer hardness shall be shown in the contract documents .
the sheer modulus shall be within num percent of the specified value .
materials requirements for elastomeric bearing pads sheet lead polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe sheets stainless steel sheets and adhesive material shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
leveling pads are unlaminated bearings as called for on the plans .
they shall be cut or molded from aashto elastomer grade num num or num as described in tables num and num with a durometer shore a hardness of num .
the sealing mechanism used in pot bearing devices to prevent extrusion of the elastomer shall be of brass or bronze metal .
all steel except stainless steel used in fabricating bearing devices shall conform to aashto m num astm a num grade num unless otherwise required in the contract .
astm a num grade numw or astm a num grade num may be substituted for astm a num grade num .
anchor bolts shall be astm a num zinc plated .
structural steel elements of type ii bearing devices shall be painted in accordance with section num .
all metal surfaces of type iii bearing devices shall be completely zinc metallized in accordance with aws cnum to a thickness of num mils except the surfaces covered with ptfe and surfaces with stainless steel .
the internal pot cavity and bottom surface of the piston for type iii bearings shall be zinc metallized to a thickness of num mils and polished to num microinches after zinc metallizing .
fabrication type i bearing device .
a type i bearing device consists of either a plain or laminated elastomeric bearing pad with an optional machined sole plate as shown on the plans .
num num welding shall conform to applicable requirements of ansiaws dnum ancillary items .
pads  inch or less in thickness may be either laminated or plain .
pads over  inch in thickness shall be laminated .
laminated pads shall be individually molded and shall consist of alternate laminations of elastomer and metal laminates .
the bearings shall be vulcanized under heat and pressure .
the mold finish shall conform to standard shop practice .
the internal steel laminates shall be sandblasted and cleaned of all surface coatings rust mill scale and dirt before bonding and shall be free of sharp edges and burrs .
laminations of elastomer shall be  inch plus or minus  inch in thickness .
unless otherwise noted on the plans the top and bottom layers of metal shall be uniformly covered with a maximum of  inch of elastomer .
the edges of the metal shall be uniformly covered with a minimum of  inch of elastomer except at laminate restraining devices and around holes that will be entirely closed on the finished structure .
variations in the location of the metal reinforcement from its theoretical location shall not exceed  inch .
plain bearings may be molded individually cut from previously molded strips or slabs or extruded and cut to length .
cut edges shall conform to the requirements of ansi bnum .
type ii bearing device .
the upper sliding element shall consist of a polished stainless steel sheet finished to a no .
num high luster polish glossy bright buffed finish and attached to a sole plate .
the stainless steel sheet shall be seal welded to the sole plate .
the operating coefficient of either static friction or sliding friction between the stainless steel and the ptfe sheet when loaded to num psi shall not exceed num .
pads less than  inch in thickness may be either laminated or plain .
pads  inch and greater in thickness shall be laminated .
the lower sliding element shall consist of a filled or unfilled ptfe sheet with a minimum thickness of num inch vulcanized to a stainless steel substrate .
the stainless steel substrate shall be capable of resisting bending stresses to which the sliding surface may be subjected .
the other side of the substrate material shall be vulcanized to an elastomeric pad as described in subsection num and as shown on the plans .
the stainless steel substrate material shall have a thickness as shown on the plans or shall have sufficient tensile strength to restrain the elastomeric pads .
type iii bearing device .
the manufacturer of type iii bearings shall be preapproved and listed in the contract .
type iii bearing devices are designed as pot type or disc type .
bearing devices shall be fabricated as fixed guided expansion or nonguided expansion bearings as designated in the contract .
bearings shall satisfactorily provide for thermal expansion and contraction rotation camber changes and creep and shrinkage of the structural members they support .
bearings shall be designed and fabricated so that they can be readily inspected and easily removed and replaced during the service life of the bridge .
this shall include num num provisions to allow removal and replacement of all components of the bearing device excluding sole plates by lifting the superstructure no more than  inch .
the static coefficient of friction shall be determined based on the force required to cause first movement under the vertical load applied during the test .
the operating coefficient of static friction or sliding friction between the stainless steel and the ptfe sheet when subjected to a num psi load shall not exceed num. a fixed bearing .
a fixed bearing shall allow rotation but no longitudinal or transverse movement in the bearing plane .
b guided expansion bearing .
a guided expansion bearing shall allow rotation and longitudinal movement and shall restrict transverse movement in the bearing plane .
c nonguided expansion bearing .
a nonguided expansion bearing shall allow rotation and longitudinal and transverse movement in the bearing plane .
d pot bearings .
the bearing device shall consist of a masonry plate a sole plate a top plate an optional guide plate a loading piston and a cylindrical steel retainer pot to confine an elastomeric pad .
the piston and pot shall each be machined from a solid steel plate .
the piston may be welded to a guide or top plate as approved by the engineer .
the shape characteristics clearances and sealing mechanism of the piston and cylinder shall be designed to prevent extrusion of the elastomer material under rotational movement vertical load and where applicable horizontal load .
when a bearing must accommodate movement in the plane of the bearing guided or nonguided type the top surface of the piston plate shall be faced with ptfe sheet and the mating surface of the steel shall be faced with polished stainless steel finished to no .
num mirror finish or better .
when a bearing device restricts transverse movement guided type the device shall contain either a guide bar or a keyway system .
these systems shall be designed so that the vertical interfaces are parallel throughout the range of rotation of the bearing device .
the mating steel surfaces of the guide bar or keyway systems shall be faced with strips of ptfe and stainless steel .
e disc bearings .
the bearing shall consist of an elastomeric rotational element disc confined by upper and lower steel bearing plates .
the bearing shall be equipped with a shear restricting mechanism to prevent horizontal movement of the disc .
when a bearing device must accommodate movement in the plane of the bearing guided or nonguided type the top surface of the upper steel bearing plate shall be faced with ptfe sheet and the mating surface of the steel plate shall be faced with polished stainless steel finished to a no .
num mirror finish or better .
bearing devices designed to restrict transverse movement guided type shall contain either a guide bar or a keyway system .
these systems shall be designed so that the vertical interfaces are parallel throughout the range of the rotation of the bearing device .
the mating steel surfaces of the guide bar or keyway systems shall be faced with strips of ptfe and stainless steel .
num num f sliding surfaces of plates for pot and disc bearings .
the ptfe sheet affixed to the top surface of a piston plate or upper steel bearing plate shall have a minimum finished thickness of num inch and shall be recessed for  its thickness into its steel substrate .
the ptfe sheet shall be bonded to the steel substrate using an epoxy resin applied to the full area of the contact surfaces .
the surface of the ptfe sheet to be bonded shall be treated with sodium naphthalene or sodium ammonia process prior to bonding .
bonding shall be performed at the manufacturers factory under controlled conditions and in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer of the epoxy material .
at the completion of the bonding operation the surface of ptfe shall be smooth and free of bubbles .
lubricants of any kind shall not be used in the sliding surfaces of bearing devices .
the ptfe strips on the mating surfaces of guide systems shall be num inch minimum and shall be recessed and bonded or may be bonded and mechanically fastened to the mating steel surfaces of the guide bar or keyway systems .
the fasteners shall provide full bearing on the ptfe strip and the steel surfaces to which the ptfe is attached .
the mating surfaces of structural steel elements shall be ground to a flatness of num inch per linear foot .
maximum surface roughness shall be ansi num in accordance with american national standards institute b num .
bearing devices shall be designed so that stainless steel will cover the ptfe throughout the range of movement for the bearing device .
the surface of stainless steel which slides on the ptfe shall have a flatness of num inch per linear foot .
reserved .
reserved .
the bearings shall be completely factoryproduced assemblies and shall include all directly connected or welded anchorage hardware .
the bearings shall adequately provide for the amount of movement due to temperature changes post tensioning offsets or girder rotation as shown on the plans .
testing and acceptance .
the materials for elastomeric bearings and finished bearings shall be subjected to the tests described in this subsection .
material tests shall be in accordance with table num or num and as described herein .
the manufacturer shall furnish facilities for the testing and inspection of the completed bearings in the plant or at an independent test facility .
at the engineers discretion testing may be performed in the presence of the engineer or a designated representative .
the engineer or the engineers representative shall be allowed free access to the necessary parts of the manufacturers plant and test facility as arranged by the contractor .
the contractor shall inform the engineer a minimum of two weeks in advance of a date and time when a visit to the plant and test facility would be permitted .
num num a test specimens .
one bearing per lot shall be tested .
the engineer will randomly select samples from the production bearings for testing .
a lot shall be defined as the smallest number of bearings as determined by the following criteria num .
one lot shall not exceed a single contract or project quantity .
num .
one lot shall not exceed num bearings .
num .
a lot shall consist of those bearings of the same type within a load category .
the types of bearing devices are defined as fixed guided expansion and nonguided expansion which includes type i type ii and type iii bearings .
num .
load categories are num to num kips num to num kips and num kips or more .
b test method .
the test for the sliding coefficient of friction for types ii and iii bearing devices consists of determining the sliding coefficient of friction between the ptfe and stainless steel elements of an expansion type bearing device by using equipment and a test procedure approved by the engineer .
specially made bearings shall not be used only actual bearings to be used in the project shall be tested .
num .
clean all bearing and sliding surfaces assemble the bearing device and place it into the test apparatus .
num .
type iii bearings shall be subjected to a rotation of num radian or the rotation specified in the contract if larger .
num .
the test shall be conducted at maximum working stress for the ptfe surface with the test load applied continuously for num to num hours prior to measuring friction .
num .
at first movement the static and dynamic coefficients of friction shall be determined by applying an approximate horizontal force to the bearing device in a cyclic manner to cause slipping along the ptfe stainless steel surface at a speed of less than num inch per minute and shall not exceed the coefficient of friction specified .
the bearing shall then be subjected to a minimum of num movements of at least num inch in each direction from the centerline of the device at a speed of less than num inches per minute .
after cycling the static and dynamic coefficients of friction shall be determined again at a speed of less than num inch per minute and shall not exceed the coefficient of friction specified .
after the load is removed the bearings shall be disassembled and the components carefully examined .
any visible damage to a component shall be cause for rejection .
num .
rotational test type iii .
this test consists of applying a vertical load to the bearing device equal to num percent of its rated capacity and subjecting the bearing to the greater value of either rotation of num radians or the designed rotation for a period of one hour .
during the num num testing of pot bearings if the confined elastomer extrudes beyond the sealing mechanism the bearing shall be rejected .
during the testing of disc bearings any observed lift off between the rotational element and other components of the bearing shall be cause for rejection .
after the load is removed the bearing device shall be disassembled and the components carefully examined .
any visible damage to the disk bearing components shall be cause for rejection .
num .
type i and ii bearings incorporating laminated elastomeric pads shall be loaded and tested as follows a. shortduration compression test .
the bearing shall be loaded in compression to num times the maximum design load .
the load shall be held constant for num minutes removed and reapplied for another num minutes .
the bearing shall be examined visually while under the second loading .
bulges indicating laminate nonparallelism or a layer thickness that is outside the specified tolerances or poor laminate bond shall result in the bearing being rejected .
if there are three or more separate surface cracks that are greater than num inch wide and num inch deep the bearing shall be rejected .
the short duration test shall be performed for bearings designed under aashto method a or b .
b. longduration compression test .
the bearing shall be loaded in compression to num times its maximum design load for a minimum period of num hours .
if during the test the load falls below num times the maximum design load the test duration shall be increased by the period of time for which the load is below this limit .
the bearing shall be examined visually at the end of the test while it is still under load .
if the bulging pattern suggests laminate nonparallelism or a layer thickness that is outside the specified tolerances or poor laminate bond the bearing shall be rejected .
if there are three or more separate surface cracks that are greater than num inch wide and num inch deep the bearing shall be rejected .
the long duration test shall be performed for bearings designed under aashto method b. bearings represented by test specimens passing the above requirements will be approved for use in the structure subject to onsite inspection for visible defects .
c certification .
num .
certification for type i ii and iii bearings the manufacturer shall certify that each bearing satisfies the requirements of the plans and these specifications .
the manufacturer shall submit num num num manufacturers certification of the steel elastomer ptfe and other materials used in the construction of the bearings .
num details and calibration of the test equipment prior to testing .
num certified test results on the samples of the completed bearing devices which show they conform to the requirements of this specification .
num notification when fabrication is completed and when testing is to be performed .
num .
certification for leveling pads the supplier shall submit a certificate of compliance to the engineer for acceptance .
packaging .
the bearings shall be packaged and protected in such a manner that they will not be damaged and the contact surfaces of the sliding elements will not be contaminated while being handled transported or stored .
each completed bearing shall have its components clearly identified and marked with an upstation arrow and the location on the structure .
except for type i bearings the markings shall be on a face that is visible after erection of the bridge .
the bearing assemblies shall be furnished as a complete unit from one manufacturing source unless otherwise approved .
construction requirements the concrete on which the bearings are to be placed shall be free of honeycomb .
the concrete bearing contact surface shall be finished to a level plane with a flatness tolerance of num inch for bearing seats up to num inches num inch for bearing seats over num inches and under num inches and  inch for bearing seats over num inches as measured using a straight edge placed in any direction across the area .
the finished plane shall not vary more than  inch from the elevation shown on the plans .
the initial installations of type iii bearings shall be performed by the contractor in the presence of a representative of the manufacturer .
this representative shall be experienced in such installations and provide information to the contractor on handling and installation procedures .
the representative shall provide information to the engineer on inspection of the bearing installation and shall provide assistance until the contractor and the engineer agree that they understand the installation and inspection procedures .
upon completion of the superstructure placement the contractor engineer and bearing manufacturers representative together shall inspect each bearings placement and alignment for type iii bearings .
subsequent to the inspection and after correction of all deficiencies the contractor shall certify in writing that the bearing installation is correct .
masonry plates of type iii bearing assemblies shall be set on a single thickness of sheet lead or preformed fabric pad when a monolithic cap seat is used .
num num placement of elastomeric bearing pads or bearing devices on grout pads will not be permitted unless called for on the plans .
nonmetallic bearing pads shall be protected from damage due to welding heat .
the contractor shall submit a welding procedure for approval prior to beginning welding .
field welding to steel plates which have a bonded ptfe surface will be permitted provided that the welding procedure used does not increase the temperature of the area of the steel to which ptfe is bonded above num f. temperature indicating wax pencils or other approved means shall be used to determine whether this temperature limit is being exceeded .
type ii and type iii bearing devices shall not be disassembled during installation unless otherwise permitted .
the contractor shall protect all bearings from contamination and damage due to paint overspray or when placing concrete or other materials .
the contractor shall furnish a manufacturers certification that all components meet the contract requirements .
the contractor shall submit shop drawings design calculations and load data for review of type iii bearing bevices as specified in subsection num .
the shop drawings shall include installation procedures and address storage handling disassembly placement alignment offsets protection during welding to steel girders protection during painting of structure and removal of banding or retaining clamps .
method of measurement bearing devices will be measured by the unit .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of bearing devices will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit bearing device type______ each elastomeric bearing pads preformed fabric pads and sheet lead when not included in bearing device type will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
leveling pads will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the presence of a manufacturers representative will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num pedestrian and bikeway railing description this work consists of the construction of the designated type of railing in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the details lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials pipe railing .
pipe for railing shall be standard steel black or galvanized as specified .
the pipe and galvanizing when specified shall conform to the requirements of astm a num types e or s grade a schedule num or better for steel pipe .
threaded fittings shall be made from malleable iron plain or galvanized as specified and slipon fittings shall be of the type shown on the plans .
steel shapes shall conform to the requirements of section num .
steel tube railing .
steel for this type of railing shall conform to the requirements of section num and the following num steel tubes shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade b .
num steel plates and bars shall conform to the requirement of astm a num grade num .
num bolts shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num zinc coating shall conform to the requirements of astm a num a num a num and a num .
num welding shall conform to the american welding society structural welding code steel dnum .
steel for uncoated railing shall conform to the requirements of astm a num for structural steel tubing and astm a num grade numw for plates and shapes .
timber railing .
timber for posts and rails shall be pressure treated and shall be in accordance with section num .
timber for posts shall be douglas fir larch num or equivalent .
timber for rails shall be douglas fir larch num .
pressure treated timber shall conform to the requirements of the american wood preservers association awpa standards section cnum and cnum soil contact either ammoniacal copper arsenate aca or chromated copper arsenate cca preservative conforming to the requirements of section pnum standards for waterborne preservatives of the awpa standards shall be utilized and total absorption shall be num pounds per cubic foot of timber .
redwood or cedar will not require a preservative treatment .
all steel hardware and bolts for timber railing shall be galvanized or zinc coated .
num num combination railing .
pedestrian or bikeway railing combined with traffic railing shall conform to the requirements of this section .
traffic railing and traffic portion of combination railing shall conform to the plans and shall be in accordance with section num .
construction requirements prior to construction of any type of railing the contractor shall submit working drawings in accordance with sections num and num .
posts shall be aligned and plumb within a tolerance of  inch .
the finished rail shall be rigidly braced and secured to surrounding construction and shall be tight and free of rattle vibration or noticeable deflection .
rail elements shall be erected in a manner resulting in a smooth continuous installation .
all bolts in the finished rail shall be drawn tight .
bolts shall be of sufficient length to extend beyond the nuts .
fasteners projecting toward the pathway shall be carriage bolts with smooth round heads with nuts oriented away from the pathway .
bolts in timber rails shall be recessed .
hand rails and rub rails shall not have projecting fasteners .
welding shall be in accordance with section num and aws dnum .
gas metalarc welding gmac will be permitted .
where welds are designated connections shall be continuously welded .
all cut edges shall be rounded and all welds ground smooth .
punched cut drilled or tapped holes shall be free of burs and sharp edges .
after field welding damaged paint and galvanized coatings shall be repaired .
electrolytic isolation shall be provided to prevent contact of dissimilar metals .
asphaltic paint shall not be permitted to remain on surfaces to be exposed or to receive a sealant or paint .
pipe railing with threaded fittings shall screw into end fittings but may slide through intermediate fittings .
splices shall be made inside of fittings and clearance shall be allowed for expansion .
each piece of railing shall be securely fastened at one end by a set screw in the fittings or by sufficient threads to develop its strength .
all steel railing shall be galvanized or painted in accordance with section num unless uncoated railing of corrosion resistant steel is specified .
the color of paint shall be as shown on the plans or as directed .
method of measurement railing will be measured by the linear foot from end to end of the railing .
payment will be full compensation for all work and materials required to complete the installation including foundations anchorages attachments fabrication painting and installation .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of railing will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit bikeway railing ____ linear foot hand railing linear foot pedestrian railing ____ linear foot pipe railing linear foot pipe and redwood railing linear foot payment for traffic railing combination pedestrian and traffic railing and combination railing shall be in accordance with section num for the applicable type of bridge railing or guardrail .
num num section num waterproofing membrane description this work consists of furnishing and placing an approved waterproofing membrane and protective covering over a prepared concrete bridge deck surface or furnishing and placing an approved chemical concrete sealer sealer on the surface of a concrete bridge deck approach slabs and all adjacent sidewalk and curb and other applications designated on the plans .
materials the waterproofing membrane shall consist of one of the following num a prefabricated reinforced membrane and primer or num a single component hotapplied elastomeric membrane and primer if required .
materials for the waterproofing membrane shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections protective covering num prefabricated reinforced membrane and primer num single component hot applied elastomeric membrane num concrete sealer shall consist of an alkylalkoxy silane and shall be a penetrating type with num percent solids in water or a high flash organic solvent .
the sealer shall be compatible with the curing compound used on the concrete and shall be one that is included on the approved products list of the department .
a certificate of compliance shall be provided with each shipment of sealer .
construction requirements waterproofing membrane .
a condition of concrete deck for application of waterproofing membrane .
the entire deck and the sides of the curbs for a height of num inches above the plan thickness of the hot mix asphalt shall be free of all foreign material such as dirt grease old pavement and primer .
all decks shall be sand blasted or shot blasted .
immediately prior to the application of primer or any type of membrane all dust and loose material shall be removed .
the deck condition will be approved before application of the membrane .
b weather and moisture limitations for application of waterproofing membrane .
application of primer or membrane shall not be done during inclement weather conditions or when deck and ambient air temperatures are below num f. the deck surface shall be dry at the time of application of primer and membrane .
num num c application prefabricated reinforced membrane .
primer shall be applied to the prepared concrete surface at the rate and according to the procedure recommended by the membrane manufacturer .
placement of the membrane shall not begin until the volatile material in the primer has dissipated .
the membrane shall be placed in such a manner that a shingling effect will be achieved and any accumulation of water will be directed toward curbs and drains .
primer and membrane shall be placed on the curb faces for a height of num inches above the plan thickness of the hot mix asphalt .
the entire membrane shall be essentially free of wrinkles air bubbles and other placement defects .
blisters or bubbles larger than num inches in diameter which develop after placement of the membrane and before placement of protective covering shall be punctured the air expelled and membrane patched in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
at all expansion joints and other joints membrane shall be flashed up to the top of the joint and secured with primer .
at drain pipes membrane shall be placed in such a manner that it extends down inside the drain and is secured with primer .
d application single component hot applied elastomeric membrane .
hot applied membrane shall be applied to the prepared deck surface at a uniform minimum rate of  gallon per square yard thickness of num to num mils num mil num inch .
during application the thickness may be measured by the engineer .
lack of uniform application shall be cause for termination of the work until remedial measures are taken .
primer if required and membrane shall be placed up the curb faces for a height of num inches above the plan thickness of hot mix asphalt .
e application of protective covering .
as soon as practical but in all cases the same day as membrane application protective covering shall be placed from gutter line to gutter line .
protective covering shall be laid parallel to the centerline of the bridge .
the protective covering shall be butted together at longitudinal and transverse joints .
overlapping will not be permitted .
the maximum allowable space between adjoining sections of protective covering shall be num inch .
following placement of protective covering a bead of compatible mastic or hot applied membrane shall be applied where the protective covering contacts the curbs and in cracks between adjoining sections that are apart by more than  inch .
the bead shall fill the void preventing water from entering at this point .
f inspection .
upon completion of the membrane and protective covering the engineer will inspect the membrane system .
approval in writing from the engineer shall be obtained before application of hot mix asphalt .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the membrane system on the bridge deck until covered with hot mix asphalt to the thickness required by the contract .
g overlay .
hot mix asphalt shall be placed spread and compacted in accordance with the specifications or as approved .
num num concrete sealer .
a condition of surface for application of sealer .
the surface of bridge deck approach slabs sidewalks and curbs and the interior concrete surface of drains shall be free of all residue and other surface contaminants .
within num hours prior to the application of the sealer these surfaces shall be cleaned with dustless abrasive shot blasting .
other methods of blasting power washing or cleaning may be used if approved .
the amount of shot blasting or cleaning shall be sufficient to remove all visual evidence of curing compound residue dirt grease and surface contaminants .
when wet methods are used the surface shall be dried in accordance with subsection num. b weather and moisture limitations for application of sealer .
sealer shall not be applied when the deck or ambient air temperature is below num f above num f or outside the manufacturers recommended temperature range .
the concrete shall have aged a minimum of num days and the surface shall be dry at the time of application of the sealer .
when the surface is wet because of inclement weather power washing or other moisture it shall be permitted to dry at least num hours before the sealer is applied .
c application of sealer .
sealer shall be applied uniformly at the manufacturers recommended rate .
the sealer shall be applied to the surface of the concrete bridge deck approach slabs curbs including the face of concrete bridge rail for num inches above the bridge deck sidewalks and the interior concrete surface of drains .
two copies of the manufacturers literature for the sealer including the recommended application procedure shall be provided to the engineer prior to application .
the literature shall include a product material safety data sheet .
all solvents coatings or other chemical products or solutions shall be mixed handled applied stored and disposed of in such a manner that spills splashes and drips shall be contained without contamination of the soil vegetation streams or other water bodies .
the contractor shall provide two approved respirators for use by department personnel .
traffic shall not be allowed on the treated surface until the sealer has penetrated the concrete and the liquid sealer is no longer visible on the surface .
the contractor shall follow all the manufacturers recommendations including penetration time prior to opening to traffic .
method of measurement waterproofing membrane including protective covering complete in place will be measured by the number of square yards of bridge deck covered .
material placed on curb faces will not be measured .
concrete sealer will be measured by the number of square yards of concrete surface covered except material placed on drains will not be measured .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of waterproofing membrane including protective covering will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the accepted quantities of concrete sealer including surface preparation will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard of concrete surface covered .
preparation and sealing of drains will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit waterproofing membrane square yard concrete sealer square yard hot mix asphalt will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num dampproofing description this work consists of dampproofing concrete surfaces in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the plans or as ordered .
materials materials for dampproofing with asphalt shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
construction requirements surfaces to be dampproofed shall be cured dry and free of all frost loose material and dirt .
the surface which is to be protected by dampproofing shall be thoroughly cleaned before the primer is applied .
the surface shall then be brush or spray painted with two coats of asphalt for primer treatment at a rate of  gallon per square yard for each coat .
after the primed surface has dried one application of asphalt dampproofing material shall be applied by brush at a rate of num gallon per square yard .
care shall be taken to prevent discoloration of other parts of the structure not to be dampproofed by the dripping or spreading of asphalt .
method of measurement dampproofing will be measured by the square yard of surface area dampproofed .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of dampproofing including absorptive primer coats will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit dampproofing asphalt square yard num num section num waterproofing description this work consists of waterproofing concrete surfaces in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the plans or as directed .
materials materials for waterproofing shall conform to the following item astm designation use asphalt primer dnum primer under asphalt mop coats asphalt mop coat dnum mop coats with or without membrane woven cotton fabric dnum with asphalt membrane type i is for use below ground and shall be heated to a temperature of between num and num f. type ii is for use above ground and shall be heated to a temperature of between num and num f. type ii shall be used unless otherwise specified .
for hot application materials for waterproofing shall be heated to a temperature of between num and num f in a heating kettle or tank constructed as a double boiler with a space between the inner and outer shells filled with oil asphalt or other material for heat transfer and for positive temperature control .
heating kettles shall be equipped with thermometers and the material shall be stirred continuously to avoid overheating .
construction requirements all concrete surfaces to be waterproofed shall be free of loose material and dirt and shall be reasonably smooth and free of projections or holes .
waterproofing shall not be started without approval in wet weather or when the temperature is below num f. the waterproofing shall in all cases be started at the low point of the surface to be treated so that water will run over and not against or along the laps .
beginning at the low point of the properly prepared surface to be waterproofed a priming coat shall be brushed or sprayed on the surface to penetrate and prepare it for the first mop coat of hot asphalt coating .
after the primer has cured a section about num inches wide and the full length of the surface shall be mopped with the hot asphalt .
the first strip of halfwidth fabric shall be rolled into the mop coat immediately after it is placed .
the first strip and all following strips shall be rolled into place to eliminate air bubbles and obtain num num close conformity with the surface being treated .
the first strip and an adjacent section of the surface of a width equal to slightly more than half the width of fabric being used shall then be mopped with hot asphalt and a second strip shall then be rolled into it .
the second strip shall completely cover the first strip .
the second strip and an adjacent surface of concrete shall then be mopped with hot asphalt and a third strip of fabric shingled on .
the third strip shall lap the first strip by at least num inches .
this process shall be continued until the entire surface to be treated is covered and each strip of fabric shall lap at least num inches over the next to last strip .
the entire surface shall then be given a final mopping of hot asphalt .
the completed waterproofing shall consist of a firmly bonded membrane composed of two layers of fabric and three moppings of asphalt together with the required prime coat .
each layer must be separated from the concrete surface or other layers of fabric by an intervening mop coat .
the mopping on the concrete shall cover the surface so that no gray spots appear and on the fabric it shall be sufficiently heavy to completely conceal the weave .
at least num gallons of asphalt shall be used for each num square feet of horizontal surface and at least num gallons for each num square feet of vertical surface for each mop coat .
the work shall be so regulated that at the close of a days work all fabric that has been laid shall have received the final mopping of asphalt and the edges of all laps shall be thoroughly sealed down .
suitable provisions shall be made to prevent water from getting between the waterproofing and waterproofed surface at the edges of the membrane and at any point where it is punctured by such appurtenances as drains or pipes .
method of measurement the accepted quantities of waterproofing will be measured by the square yard based on the surface area waterproofed .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of waterproofing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit waterproofing asphalt square yard num num section num waterstops and expansion joints description this work consists of furnishing and installing waterstops expansion joints and end dams of the sizes and types required in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the details shown on the plans or as directed .
materials waterstops .
waterstops shall be manufactured either from neoprene or polyvinyl chloride pvc meeting the requirements described in subsection num .
the contractor will have the option of furnishing either material unless otherwise specified .
the contractor shall submit a certificate of compliance for each type of waterstop proposed for use on the project to the engineer .
asphaltic expansion devices .
this device consists of an expansion joint system composed of a blended polymer modified asphalt and special aggregate in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the details shown on the plans or established .
the joint system shall be installed in a prepared expansion joint blockout and shall be designed for a rated joint movement of num to num inches including rotations .
the polymer modified asphalt aggregate backer rod bridging plate and joint binder shall conform to recommendations of the manufacturer of the approved joint system installed .
approved joint systems shall be those shown on the plans .
the contractor shall furnish manufacturers certification that all materials furnished have been pretested and meet the requirements set forth in the specifications and conform to the materials listed in the latest product literature .
no substitution of materials will be permitted .
elastomeric expansion devices .
this device consists of an elastomeric expansion joint device and curb cover plates as shown on the plans and in accordance with these specifications .
the expansion joint device shall seal the deck surface as indicated on the plans and prevent water from seeping through the superstructure slab .
seeping of water through the joint will be cause for rejection of the expansion device .
the contractor shall state at the preconstruction conference the specific manufacturer and model number of the device the contractor intends to furnish and install .
the device shall consist of a continuous premolded elastomeric expansion joint seal embedded steel angles and steel extrusions as shown on the plans required by the manufacturer or specified herein for attaching the elastomeric expansion joint seal to the steel armor .
the expansion device shall have a rated movement of num to num inches including rotations .
num num the contractor shall furnish manufacturers certification that the materials proposed for use on the project have been pretested and will meet the requirements as set forth in these specifications and the manufacturers current literature .
the materials shall not be installed in the work prior to the engineers approval .
structural steel sections shall conform to the specifications of aashto m num astm anum grade num .
fabrication and welding of structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
the material designations for all steel components shall be shown on the contractors working drawings .
all structural steel elements of the bridge expansion device including cover plates shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with section num whether or not they are in contact with the elastomeric seals .
modular expansion devices .
this device consists of a modular expansion joint device and curb cover plates at the locations shown on the plans and in accordance with these specifications .
the modular expansion joint device shall seal the deck surface gutters curbs and walls as indicated on the plans and prevent water from seeping through the bridge deck .
seeping of water through the joint will be cause for rejection of the expansion device .
the contractor shall state at the preconstruction conference the specific manufacturer and model number of the device the contractor intends to furnish and install .
the expansion device shall have a rated movement greater than num inches but not exceeding num inches .
the modular expansion joint device supplied shall be one of the approved devices as shown on the plans .
the modular expansion device system shall be designed fabricated and delivered to the jobsite as a continuous unit unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
field splices shall not be located on the vehicle wheel path .
the maximum length of completed expansion device assemblies shall be determined by practical shipping limitations .
handling and storage of the expansion joint device shall be in accordance with the manufacturers written recommendations and as approved by the engineer .
only one type of modular joint device will be permitted to be installed at all locations .
the installation of two different types at separate locations will not be permitted .
the device shall consist of premolded elastomeric expansion joint seals strip seals mechanically held in place by steel center beams and edge beams .
each transverse center beam shall be individually supported by and connected by full penetration weld to an independent support bar .
the device shall provide equaldistance control of the premolded elastomeric seals .
a the transverse separation beams center beams support bars and other structural elements shall be fatigue tested and designed following the guidelines provided in nchrp report num fatigue design of modular bridge expansion joints as well as the provisions included in chapter num of the latest edition of the aashto lrfd design specification .
num num b the following components shall meet the listed requirements structural steel except center beams edge beams and support bars aashto m num astm a num grade num center beams edge beams and support bars aashto m num astm a num grade num or aashto m num astm a num grade numw headed studs astm anum premolded seals lubricant adhesive and sliding surfaces conforming to manufacturers current literature stainless steel bearing surfaces subsection num structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num except the steel fabricator shall be certified under the aisc quality certification program in simple steel bridges as a minimum .
all structural steel elements of the bridge expansion device including cover plates shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with section num whether or not they are in contact with the elastomeric seals .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification that the materials proposed for use on the project have been pretested and will meet the requirements as set forth in these specifications and the manufacturers current literature .
the material shall not be installed in the work prior to the engineers approval .
all components of the expansion joint device including stiffening plates and anchorages shall be supplied by the manufacturer .
the material designations for all components shall be shown on the shop drawings .
elastomeric concrete end dam .
elastomeric concrete end dam shall be an elastomeric concrete of either field vulcanized fusion bonded synthetic elastomer and precision blended aggregates or an approved polyurethane binder and precision blended aggregates bonded to all adjacent surfaces of the existing structure .
the contractor shall furnish a manufacturers certification that the materials proposed for use on the project have been pretested and will meet the requirements as set forth in the manufacturers current literature .
the material shall not be installed in the work prior to the engineers approval .
two copies of the product literature containing pertinent materials and installation data for the elastomeric concrete supplied on this project shall be furnished to the engineer at least two weeks prior to the installation of the elastomeric concrete end dam .
material for this work will either be one of the approved products shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall state at the pre construction conference the specific material the contractor intends to furnish and install .
no other material will be considered or allowed .
num num construction requirements waterstops .
waterstops shall be furnished full length for each straight portion of the joint without field splices .
field splices shall have a full size tensile strength of num pounds per inch of width .
waterstops when being installed shall be cut and spliced at changes in direction as may be necessary to avoid buckling or distortion of the web or flange .
if after placing concrete waterstops are substantially out of position or shape the surrounding concrete shall be removed the waterstop reset or replaced if damaged and the concrete replaced at the contractors expense .
asphaltic expansion devices .
the joint system shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendation and specifications and according to the details on the plans .
the backer rod shall be secured and sealed in the joint opening according to the manufacturers directions .
the bridging plate shall be centered and secured over the joint opening according to the manufacturers directions .
the joint binder polymer modified asphalt and aggregate shall be placed in the sequence and by the methods recommended by the manufacturer .
the completed joint shall be compacted by the methods recommended by the manufacturer .
the final grade of the joint after compaction shall match the finished grade of the deck .
the final thickness of the joint shall be num inches minimum .
a representative of the joint manufacturer shall be on site during the installation of each of the joint components .
the representative shall certify that the joint was installed in accordance with manufacturers recommended procedures and in accordance with the attached details .
if a joint fails to meet the manufacturers specifications it shall be removed and replaced with a properly installed joint at the expense of the contractor .
two copies of the manufacturers product literature specifications and installation instructions shall be provided to the engineer .
elastomeric expansion devices .
the contractor shall submit working drawings as specified in subsection num .
the manufacturers instructions for proper installation of the expansion joint device shall be included in the working drawings .
working drawings which lack manufacturers installation instructions shall be returned for resubmittal .
where applicable according to the plans details of the expansion device through the curb and details of the curb cover plates and connections shall be shown on the working drawings .
num num at the discretion of the engineer the manufacturer may be required to furnish facilities for testing and inspecting of the completed device or a representative sample in the plant or at an independent test facility .
the inspectors shall be allowed free access to the necessary parts of the manufacturers plant and test facility .
the manufacturer shall provide a technical representative to be present at all times while the expansion device is being installed .
the expansion device shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and these specifications .
the expansion device shall be anchored as shown on the plans .
curb cover plates where called for by the plans shall be anchored to the concrete with castinplace inserts .
bolts shall be zinc or cadmium plated .
the expansion device shall be accurately set and securely supported at the correct grade and elevation and the correct joint opening as shown on the plans and on the working drawings .
if portland cement concrete end dams are specified on the plans the area beneath the expansion device angles shall be pressure injected by approved methods with an approved epoxy grout until all voids beneath the angles are eliminated .
this shall be performed prior to the installation of the elastomeric expansion joint seal and after the concrete end dams have cured for a minimum of num hours .
epoxy grout shall not be placed when the ambient temperature is num f or below or when temperatures are expected to fall to or below num f at any time during the period of num hours following placement unless the entire expansion device is protected from freezing by a heating enclosure .
before the premolded elastomeric expansion joint seal is installed the contact surfaces of the adjacent steel shall be thoroughly cleaned of mill scale and foreign material that will affect the installation or the sealing capabilities of the elastomeric expansion joint seal .
the cleaned metal surfaces shall be protected from rusting until the premolded elastomeric expansion seal and lubricant adhesive are placed against the metal surface .
all cleaned metal surface on which rusting appears shall be recleaned at no additional expense to the state .
after the expansion joint device has been permanently installed the contractor shall test the full length of the device for watertight integrity .
the contractor shall employ a method satisfactory to the engineer .
the entire joint system shall be covered with water either ponded or flowing for a minimum duration of num minutes .
the concrete surfaces under the joint shall be inspected during this num minute period and also for a minimum of num minutes after the supply of water has stopped for any evidence of dripping water or moisture .
water tightness shall be interpreted to be no free dripping water on any surface on the underside of the joint .
patches of moisture shall not be cause for nonacceptance .
if the joint system exhibits evidence of water leakage at any place whatsoever the contractor shall locate the leakage and correct the leakage as approved by the engineer .
subsequent to corrective measures the watertight integrity test shall be num num performed subject to the same conditions as the original test .
this work and subsequent tests shall be done at the contractors expense .
the watertight integrity test is not required for joints at the ends of approach slabs .
the words permanently installed as used above include completion of the portions of the curb and deck that can not be constructed until after the expansion device is installed .
this applies even though this work is to be paid for under other items of the contract .
the contractor shall provide written certification to the engineer that the expansion joint device was installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions the advice of their technical representative and these specifications .
any certification from the joint manufacturers technical representative provided by the contractor to the engineer shall be in writing .
modular expansion device .
a the contractor shall submit shop drawings as specified in subsection num .
the manufacturers instructions for proper installation of the expansion joint device shall be included in the shop drawings .
details of the expansion device through the curb and details of the curb cover plates and connections shall be shown on the shop drawings .
at the discretion of the engineer the manufacturer may be required to allow inspection of the completed device in the plant .
the inspectors shall be allowed full access to the parts of the manufacturers plant necessary for the fabrication and assembly of the expansion joint device .
the contractor and engineer shall ensure that the time of inspection does not result in a delay in fabrication .
the manufacturer shall provide a technical representative to be present at all times while the expansion device is being installed .
the contractor shall notify the expansion device manufacturer of the scheduled installation a minimum of two weeks prior to the installation date .
the modular expansion joint device shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers written instructions the advice of the manufacturers technical representative and these specifications .
the permanently installed expansion joint device shall match exactly the finished roadway profile and grade and specified recesses as shown on the plans .
immediately prior to installation the expansion joint device shall be inspected by the engineer for proper alignment and complete bond between the premolded elastomeric seals and the steel and proper stud placement and effectiveness .
premolded elastomeric seals not fully bonded to the steel shall be made fully bonded at the expense of the contractor .
all bolted connections shall be checked and tightened if found to be loose .
bends or kinks in the expansion joint device steel will not be allowed except as necessary to follow the roadway grades .
straightening of bends or kinks will not be allowed .
if an expansion joint device exhibits bends or kinks it num num shall be removed from the work site and replaced by a new expansion joint device at the expense of the contractor .
the expansion joint device shall be preset by the manufacturer prior to shipment .
presetting shall be done in accordance with the joint opening at num f as indicated on the contract plans .
mechanical devices supplied to set the expansion joint device to the proper width shall be disposed of by the contractor following final adjustment for temperature .
concrete anchorages shall be inspected visually and shall be given a light blow with a num pound hammer .
if an anchorage does not have a complete weld or does not emit a ringing sound when struck with a light blow of a hammer it shall be replaced .
all anchorage replacements shall be at the expense of the contractor .
stainless steel sheet shall be welded to the support member .
adhesive will not be permitted .
the expansion device shall be anchored as shown on the plans .
curb cover plates shall be anchored to the concrete with castinplace inserts .
bolts shall be zinc or cadmium plated .
the expansion device shall be accurately set for the correct joint opening and field conditions prior to placement in the blockout and then secured at the correct grade and elevation and the correct joint opening as shown on the plans and on the shop drawings .
b the structure temperature shall be measured by recording the surface temperature of the concrete steel or both with a surface thermometer as described below .
num .
concrete bridges record the temperature of the underside of the concrete slab at each end of the superstructure element adjacent to the expansion joint .
take the average of the readings to use with the temperature chart shown on the plans .
in lieu of surface readings internal slab readings may be taken by drilling a  inch diameter hole num inches into the concrete slab filling the hole with water and inserting a probe thermometer .
num .
steel bridges record the concrete slab temperature as described above .
in addition record the surface temperature of the shaded portion of the girder web at each location .
average the readings of the steel and concrete to use with the temperature chart .
c all nongalvanized metal surfaces to come in contact with the premolded elastomeric seal shall be blast cleaned in accordance with the requirements of steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning .
after cleaning all cleaned surfaces shall exhibit a clean quality of csanum or better as defined by steel structures painting council standard sspcvis l. the cleaned metal surfaces shall be protected from rusting until the premolded elastomeric seal and lubricant adhesive are placed against the metal surface .
num num any cleaned metal surface on which rusting appears shall be recleaned in accordance with the foregoing at no additional expense to the state .
in order to perform the work of installing the expansion joint device in a proper manner some portions of the curb and bridge deck can not be constructed until after the expansion device is installed .
after the modular expansion joint device has been set to its final line and grade recess openings in the deck and curb shall be filled with concrete class d or s. grout shall be required below the support bar boxes where clearance will not allow proper consolidation of concrete class d or s. in such cases grout shall be placed prior to pouring concrete and techniques utilized which will assure full support of the support bar boxes .
this shall be verified by visual inspection .
the grout shall be a cdotapproved grout and strict adherence to the grout manufacturers instructions shall be followed .
the uppermost surface of the concrete placement shall have a broom finish .
the cost of this work including grout placement shall be included in the unit price bid for concrete class d or s. d after the expansion joint device has been permanently installed the contractor shall test the full length of the device for watertight integrity .
the contractor shall employ a method satisfactory to the engineer .
the entire joint system shall be covered with water either ponded or flowing for a minimum duration of num minutes .
the concrete surfaces under the joint shall be inspected during this num minute period and also for a minimum of num minutes after the supply of water has stopped for any evidence of dripping water or moisture .
water tightness shall be interpreted to be no free dripping water on any surface on the underside of the joint .
patches of moisture shall not be cause for nonacceptance .
if the joint system exhibits evidence of water leakage at any place whatsoever the contractor shall locate the leakage and take measures to correct the leakage as approved by the engineer .
subsequent to corrective measures the watertight integrity test shall be performed subject to the same conditions as the original test .
this work shall be done at the contractors expense .
the words permanently installed as used above include completion of the portions of the curb and deck that can not be constructed until after the expansion device is installed .
this applies even though this work is to be paid for under other items of the contract .
e the contractor shall provide written certification to the engineer that the expansion joint device was installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions the advice of their technical representative and these specifications .
any certification from the joint manufacturers technical representative provided by the contractor to the engineer shall be in writing .
num num elastomeric concrete end dam .
the material supplier shall supply a representative who is completely competent in all aspects of the work including all material and all equipment necessary to install the elastomeric concrete end dam properly .
the representative shall remain on site until the job is completed .
the representative shall be responsible for num advising the engineer and the contractor to insure that the correct installation method is being followed .
num training assigned personnel in the correct methods of installation .
num certifying to the engineer that the material has been installed correctly .
all certifications from the suppliers representative to the engineer shall be in writing and shall be signed and dated by the suppliers representative and the contractor .
method of measurement waterstop will be measured by the number of linear feet installed and accepted .
asphaltic expansion devices will be measured by the number of linear feet from curb face to curb face along the joint installed and accepted .
elastomeric expansion device will be measured by the linear foot between faces of curbs parallel to the expansion device completely installed tested and accepted .
portions of devices required in faces of curbs including cover plates and hardware will not be measured for payment .
modular expansion device will be measured by the linear foot between faces of curbs parallel to the expansion device completely installed and accepted .
portions of devices required in faces of curbs including cover plates and hardware will not be measured for payment .
the words completely installed shall be interpreted to mean the expansion joint device is in place with the following operations completed num concrete placed and finished .
num watertight integrity test performed .
elastomeric concrete end dam will be measured by the cubic foot completed and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of waterstop will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
the accepted quantity of asphaltic expansion joint will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot and shall include all preparation materials installation compacting and final treatments associated with the particular joint provided .
num num the accepted quantity of elastomeric expansion device will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot and shall include all work necessary to complete the item including furnishing and installing steel extrusions steel angles steel anchors cover plates and hardware bolts inserts epoxy grout lubricant adhesive premolded elastomeric joint seal and all miscellaneous hardware required .
the accepted quantity of modular expansion device will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot and shall include all work necessary to complete the items including furnishing and installing modular expansion device steel angles concrete anchorages cover plates and hardware bolts inserts lubricant adhesive and all miscellaneous hardware required .
the accepted quantity of elastomeric concrete end dam will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot and shall include all work and materials necessary to complete the item including saw cutting existing asphalt pavement removing asphalt pavement light sandblasting of existing concrete and any existing steel and all miscellaneous work required .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit waterstop inch linear foot bridge expansion device num inch linear foot bridge expansion device num num inch linear foot bridge expansion device num __inch linear foot elastomeric concrete end dam cubic foot num num num num division num miscellaneous construction section num structural concrete description this work consists of furnishing and placing portland cement concrete in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and dimensions as shown on the plans or established .
this work includes preparing concrete surfaces designated in the contract and applying an approved colored structural concrete coating to them .
classification .
the classes of concrete shown in table num shall be used when specified in the contract .
table num concrete table concrete class required field compressive strength psi cementitious material content minimum or range lbsydnum air content range total watercementitious material ratio maximum or range b num at num days na num num num bz num at num days num na num d num at num days num to num num num num dt num at num days num num num num e num at num days num num num num h num at num days num to num num num num num ht num at num days num to num num num num num p num at num days num num num num snum num at num days num to num num num num snum num at num days num to num num num num snum num at num days num to num num num num shotcrete num at num days na num num prior to pumping for wet process .
class b concrete is an air entrained concrete for general use .
class d h or p concrete may be substituted for class b concrete .
additional requirements are the coarse aggregate shall have a nominal maximum size of num inches or smaller .
num num class bz concrete is concrete for drilled caissons .
additional requirements are entrained air is not required unless specified in the contract .
when entrained air is specified in the contract the air content shall be num to num percent .
high range water reducers may be added to obtain desired slump and retardation .
slump shall be a minimum of num inches and a maximum of num inches .
the concrete mix shall be made with aashto m num size no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate .
class d concrete is a dense medium strength structural concrete .
class h may be substituted for class d concrete .
additional requirements are an approved water reducing admixture shall be incorporated in the mix .
the concrete mix shall be made with aashto m num sizes no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate .
when placed in a bridge deck the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num size no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
class dt concrete may be used for deck resurfacing and repairs .
class ht may be substituted for class dt concrete .
additional requirements are an approved water reducing admixture shall be incorporated into the mix .
the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num size no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
class e concrete is used for fast track pavements needing early strength in order to open a pavement to service soon after placement .
class e concrete shall meet the requirements of class p concrete .
astm cnum type iii or astm cnum type he cement may be used .
accelerating admixtures may be used .
class h concrete is used for bare concrete bridge decks .
additional requirements are num type a or dual rated type a and f chemical admixtures may be used .
num set retarding and accelerating admixtures shall not be used .
these include type b c d e and g chemical admixtures .
num the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum of num percent sizes no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
num the permeability of the laboratory trial mix shall not exceed num coulombs at num days when tested in accordance with astm c num .
num the cracking tendency of the laboratory trial mix shall not exhibit a crack before num days when tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
num class h concrete shall contain a minimum of num percent pozzolan by weight of total cementitious material .
num the sulfate exposure is class num except when substituted for class b or d concrete .
class ht concrete is used for deck resurfacing and repairs on bare concrete bridge decks .
additional requirements are num type a or dual rated type a and f chemical admixtures may be used .
num set retarding and accelerating admixtures shall not be used .
these include type b c d e and g chemical admixtures .
num num num the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum of num percent size no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
num the permeability of the laboratory trial mix shall not exceed num coulombs at num days when tested in accordance with astm c num .
num the cracking tendency of the laboratory trial mix shall not exhibit a crack before num days when tested in accordance aashto tnum .
num class ht concrete shall contain a minimum of num percent pozzolan by weight of total cementitious material .
num the sulfate exposure is class num .
class p concrete is used in pavements .
additional requirements are the required field flexural strength shall be num psi when flexural strength acceptance is specified .
the laboratory trial mix shall produce a minimum average num day flexural strength of num psi .
the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num size no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
if all transverse joints are doweled the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num sizes no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
class snum concrete is a dense high strength structural concrete .
additional requirements are an approved water reducing admixture shall be incorporated in the mix .
the concrete mix shall be made with aashto m num sizes no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate .
when placed in a bridge deck the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num size no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
class snum concrete is a dense high strength structural concrete .
additional requirements are an approved water reducing admixture shall be incorporated in the mix .
the concrete mix shall be made with aashto m num sizes no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate .
when placed in a bridge deck the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num size no .
num coarse aggregate .
class snum concrete is a dense high strength structural concrete .
additional requirements are an approved water reducing admixture shall be incorporated in the mix .
the concrete mix shall be made with aashto m num sizes no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num or no .
num coarse aggregate .
when placed in a bridge deck the concrete mix shall consist of a minimum num percent aashto m num size no .
num coarse aggregate by weight of total aggregate .
the laboratory trial mix shall not exhibit a crack before num days in the cracking tendency test aashto tnum .
deviations from the standard class b class bz class d class dt class e and class p concrete may be made under the following conditions num the minimum cement content may be reduced from that specified in table num if lab test results show that the permeability of the mix does not exceed num coulombs at an age of not more than num days as determined by astm num num cnum.the maximum cement content may be increased from that specified in table num if lab test results show that the unrestrained shrinkage is less than num percent when tested by cpl num .
num the maximum amount of fly ash substituted for astm cnum cement or the maximum pozzolan content when astm cnum or cnum cement is used may exceed the limits in subsection num if lab test results show that the permeability of the mix does not exceed num coulombs at an age of not more than num days as determined by astm cnum and the salt scaling resistance is less than num as determined by astm cnum .
num except for class dt the concrete mix may use an optimized gradation og .
when an og is used aggregate proportions must be a result of an optimized combined aggregate gradation cag developed by an approved mix design technique such as shilstone or ku mix .
the amount of aggregate in the cag passing the num mm  inch sieve and retained on thenum mm  inch sieve shall be a minimum of num percent for the trial mix design .
the coarseness factor cf and workability factor wf must plot within the workability box abcd depicted graphically by the following num coordinate points i point a cfwf num num ii point b cfwf num num iii point c cfwf num num iv point d cfwf num num figure num cf s t x num num num where s percent cumulative retained on num mm  inch sieve t percent cumulative retained on num mm no .
num sieve wf is the percent passing the num mm no .
num sieve .
increase workability factor by num percentage points for every num pounds per cubic yard of cementitious material used in excess of num pounds per cubic yard in the mix design .
decrease workability factor by num percentage points for every num pounds per cubic yard of cementitious material used below num pounds per cubic yard in the mix design .
the contractor shall not adjust the workability factor if the amount of cementitious material is num pounds per cubic yard .
num aggregate gradings not obtained through an og may be used if lab test results show that the unrestrained shrinkage is less than num percent when tested by cpl num .
concrete with any of the above deviations shall be known as class _ non standard concrete class _ns concrete .
for example class bns .
non standard concrete may be substituted for the equivalent standard concrete .
non standard concrete shall be tested accepted measured and paid for as standard concrete or the pay item specifying standard concrete .
materials materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections fine aggregate num coarse aggregate num portland cement num fly ash num silica fume admixture num water num air entraining admixture num chemical admixtures num curing materials num preformed joint material num reinforcing steel num bearing materials num epoxy num structural concrete coating num highreactivity pozzolans num num num pozzolans shall consist of fly ash silica fume and highreactivity pozzolan .
prestressing steel shall meet the requirements of subsection num except as noted on the plans .
calcium chloride shall not be used in reinforced concrete .
calcium chloride shall be used in nonreinforced concrete only when specified .
where fiberreinforced concrete is specified or designated on the plans the concrete mix shall include approved polyolefin fibers .
unless otherwise specified a minimum of num pounds per cubic yard of polyolefin fiber reinforcement shall be evenly distributed into the mix .
mixing shall be as recommended by the manufacturer such that the fibers do not ball up .
polyolefin fibers shall meet the requirements of astm cnum and astm dnum .
where macro fiberreinforced concrete is specified or designated in the plans the concrete mix shall include approved macro polyolefin fibers .
a minimum of num pounds per cubic yard of macro polyolefin fiber reinforcement shall be evenly distributed into the mix .
if less than num pounds per cubic yard of macro polyolefin fiber reinforcement is used in the mix the contractor shall provide test results showing the mix design has a residual strength of num psi as determined in accordance with astm cnum .
mixing shall be as recommended by the manufacturer such that the fibers do not ball up .
macro polyolefin fibers shall meet the requirements of astm cnum and astm dnum with the following exceptions num tensile strength shall be a minimum of num ksi num modulus of elasticity shall be a minimum of num ksi num cut length shall be num to num inches num aspect ratio shall be num to num sulfate resistance .
the contractor shall provide protection against sulfate attack on concrete structures and pavements by providing concrete manufactured according to the requirements of table num .
the sulfate exposure for all concrete shall be class num unless otherwise specified on the plans .
a higher level of requirements may be used for a lower level of exposure .
if the contractor provides test reports that show another class of exposure exists at a structure location then the engineer may accept a concrete mix for that location that meets the corresponding sulfate protection requirements .
num num table num requirements to protect against damage to concrete by sulfate attack from external sources of sulfate severity of sulfate exposure watersoluble sulfate sonum in dry soil percent sulfate sonum in water ppm maximum water to cementitious material ratio cementitious material requirements class num num to num num to num num class num class num num to num num to num num class num class num num to num num to num num class num class num num or greater num or greater num class num cementitious material requirements are as follows class num requirements for sulfate resistance shall be one of the following num astm cnum type i ii or v num astm cnum type il ip ipms iphs or it num astm cnum type gu ms or hs num astm cnum type iii cement if it is allowed as in class e concrete class num requirements for sulfate resistance shall be one of the following num astm cnum type ii or v class c fly ash shall not be substituted for cement .
num astm cnum type ipms or iphs .
num astm cnum type ms or hs class c fly ash shall not be substituted for cement .
num when astm cnum type iii cement is allowed as in class e concrete it shall have no more than num percent cnuma .
class c fly ash shall not be substituted for cement .
num astm cnum type il having less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
class c fly ash shall not be substituted for cement .
num astm cnum type it having less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
class num requirements for sulfate resistance shall be one of the following num astm cnum type v with a minimum of a num percent substitution of class f fly ash by weight num num num astm cnum type ii or iii with a minimum of a num percent substitution of class f fly ash by weight .
the type ii or iii cement shall have no more than num percent expansion at num days when tested according astm cnum num astm cnum type hs class c fly ash shall not be substituted for cement .
num astm cnum type ii iii or v plus highreactivity pozzolan where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months or num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum num astm cnum type ms plus class f fly ash or highreactivity pozzolan where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months or num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum num a blend of portland cement meeting astm cnum type ii or iii with a minimum of num percent class f fly ash by weight where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months or num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
num astm cnum type iphs .
num astm cnum type il plus class f fly ash or highreactivity pozzolan where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months or num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum num astm cnum type it having less than num percent expansion at num months or num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
class num requirements for sulfate resistance shall be one of the following num a blend of portland cement meeting astm cnum type ii iii or v with a minimum of a num percent substitution of class f fly ash by weight where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
num astm c num type hs having less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
class c fly ash shall not be substituted for cement .
num astm cnum type ms or hs plus class f fly ash or highreactivity pozzolan where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
num astm cnum type iiiii or v plus highreactivity pozzolan where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
num astm cnum type numl plus highreactivity pozzolan where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
num num num astm cnum type iphs or it having less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
num astm cnum type il with a minimum of a num percent substitution of class f fly ash by weight where the blend has less than num percent expansion at num months when tested according to astm cnum .
when fly ash or highreactivity pozzolan is used to enhance sulfate resistance it shall be used in a proportion greater than or equal to the proportion tested in accordance to astm cnum shall be the same source and it shall have a calcium oxide content no more than num percent greater than the fly ash or highreactivity pozzolan tested according to astm cnum .
construction requirements proportioning .
the contractor shall submit a concrete mix design for each class of concrete being placed on the project .
concrete shall not be placed on the project before the concrete mix design report has been reviewed and approved by the engineer .
the concrete mix design will be reviewed and approved following the procedures of cp num .
the concrete mix design will not be approved when the laboratory trial mix data are the results from tests performed more than two years in the past or aggregate data are the results from tests performed more than two years in the past .
the concrete mix design shall show the weights and sources of all ingredients including cement pozzolan aggregates water additives and the water to cementitious material ratio wcm .
when determining the wcm the weight of cementitious material cm shall be the sum of the weights of the cement fly ash silica fume and highreactivity pozzolan .
the laboratory trial mix data shall include results of the following num aashto t num astm cnum slump of hydraulic cement concrete .
num aashto t num astm cnum weight per cubic foot yield and air content gravimetric of concrete .
num aashto t num astm cnum air content of freshly mixed concrete by the pressure method num astm cnum compressive strength of cylindrical concrete specimens shall be performed with at least two specimens at num days and three specimens at num days .
three additional specimens tested at num days shall be required for class h and ht concrete .
num class h and ht concrete shall include a measurement of permeability by astm cnum electrical indication of concretes ability to resist chloride ion penetration .
num class h ht and snum concrete shall include a measurement of cracking by aashto tnum standard practice for estimating the cracking tendency of concrete .
the sample shall be cured at a temperature of num to num f and relative humidity not exceeding num percent .
num num num class e and p concrete shall include aashto tnum astm cnum flexural strength of concrete using simple beam with thirdpoint loading .
when compressive strength is indicated at least two specimens will be tested at num days and four specimens at num days .
when flexural strength is indicated at least two specimens will be tested at num num and num days and four specimens at num days .
when flexural strength is indicated the mix design shall include aashto t num astm cnum splitting tensile strength of cylindrical concrete specimens .
at least two specimens will be tested at num num num and num days .
the splitting tensile strength specimens for each age shall be cast from the same trial batch as the same age flexural strength specimens .
multiple trial batches may be used .
the engineer will verify the correlation curve during production by casting and testing splitting tensile specimens .
if the correlated flexural strength of the splitting tensile sample is not within num psi of the verification beam specimens flexural strength a new correlation curve shall be required if low flexural strength specimens are to be evaluated .
num concrete with an og shall indicate the gradation proportions that results in a combined aggregate gradation corresponding to compliance within the specified cf and wf box and shall include the following charts used to perform aggregate gradation analysis i coarseness factor .
ii workability factor .
iii num power .
iv combined gradation .
concrete for bridge sidewalk shall be macro fiberreinforced class d concrete .
prior to placement of class e concrete the contractor shall provide the engineer a report of maturity relationships in accordance with cp num .
the contractor shall provide maturity meters and all necessary wires and connectors .
the contractor shall be responsible for the placement and maintenance of the maturity meters and wires .
placement shall be as directed by the engineer .
except for class bz concrete the slump of the delivered concrete shall be the slump of the approved concrete mix design plus or minus num inches .
the laboratory trial mix must produce an average compressive strength at least num percent of the required field compressive strength specified in table num .
when entrained air is specified in the contract for class bz concrete the trial mix shall be run with the required air content .
the laboratory trial mix shall have a relative yield of num to num .
when portland cement concrete pavement is paid with a volumetric pay quantity the relative yield of the concrete produced on the project shall be num to num .
num num if the produced concrete does not have a relative yield of num to num for two consecutive yield determinations concrete production shall cease and the contractor shall present a plan to correct the relative yield to the engineer .
aggregate data shall include the results of the following num aashto t num astm cnum materials finer than num um no .
num sieve in mineral aggregates by washing .
num aashto t num astm cnum unit weight and voids in aggregate .
num aashto t num astm cnum organic impurities in fine aggregate for concrete .
num aashto t num astm cnum sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregates .
num aashto t num astm cnum specific gravity and absorption of fine aggregate .
num aashto t num astm cnum specific gravity and absorption of coarse aggregate .
num aashto t num astm cnum resistance to degradation of smallsize coarse aggregate by abrasion and impact in the los angeles machine .
num aashto t num astm cnum soundness of aggregate by use of sodium sulfate or magnesium sulfate .
num cp num plastic fines in graded aggregates and soils by use of the sand equivalent test num astm cnum resistance to degradation of largesize coarse aggregate by abrasion and impact in the los angeles machine num astm cnum determining the potential alkali reactivity of aggregates accelerated mortarbar method .
when an aggregate source is known to be reactive astm cnum results may be submitted in lieu of astm cnum results .
any aggregate tested by astm cnum with an expansion of num percent or more or that is known to be reactive shall not be used unless mitigative measures are included in the mix design .
test results from astm cnum standard test method for determination of length change of concrete due to alkalisilica reaction may be substituted for astm cnum test results .
the astm cnum test shall be run on an individual source of aggregate .
the astm cnum test shall not use pozzolan as part of the cementitious material content .
any aggregate source tested by astm cnum with an expansion greater than or equal to num percent at one year shall not be used unless mitigative measures are included in the mix design .
mitigative measures shall be tested using astm cnum and exhibit an expansion less than num percent by one of the following methods num combined aggregates .
the mix design sources of aggregates cement and mitigative measures shall be tested .
the proportions of aggregates cement num num and mitigative measures shall be those used in the mix design .
num individual aggregates .
each source and size of individual aggregates shall be tested .
the source of cement and mitigative measures shall be those used in the mix design .
the highest level of mitigative measures for any individual aggregate shall be the minimum used in the mix design .
the concrete mix design report shall include certified test reports showing that the cement fly ash highreactivity pozzolan and silica fume meet the specification requirements and shall support this statement with actual test results .
the certification for silica fume shall state the solids content if the silica fume admixture is furnished as slurry .
for all concrete mix designs with astm cnum cements up to a maximum of num percent class c fly ash num percent class f fly ash or num percent highreactivity pozzolan by weight of total cementitious material may be substituted for cement .
for all concrete mix designs with astm cnum type il cements up to a maximum of num percent class c fly ash num percent class f fly ash or num percent high reactivity pozzolan by weight of total cementitious material may be substituted for cement .
for all concrete mix designs with astm cnum type ip ipms iphs or it cements fly ash or highreactivity pozzolan shall not be substituted for cement .
for all concrete mix designs with astm cnum cements the total pozzolan content including pozzolan in cement shall not exceed num percent by weight of the cementitious material content .
the contractor shall submit a new concrete mix design report meeting the above requirements when a change occurs in the source type or proportions of cement fly ash highreactivity pozzolan silica fume or aggregate .
when a change occurs in the source of approved admixtures the contractor shall submit a letter stamped by the concrete mix design engineer approving the changes to the existing mix design .
the change must be approved by the engineer prior to use .
the use of approved accelerating retarding or hydration stabilizing admixtures to existing mix designs will be permitted at the discretion of the engineer when documentation includes the following num manufacturers recommended dosage of the admixture num a letter stamped by the concrete mix design engineer approving the changes to the existing mix design .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer the product of only one type of hydraulic cement from one source of any one brand shall be used in a concrete mix design .
when fiberreinforced concrete is specified in the contract polyolefin fibers may be added to an approved mix design except when macro fiberreinforced concrete is specified .
if macro fiberreinforced concrete is specified a new trial mix will be num num required .
when polyolefin fibers are added to an approved concrete mix design the contractor shall submit a letter stamped by the concrete mix design engineer approving the changes .
the stamped letter shall include the following and the change must be approved by the engineer prior to use num the mix design number both the cdot mix id number and the suppliers mix id number .
num the brand and type of polyolefin fibers .
num the dosage of polyolefin fibers in pounds per cubic yard .
num adjustment to the fine aggregate batch weight .
review and approval of the concrete mix design by the engineer does not constitute acceptance of the concrete .
acceptance will be based solely on the test results of concrete placed on the project .
batching .
measuring and batching of materials shall be done at a batching plant in accordance with aashto m num .
the contractor shall furnish a batch ticket delivery ticket with each load for all classes of concrete .
concrete delivered without a batch ticket containing complete information as specified shall be rejected .
the contractor shall collect and complete the batch ticket at the placement site and deliver all batch tickets to the engineer on a daily basis .
the engineer shall have access to the batch tickets at any time during the placement .
the following information shall be provided on each batch ticket num suppliers name and date .
num truck number .
num project number and location .
num concrete class designation and item number .
num cubic yards batched .
num time batched .
num cdot mix design number .
num type brand and amount of each admixture .
num type brand and amount of cement fly ash and highreactivity pozzolan .
num weights of fine and coarse aggregates or combined weight when an og is preblended .
num moisture of fine and coarse aggregates or combined moisture when an og is preblended .
num gallons pounds of batch water including ice .
num num the contractor shall add the following information to the batch ticket at the placement site num gallons of water added by truck operator the time the water was added and the quantity of concrete in the truck each time water is added .
num number of revolutions of drum at mixing speed for truck mixed concrete .
num discharge time .
num location of batch in placement .
num water to cementitious material ratio .
num weight of polyolefin fiber reinforcement .
the drum on each truck mixer shall be reversed prior to charging to eliminate any wash water remaining in the mixer .
a portland cement fly ash highreactivity pozzolan and silica fume .
these materials may be sacked or bulk .
no fraction of a sack shall be used in a batch of concrete unless the material is weighed .
all bulk cement shall be weighed on an approved weighing device .
the bulk cement weighing hopper shall be sealed and vented to preclude dusting during operation .
the discharge chute shall be so arranged that cement will not lodge in it or leak from it .
separate storage and handling equipment shall be provided for the fly ash silica fume and highreactivity pozzolan .
the fly ash silica fume and high reactivity pozzolan may be weighed in the cement hopper and discharged with the cement .
b water .
unless water is to be weighed the watermeasuring equipment shall include an auxiliary tank from which the measuring tank shall be filled .
the measuring tank shall be equipped with an outside tap and valve to provide for checking the calibration unless other means are provided for readily and accurately determining the amount of water in the tank .
the volume of the auxiliary tank shall be at least equal to that of the measuring tank .
in lieu of the volume method specified above the contractor will be permitted to use a water metering device that is accurate within the prescribed limits .
c aggregates .
aggregates from different sources and of different gradings shall not be stockpiled together .
aggregate shall be handled from stockpiles or other sources to the batching plant in such manner as to secure a uniform grading of the material .
aggregates that have become segregated or mixed with earth or foreign material shall not be used .
all aggregates produced or handled by hydraulic methods and washed aggregates shall be stockpiled or binned for draining at least num hours before being batched .
rail shipment requiring more than num hours will be accepted as adequate binning only if the car bodies permit free num num drainage .
in case the aggregates contain high or nonuniform moisture content storage or stockpile period in excess of num hours may be required .
d bins and scales .
the batching plant may include bins weighing hoppers and scales for the fine aggregate and for each size of coarse aggregate .
if cement is used in bulk a bin hopper and scale for cement shall be included .
a single weighing hopper with an accumulative scale will be permitted provided a separate scale is used for weighing cement .
scales shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
mixing .
concrete may be mixed in stationary mixers in a centralmix plant in truck mixers or in selfcontained mobile mixers .
mixing time shall be measured from the time all materials except water are in the drum .
for class h and ht concrete water shall not be added after the initial mixing .
all water shall be added at the plant .
slump adjustment shall be made through the addition of an approved type a or dual rated type a and f water reducing admixture .
silica fume when used shall be added to the mix during initial batching .
a mixing general .
the concrete shall be deposited in place within num minutes after batching when concrete is delivered in truck mixers or agitating trucks and within num minutes when delivered in non agitating trucks .
except for class h and ht concrete the num minute time limit for mixer or agitating trucks may be extended to num minutes if num no water is added after num minutes .
num the concrete temperature prior to placement is less than num f except for class h and ht concrete the num minute time limit for mixer or agitating trucks may be extended to num minutes if num no water is added after num minutes .
num the concrete temperature prior to placement is less than num f. num the approved concrete mix contains a type d water reducing and retarding chemical admixture .. b stationary mixing .
when mixed in a central mixing plant the mixing time shall be between num and num seconds .
four seconds shall be added to the specified mixing time if timing starts the instant the skip reaches its maximum raised position .
mixing time ends when the discharge chute opens .
transfer time in multiple drum mixers is included in mixing time .
the contents of an individual mixer drum shall be removed before a succeeding batch is emptied therein .
the volume of concrete mixed per batch may exceed the mixers nominal capacity as shown on the manufacturers standard rating plate on the mixer up num num to num per cent provided concrete test data for strength segregation and uniform consistency are satisfactory and provided spillage of concrete does not occur .
the batch shall be so charged into the drum that a portion of the mixing water shall enter in advance of the cement and aggregates .
the flow of water shall be uniform and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first num seconds of the mixing period .
the throat of the drum shall be kept free of such accumulations as may restrict the free flow of materials into the drum .
the timing device on stationary mixers shall be equipped with a bell or other suitable warning device adjusted to give a clearly audible signal each time the lock is released .
in case of failure of the timing device the contractor will be permitted to operate while it is being repaired provided the contractor furnishes an approved timer that accurately measures minutes and seconds .
if the timing device is not placed in good working order within num hours further use of the mixer will be prohibited until repairs are made .
c truck mixing .
truck mixed concrete shall conform with one of the following num .
concrete mixed entirely in a truck mixer equipped with a mechanical counter shall be partially mixed at the plant or in transit for at least num revolutions of the drum at mixing speed .
the revolutions of the drum at charging speed shall not be counted as mixing revolutions .
the concrete shall be mixed between num and num revolutions of the mixer drum at mixing speed at the delivery site before discharge of the concrete .
num .
concrete partially mixed in a stationary central mixing plant with mixing brought to completion in a truck mixer known as shrink mixing shall be mixed for a minimum of num seconds in the stationary mixer .
mixing shall be completed in the truck mixer for at least num but not more than num revolutions of the mixer drum at mixing speed at the delivery site before discharge of the concrete .
num .
concrete mixed entirely in a stationary mixer and delivered to the job in a truck mixer shall be remixed for a minimum of num revolutions of the mixing drum at mixing speed at the job site prior to discharge .
when water is added at the delivery site to control the consistency of the concrete as specified in subsection num the concrete shall be mixed for at least num revolutions of the mixer drum at mixing speed for each addition of water before discharge .
these revolutions are in addition to the minimum revolutions required for mixing at the delivery site .
the added water shall not cause the watercement ratio to exceed the requirements in subsection num .
water from all sources shall be documented by the ready mix producer on the delivery slip for each load of concrete .
the contractor shall provide a concrete truck mixer certification .
this certification shall show the various pickup and throwover configurations and wear marks so that the wear on the blades can be num num checked .
blades shall be replaced when any part or section is worn num inch or more below the original height of the manufacturers design .
a copy of the manufacturers design showing the dimensions and arrangement of blades shall be available to the engineer at all times .
the contractor shall furnish a watermeasuring device in good working condition mounted on each transit mix truck for measuring the water added to the mix after the truck has left the charging plant .
each measuring device shall be equipped with an easytoread gauge .
water shall be measured to the accuracy prescribed in aashto m num. d self contained mobile mixer .
proportioning and mixing equipment shall be of the selfcontained mobile continuous mixing type subject to the following the mixer shall be selfpropelled and be capable of carrying sufficient unmixed dry bulk cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate admixtures and water to produce on the site at least num cubic yards of concrete .
the mixer shall have one bin for each size aggregate .
the mixer shall be capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into the mix .
a recording meter visible at all times and equipped with a ticket printout shall indicate the quantity of total concrete mix .
the mixer shall provide positive control of the flow of water into the mixing chamber .
water flow shall be indicated by flow meter and be readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in the aggregate moisture .
the mixer shall be capable of being calibrated to automatically proportion and blend all components of indicated composition on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation and shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute directly in front of the finishing machine .
the contractor shall perform calibration tests according to the equipment manufacturers recommendations at the beginning of each project and when there is a change in the mix design proportions or source of materials .
the engineer may require a calibration test or yield check whenever a change in the characteristics of the mixture is observed .
the tolerances in proportioning the various ingredients shall be according to subsection num of aashto m num .
air content adjustment .
when a batch of concrete delivered to the project does not conform to the minimum specified air content an air entraining admixture conforming to subsection num may be added in accordance with subsection num .
after the admixture is added the concrete shall be remixed for a minimum of num revolutions of the mixer drum at mixing speed .
the concrete shall then be retested by pc .
forms .
a design .
forms shall be mortar tight and sufficiently rigid to prevent distortion due to the pressure of the concrete and other loads incidental to the concrete operations including vibration .
num num the rate of depositing concrete in forms shall be controlled to prevent deflections of the form panels in excess of the deflections permitted by these specifications .
forms for exposed concrete surfaces shall be designed and constructed so that the formed surface of the concrete does not undulate excessively in any direction between studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales .
undulations exceeding num inch between the center to center distance of studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales will be considered to be excessive .
should any form or forming system even though previously approved for use produce a concrete surface with excessive undulations its use shall be discontinued until modifications satisfactory to the engineer have been made .
portions of concrete structures with surface undulations in excess of the limits herein may be rejected by the engineer .
forms for drainage inlets may be constructed of any suitable material that will produce a structure with the inside dimensions and at least the wall thicknesses shown on the plans .
undulations of finished interior wall surfaces shall not exceed num inch .
where called for in the contract the contractor shall design and construct a permanent bridge deck forming system .
based on what is indicated the contractor will be permitted one of the following sets of options num if the plans indicate that permanent deck forms are optional the contractor shall have the option of constructing a castinplace bridge deck using conventional forms a full depth castinplace bridge deck using permanent steel bridge deck forms or a partial depth castinplace bridge deck using precast panel deck forms as a portion thereof .
num if the plans indicate that permanent deck forms are required the contractor shall have the option of constructing a full depth castinplace bridge deck using permanent steel bridge deck forms or a partial depth castinplace bridge deck using precast panel deck forms as a portion thereof .
num if the plans indicate that precast panel deck forms are required the contractor shall construct a partial depth castinplace bridge deck using precast panel deck forms as a portion thereof .
b construction .
forms shall be constructed and maintained so as to prevent the opening of joints due to shrinkage of the lumber .
the use of ties consisting of twisted wire loops to hold forms in position will not be permitted .
deck slab forms between girders shall be constructed with no allowance for settlement relative to the girders .
the inside surfaces of forms shall be cleaned of all dirt mortar and foreign material .
forms which will later be removed shall be thoroughly coated with form oil prior to use .
the form oil shall be a commercial quality form oil or other equivalent coating which will permit the ready release of the forms and will not discolor the concrete .
concrete shall not be deposited in the forms until all work connected with num num constructing the forms has been completed all materials required to be embedded in the concrete have been placed unless otherwise specified on the plans or approved and the engineer has inspected said forms and material .
such work shall include the removal of all dirt chips sawdust water and other foreign material from the forms .
anchor devices may be cast into the concrete for later use in supporting forms or for lifting precast members .
the use of driven types of anchorages for fastening forms or form supports to concrete will not be permitted .
backforms may be omitted with the approval of the engineer in cases involving footings which can be placed in the dry without the use of cribs or coffer dams .
in such cases the entire excavation shall be filled with concrete to the required elevation of the top of the footing .
the additional concrete required shall be placed at the expense of the contractor except when footings are poured out to rock .
extra concrete required to pour footings out to rock will be allowed in the concrete quantities provided that no allowance will be made for any concrete extending more than num inches in any direction beyond the neat lines of the footings as shown on the plans .
forms for the placement of deck concrete or other concrete work associated with structural steel girders shall be constructed so that any concentrated loads applied to girder webs shall be within num inches of a flange or stiffener .
where loads are applied to steel girder webs they shall be applied in a manner that will not produce distortion to the web .
for structural steel girders temporary struts and ties shall be provided as necessary to resist lateral loads applied to the girder flanges and to prevent appreciable relative movement between the edge of deck form and the adjacent steel girder .
c form lumber .
form lumber for all exposed concrete surfaces shall be dressed at least on one side and two edges and shall be constructed so as to produce mortartight joints and smooth even concrete surfaces .
forms shall be filleted and chamfered as shown on the plans and shall be given a bevel or draft in the case of all projections such as girders and copings to assure easy removal .
unless otherwise specified forms for exposed surfaces shall be constructed with triangular fillets  inch by  inch at all exterior corners .
d metal ties .
metal ties or anchorages within the forms shall be so constructed as to permit their removal to a depth of at least  inch from the face without injury to the concrete .
when wire ties are used the wires shall be cut back at least  inch from the face of the concrete upon removal of the forms .
the cavities shall be filled with cement mortar and the surface left sound smooth even and uniform in color .
e walls .
where the bottom of the forms is inaccessible the lower form boards shall be left loose or other provisions made so that extraneous material may be removed from the forms immediately before placing the concrete .
num num f surface treatment .
all forms shall be treated with oil prior to placing reinforcement except that an approved nonpetroleum base form release agent shall be used for surfaces which are to receive class num masonry coating finish .
wood forms shall be thoroughly moistened with water immediately before placing the concrete .
for rail members or other members with exposed faces the forms shall be treated with an approved form release agent to prevent the adherence of concrete .
material which will adhere to or discolor the concrete shall not be used .
all concrete forms for surfaces to which structural concrete coating is to be applied shall be treated with a water based concrete form release agent prior to placing reinforcement .
g metal forms for general use .
the specifications for forms regarding design mortar tightness filleted corners beveled projections bracing alignment removal reuse and oiling apply to metal forms .
the metal used for forms shall be of such thickness that the forms will remain true to shape .
all bolt and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
clamps pins or other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow removal without injury to the concrete .
metal forms which do not present a smooth surface or do not line up properly shall not be used .
metal forms shall be free from rust grease or other foreign matter .
permanent steel bridge deck forms shall be as described in subsection num. h removal of forms .
the forms for any portion of the structure shall not be removed until the concrete is strong enough to withstand damage when the forms are removed .
unless specified in the plans forms shall remain in place for members that resist dead load bending until concrete has reached a compressive strength of at least num percent of the required num day strength numfc .
forms for columns shall remain in place until concrete has reached a compressive strength of at least num psi .
forms for sides of beams walls or other members that do not resist dead load bending shall remain in place until concrete has reached a compressive strength of at least num psi .
forms and supports for castinplace concrete box culverts cbcs shall not be removed until the concrete compressive strength exceeds numfc .
for cbcs with spans up to and including num feet and numfc .
for cbcs with spans exceeding num feet but not larger than num feet .
forms for cbcs with spans larger than num feet shall not be removed until after all concrete has been placed in all spans and has attained a compressive strength of at least numfc ..
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters in accordance with cp num .
at the prepour conference the contractor shall submit the location where maturity meters will be placed .
the contractor shall provide maturity meters and all necessary wires and connectors .
the contractor shall be responsible for the placement and maintenance of the maturity meter and wire .
at a minimum a maturity meter num num shall be placed at the midspan of beams and at support locations .
placement shall be as directed by the engineer .
for structures with multiple maturity meters the lowest compressive strength shall determine when the forms can be removed .
acceptance cylinders shall not be used for determining compressive strength to remove forms .
when field operations are controlled by maturity meters the removal of forms supports and housing and the discontinuance of heating and curing may begin when the concrete is found to have the required compressive strength .
forms for median barrier railing or curbs may be removed at the convenience of the contractor after the concrete has hardened .
all forms shall be removed except permanent steel bridge deck forms and forms used to support hollow abutments or hollow piers when no permanent access is available into the cells .
when permanent access is provided into box girders all interior forms falsework and loose material shall be removed and the inside of box girders shall be cleaned with an industrial vacuum .
i patching .
the mixed formula for patch mortar shall be determined by trial to obtain a good color match with the concrete when both patch and concrete are cured and dry .
j reuse of forms .
the shape strength rigidity watertightness and surface smoothness of reused forms shall be maintained at all times .
warped or bulged lumber shall not be used .
k precast panel deck forms .
working drawings for precast panel deck forms shall be submitted to the engineer in conformity with subsection num .
prestressing for precast panel deck forms shall be in accordance with subsection numa .
concrete for precast panel deck forms shall be cured in accordance with subsection num .
precast panel deck forms shall be stored and transported in a horizontal position and shall conform to the requirements of subsections numc and num .
when precast panels are erected the fit of mating surfaces shall have no more than a  inch gap to prevent concrete leakage .
if such fit can not be provided the joint shall be filled with grout or sealed with an acceptable caulking compound prior to the placing of the castinplace portion of the slab .
precast panels and their accessories including components to set grade shall not be attached by welding to steel girders or other structural steel elements or reinforcing steel .
welding including arc strikes or grounding on any structural steel element is prohibited .
the engineer will inspect all girder flanges for blemishes from arc strikes .
all identified blemishes shall be num num repaired in accordance with aws dnum section num .
repair of all blemishes shall be at the contractors expense .
support angles or other steel components that will be left in place and exposed to the atmosphere in the final product shall be galvanized in accordance with subsection num .
permanent steel bridge deck forms .
a general .
permanent steel bridge deck forms for concrete deck slab may be used as an alternate to removable forms pursuant to this specification and when specified on the plans .
permanent steel bridge deck forms shall not be used in the cantilever portions of the deck slab .
b materials .
permanent steel bridge deck forms and supports shall be fabricated from steel conforming to astm a num grades a through e having a galvanized coating designation of znum g num according to astm a num. c design .
the following criteria shall govern the design of permanent steel bridge deck forms num .
the steel forms shall be designed on the basis of dead load of form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus num pounds per square foot for construction loads .
the unit working stress in the steel sheet shall be not more than num of the specified minimum yield strength of the material furnished but not to exceed num pounds per square inch .
if permanent steel bridge deck forms are used the depth of slab shown on the plans shall be provided above the forms .
the weight of additional concrete to fill form flutes and the steel form dead load shall not exceed a total of five pounds per square foot from edge to edge of flanges in each bay and from front face to front face of abutments .
num .
deflection under the mass of the forms the plastic concrete and reinforcement shall not exceed num of the form span or  inch whichever is less but in no case shall the design loading be less than num psf total .
the permissible form camber shall be based on the actual dead load condition .
camber shall not be used to compensate for deflection in excess of the foregoing limits .
num .
the design span of the form sheets shall be the clear span of the form plus num inches measured parallel to the form flutes .
num .
physical design properties shall be computed in accordance with requirements of the american iron and steel institute specification for the design of cold formed steel structural members latest published edition .
num .
all reinforcing steel shall have a minimum concrete cover of num inch .
num .
permanent steel bridge deck form shall not be used in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers .
num num num .
permanent steel bridge deck forms and their accessories shall not be attached by welding to steel girders or other structural steel bridge elements or reinforcing steel .
welding including arc strikes or grounding on any structural steel element is prohibited .
blemishes when found shall be removed in accordance with aws dnum section num .
determination that a blemish exists will be made by the engineer and the repair shall be at the contractors expense .
num .
the contractor shall submit two sets of the fabricators shop and erection drawings to the engineer .
the drawings shall be designed and sealed by the contractors engineer .
the drawings will not be approved or returned to the contractor .
the drawings shall indicate the grade of steel the physical and section properties of all permanent steel bridge deck form sheets and attachment details .
d construction .
all forms shall be installed in accordance with fabrication and erection plans submitted to the engineer in accordance with subsection numcnum .
form sheets shall not be permitted to rest directly on the top of the girder flanges .
sheets shall be securely fastened to form supports and shall have a minimum bearing length of num inch at each end .
form supports shall be placed in direct contact with the girder flange .
all attachments shall be made by bolts clips or other approved means .
welding will not be permitted to flanges .
permanently exposed form metal where the galvanized coating has been damaged shall be thoroughly cleaned wire brushed and painted with two coats of zinc oxidezinc dust primer federal specification ttpnumd type ii no color added to the satisfaction of the engineer .
minor heat discoloration in areas of welds need not be touched up .
transverse construction joints shall be located at the bottom of a flute and  inch weep holes shall be field drilled at not more than num inches on center along the line of the joint .
e placing of concrete .
concrete shall be placed with proper vibration of the concrete to avoid honeycomb and voids especially at construction joints expansion joints valleys and ends of form sheets .
placement sequences procedures and mixes shall be approved by the engineer .
calcium chloride or any other admixture containing chloride salts shall not be used in the concrete placed on permanent steel bridge deck forms .
f inspection .
if the engineer determines that the procedures used during the placement of the concrete warrant inspection of the underside of the deck the contractor shall remove at least one section of the forms at a location and time selected by the engineer for each span .
this will be done as soon after placing the concrete as practicable in order to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix and the contractors procedures are obtaining the desired results .
an additional section shall be removed if the engineer determines that there has been any change in the concrete mix or in the contractors procedures warranting additional inspection .
num num after the deck concrete has been in place for a minimum period of two days the concrete shall be tested for soundness and bonding of the forms by sounding with a hammer as directed .
if areas of doubtful soundness are disclosed by this procedure the contractor shall remove the forms from such areas as ordered for visual inspection .
if corrective action is not required the cost of form removal will be borne by the department .
if corrective action is required the cost of form removal and corrective action shall be borne by the contractor .
the contractor shall provide inspection platforms or other approved means of stationary support from which the above visual inspection can be made .
falsework .
a general .
the contractor shall be responsible for designing and constructing falsework .
the contractors engineer shall determine whether falsework is necessary .
when the contractors engineer determines falsework is unnecessary the contractor shall submit a written statement signed by the contractors engineer so stating .
all falsework drawings including revisions shall be prepared by the contractors engineer shall meet the requirements of subsection num and shall be provided by the contractor to the engineer for record purposes only .
the drawings shall be signed and sealed by the contractors engineer .
these drawings shall be stamped approved for construction and signed by the contractor prior to providing them to the engineer .
the drawings will not be approved by the engineer .
b certification .
prior to placement of any concrete supported by falsework the contractors engineer shall certify that falsework materials and construction have been inspected and that all falsework design materials and construction conform to the requirements of the contract and are safe for the placement of concrete .
a copy of the certification on an acceptable form shall be submitted to the engineer for record purposes .
c falsework design .
num .
the falsework design drawings shall show the stresses and deflections in all load supporting members and anticipated total settlement of falsework footings and joint takeup .
anticipated settlements shall not exceed num inch .
the maximum deflection used in the design of the falsework shall be num of clear span irrespective of the fact that the deflection may be compensated for by camber strips .
num .
the design of falsework shall be based on the use of loads and conditions which are no less severe than those described in this section .
the stresses listed are based upon the use of undamaged high quality materials and such stresses shall be reduced by the contractor if lesser quality materials are to be used .
the contractor is responsible for the proper evaluation of the falsework materials and design of the falsework to safely carry the actual loads imposed .
num num num .
the design load for falsework shall consist of the sum of dead and live vertical loads and an assumed horizontal load .
a .
dead loads shall include the weight of concrete reinforcing steel forms and falsework .
the weight of concrete and reinforcing steel shall be assumed to be at least num pounds per cubic foot for normal concrete and at least num pounds per cubic foot for lightweight concrete .
b .
timber dead load is num pounds per cubic foot .
the dead load of timber forms may be assumed at num pounds per square foot for members smaller than num inch x num inch .
dead load for steel and steel forms shall be num pounds per cubic foot .
the weight of any other forming materials shall be specified on the drawings .
c. live loads shall consist of the actual weight of any equipment to be supported by falsework applied as concentrated loads at the points of contact and a uniform load of at least num pounds per square foot applied over the area supported .
num .
the assumed horizontal load to be resisted by the falsework bracing system shall be the sum of the actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes and an allowance for wind however the assumed horizontal load to be resisted in any direction shall not be less than num percent of the total dead load for falsework up to num feet high and four percent for falsework over num feet high .
the falsework shall be designed so that it will have sufficient rigidity to resist the horizontal load prior to the placement of concrete .
num .
the entire bridge superstructure crosssection except railing shall be considered to be placed at one time except as provided herein .
girder stems and connected bottom slabs if placed more than five days prior to the top slab may be considered to be self supporting between falsework posts at the time the top slab is placed provided that the distance between falsework posts does not exceed four times the depth of the portion of the girder placed in the first pour .
num .
falsework footings shall be designed to carry the load imposed upon them without exceeding the estimated soil bearing values and anticipated settlements .
num .
foundations for individual towers where the maximum leg load exceeds num kips shall be designed and constructed to provide uniform settlement under all legs of each tower under all loading conditions .
num .
if the concrete is to be posttensioned in the field the falsework shall be designed to support all increased or readjusted loads caused by the prestressing forces as shown on the plans .
num .
the falsework design drawings shall include the following minimum information num num num type and grade of structural materials .
num allowable material stresses in bending compression and shear .
num modulus of elasticity e. num stress factors if used for short term duration loading timber only .
num summary of critical tower leg loads and locations on falsework drawings .
num weight of deck finishing machine and wheel or support spacing .
num references for load data used for standardized falsework components .
num specification references for design criteria .
num the bearing value of the soil as determined by the contractor when footing type foundations are to be used .
num .
falsework design shall be based on the current edition of one of the following applicable specifications .
however it shall be based on aashto specifications if highway traffic is to be supported .
aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials standard specifications for highway bridges .
aisc american institute of steel construction manual of steel construction .
aci american concrete institute formwork for concrete spnum building code requirements for reinforced concrete .
nfpa national forest products association national design specifications for stress grade lumber .
aitc american institute of timber construction manual .
num .
manufactured assemblies .
loading of jacks brackets columns joists and other manufactured devices shall not exceed the manufacturers recommendations or num percent of the ultimate load carrying capacity of the assembly based on the manufacturers tests or additional tests as necessary .
the maximum allowable dead load deflection of joists shall be limited to num of their spans .
the contractor shall furnish catalog or equivalent data showing the manufacturers recommendations or perform tests as necessary to demonstrate the adequacy of any manufactured device proposed for use .
the contractor shall not substitute other manufacturers components unless the manufacturers data encompasses such substitutions or field tests affirm the integrity of the system .
num .
connection details shall be so designed that structural shoring members are secure for all loading conditions .
num num d falsework construction .
the falsework shall be constructed in accordance with the falsework drawings .
suitable jacks wedges or camber strips shall be used to set the forms to the required grade or camber and to take up any settlement in the formwork either before or during the placing of concrete .
supports for deck slab forms shall be constructed so as to prevent settlement relative to the girders .
the amount of camber to be used to represent the behavior of the permanent structure is shown on the plans .
falsework and formwork for the placement of deck concrete or other concrete work associated with structural steel girders shall be constructed so that any concentrated loads applied to girder webs shall be within num inches of a flange or stiffener .
where loads are applied to steel girder webs they shall be applied in a manner that will not produce distortion to the web .
for structural steel girders temporary struts and ties shall be provided as necessary to resist lateral loads applied to the girders and to prevent movement between adjacent steel girders .
where the deck overhang exceeds num of the distance between steel girders bracing shall be provided to prevent rotation of the exterior girder due to the weight of the overhang falsework and formwork and concrete placement operations .
struts and ties shall also be provided between interior steel girders to prevent movement between girders .
falsework drawings for bracing struts and ties shall be submitted and conform to the requirements of subsection numa .
the contractor shall provide telltales attached to the forms and readable from the ground in enough systematically placed locations to determine the total settlement of the entire portion of the structure where concrete is being placed .
should unanticipated events occur including settlements that deviate more than  inch from those indicated on the falsework drawings which in the opinion of the engineer would prevent obtaining a structure conforming to the requirements of these specifications the placing of concrete shall be discontinued until the corrective measures satisfactory to the engineer are provided .
in the event satisfactory measures are not provided prior to initial setting of the concrete in the affected area the placing of concrete shall be discontinued at a location determined by the engineer .
all unacceptable concrete shall be removed .
e falsework removal .
unless specified in the plans or specifications falsework shall remain in place until concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of numfc .
falsework supporting any span of a simple span bridge shall not be released until after all concrete excluding concrete above the bridge deck has attained a compressive strength of at least numfc .
falsework supporting any span of a continuous or rigid frame bridge shall not be released until after all concrete excluding concrete above the bridge deck num num has been placed in all spans and has attained the compressive strength of at least numfc .
falsework for arch bridges shall be removed uniformly and gradually beginning at the crown to permit the arch to take its load slowly and evenly .
falsework supporting overhangs and deck slabs between girders shall not be released until the deck concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least numfc .
falsework for pier caps which will support steel or precast concrete girders shall not be released until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least numfc .
girders shall not be erected onto such pier caps until the concrete in the cap has attained the compressive strength of at least numfc .
falsework for castinplace prestressed portions of structures shall not be released until after the prestressing steel has been tensioned .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters in accordance with cp num .
at the prepour conference the contractor shall submit the location that maturity meters will be placed .
the contractor shall provide maturity meters and all necessary wires and connectors .
the contractor shall be responsible for the placement and maintenance of the maturity meters and wires .
at a minimum a maturity meter shall be placed at the midspan of beams and at support locations .
placement shall be as directed by the engineer .
for structures with multiple maturity meters the lowest compressive strength shall determine when the falsework can be removed .
acceptance cylinders shall not be used for determining compressive strength to remove falsework .
placing concrete .
a general .
a preplacement conference shall be held with selected contractor and department personnel prior to placement of concrete bridge decks to discuss the method and sequence of placing concrete .
at the preplacement conference the contractor shall present a concrete winter protection plan for acceptance by the engineer .
the accepted concrete winter protection plan shall contain information on the number and type of heat sources to be used a sketch detailing the enclosure materials and all other pertinent information .
sufficient equipment shall be supplied to continuously maintain the specified temperature uniformly in all parts of the enclosure .
insulated blankets on top of the bridge deck and freely circulated artificial heat below the deck will be permitted .
concrete shall not be placed until forms have been completed and materials num num required to be embedded in the concrete have been placed and the engineer has inspected the forms and materials .
the forms shall be cleaned of all debris before concrete is placed .
the external surface of all concrete shall be thoroughly worked during the placing by means of tools of an approved type .
the working shall be such as to force all coarse aggregate from the surface and to bring mortar against the forms to produce a smooth finish substantially free from water and air pockets or honeycomb .
water or finishing aids shall not be added to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations .
hand finishing shall be minimized wherever possible .
the hand finishing methods shall be addressed in the process control plan for concrete finishing .
hand finished concrete shall be struck off and screeded with a portable screed that is at least num feet longer than the maximum width of the surface to be struck off .
it shall be sufficiently rigid to retain its shape .
concrete shall be thoroughly consolidated by hand vibrators .
hand finishing shall not be allowed after concrete has been inplace for more than num minutes or when initial set has begun .
finishing tools made of aluminum shall not be used .
the contractor shall provide a process control plan pcp to ensure that proper hand finishing is accomplished in accordance with current industry standards .
it shall identify the contractors method for ensuring that the provisions of the pcp are met .
the pcp shall be submitted to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
concrete placement shall not begin until the engineer has approved the pcp .
the pcp shall identify and address issues affecting the quality of finished concrete including but not limited to num timing of hand finishing operations .
num methodology to place and transport concrete .
num equipment and tools to be utilized .
num qualifications and training of finishers and supervisors .
when the engineer determines that any element of the approved pcp is not being implemented or that hand finished concrete is unacceptable work shall be suspended .
the contractor shall supply a written plan to address improperly placed material and to remedy future hand finishing failures and bring the work into compliance with the pcp .
the engineer will review the plan for acceptability prior to authorizing the resumption of operations .
b hot weather limitations .
placing of concrete during hot weather shall be limited by the temperature of the concrete at the time of placing .
mixed concrete which has a temperature of num f or higher shall not be placed .
num num the contractor shall provide fogging equipment and keep the concrete surface moist at all times by fogging with an approved atomizing nozzle until the curing material is in place .
the aggregate stockpiles shall be kept moist at all times .
c cold weather limitations .
the mixed concrete temperature shall be between num and num f at the time of placement .
water aggregates or both shall be heated when necessary under such control and in sufficient quantities to avoid fluctuations in the temperature of the concrete of more than num f from batch to batch .
to avoid the possibility of flash set when the water is heated to a temperature in excess of num f the water and the aggregates shall be charged into the mixer before the cement is added .
heating equipment or methods which alter or prevent the entrainment of the required amount of air in the concrete shall not be used .
the equipment shall be capable of heating the materials uniformly .
aggregates and water used for mixing shall not be heated to a temperature exceeding num f .
materials containing frost or lumps of frozen material shall not be used .
stockpiled aggregates may be heated by the use of dry heat or steam .
aggregates shall not be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over fire .
when aggregates are heated in bins steamcoil or watercoil heating or other methods which will not be detrimental to the aggregates may be used .
the use of live steam on or through binned aggregates will not be permitted .
concrete shall not be placed on frozen ground .
before concrete placement all ice snow and frost shall be completely removed from within formwork .
salt shall not be used to thaw ice snow or frost .
d chutes and troughs .
concrete shall be placed so as to avoid segregation of the materials and the displacement of the reinforcement .
concrete shall not be dropped more than num feet unless confined by closed chutes or pipes .
care shall be taken to fill each part of the form by depositing the concrete as near final position as possible .
the coarse aggregate shall be worked back from the forms and worked around the reinforcement without displacing the bars .
after initial set of the concrete the forms shall not be jarred and strain shall not be placed on the ends of projecting reinforcement .
where steep slopes are required the chutes shall be equipped with baffle boards or be in short lengths that reverse the direction of movement .
the contractor shall not use pipes fittings chutes troughs spouts or tremies that are fabricated of aluminum materials for pumping conveying or placing concrete .
concrete shall not be pumped through aluminum alloy pipe .
num num all chutes troughs and pipes shall be kept clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete .
e vibrating .
unless otherwise directed the concrete shall be consolidated with suitable mechanical vibrators operating within the concrete .
when required vibrating shall be supplemented by hand spading with suitable tools to assure proper and adequate consolidation .
vibrators shall be of a type and design approved by the engineer .
they shall be capable of frequencies of at least num vibrations per minute in air .
vibrators shall be so manipulated as to work the concrete thoroughly around the reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into corners and angles of the forms .
vibrators shall not be used as a means to cause concrete to flow or run into position in lieu of placing .
the vibration at any point shall be of sufficient duration to accomplish consolidation but shall not be prolonged to the point where segregation occurs .
f depositing concrete under water .
concrete except for cofferdam seals shall not be deposited under water unless approved by the engineer .
if approved care shall be exercised to prevent the formation of laitance .
concrete shall not be deposited until all laitance which may have formed on concrete previously placed has been removed .
pumping shall be discontinued while depositing foundation concrete if it results in a flow of water inside the forms .
concrete deposited under water shall be carefully placed in a compact mass in its final position by means of a concrete pump and tremie .
the discharge or bottom end of the tremie shall be lowered to contact the foundation at the start of the concrete placement and shall be raised during the placement at a rate which will insure that the bottom or discharge end of the tremie is continuously embedded or buried in fresh concrete a minimum of num inches .
air and water shall be excluded from the tremie pipe by keeping the pipe continuously filled .
the continuity of the placement operation shall be maintained without breaking the seal between the concrete mass and the discharge end of the tremie until the lift is completed .
the placed concrete shall not be disturbed after it has been deposited .
g placement .
concrete shall be placed in horizontal layers not more than num inches thick except as hereinafter provided .
when less than a complete layer is placed in one operation it shall be terminated in a vertical bulkhead .
each layer shall be placed and consolidated before the preceding batch has taken initial set .
each layer shall be so consolidated as to avoid the formation of a construction joint with a preceding layer which has not taken initial set .
bridge deck concrete on superelevation or grade that exceeds num percent shall be placed from the low point upward .
when the placing of concrete is temporarily discontinued the concrete after becoming firm enough to retain its form shall be cleaned of laitance and other objectionable material to a sufficient depth to expose sound concrete .
the top surfaces of concrete adjacent to the forms shall be smoothed with a trowel to minimize visible joints upon exposed faces .
work shall not be halted within num num num inches of the top of any face unless provision has been made for a coping less than num inches thick in which case the construction joint may be made at the underside of the coping .
immediately after the work of placing concrete is halted all accumulations of mortar splashed upon the reinforcement and surfaces of forms shall be removed before the concrete takes its initial set .
care shall be taken when cleaning reinforcing steel to prevent damage to or breakage of the concretesteel bond .
where class dt concrete is used for patching repair or topping of existing concrete the area that the concrete class dt contacts shall be prepared by shot blasting  to num inch deep or rotomilling .
if class dt concrete is not placed within one week of the shot blasting or rotomilling the area shall then be sandblasted and cleaned of all sand concrete fragments dirt and other foreign material within one week of placement .
the area shall be moistened two to four hours before placement and shall be free of standing water at the time of placement .
when concrete is placed by pumping the pumping equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to concrete placement .
excess form release agent shall be removed from the hopper .
the pump shall be primed at the contractors expense by pumping and discarding enough concrete to produce a uniform mix exiting the pump .
at least num cubic yard of concrete shall be pumped and discarded to prime the pump .
water shall not be added directly into the concrete pump hopper after placement has commenced .
if water is added to the concrete pump hopper all concrete in the concrete pump hopper and the line shall be discarded and the pump reprimed at the contractors expense .
the pump operator shall have a valid operators certification from the american concrete pumping association or approved equal .
boom pumps shall have a documented current inspection as required by asme bnum .
equipment added to the pump shall meet the pump manufacturers specifications .
the contractor shall submit the specifications of the pumping equipment and the qualifications of the operator to the engineer for review at least two weeks prior to pumping concrete .
equipment and operators rejected by the engineer shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
the pump shall be operated so that a continuous stream of concrete is produced .
the pump equipment shall use a minimum of one of the following to maintain concrete uniformity num a num degree loop immediately prior to the delivery end of the pump line .
num a minimum one inch reducer installed at the entry to the delivery hose .
num a minimum one inch reducing delivery hose .
num a cable attached to the pump boom creating a minimum num degree bend in the steel braded flexible hose .
the point of discharge from the flexible hose at the end of the boom shall be at or above the lowest point of the bend .
num num num on horizontal pours a numfoot minimum horizontal delivery system placed on the deck .
num other approved methods .
metal pump lines or couplings shall not rest directly on epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
the point of discharge of the pump shall be as close to the bridge deck elevation as possible .
h placing sequence .
unless otherwise shown on plans or ordered the concrete placing sequence shall be as follows concrete in columns shall be placed in one continuous operation .
the concrete in columns shall be allowed to set at least num hours before caps are placed .
each span of simple span concrete slab and girder bridges less than num feet in length shall be placed in one continuous operation .
concrete for simple or continuous girder spans greater than num feet shall be placed in two operations the first operation shall consist of placing the girder stems and any slab at the bottom of the stems and the second operation shall consist of placing the top deck slab .
the second pour shall not be made until the first pour has reached a compressive strength of twice the design unit stress shown on the plans .
transverse construction joints shall be located as shown on the plans or as approved .
concrete slabs on simple span steel girder bridges shall be poured in one continuous operation for each span .
if approval is given to place the deck of the entire structure the contractor shall use an approved retarder when necessary to retain the workability of the concrete and to obtain the desired finish .
concrete slabs on continuous span steel girder bridges shall be placed in accordance with the placing sequence shown on the plans .
the contractor may place the deck of the entire structure in one operation when approved .
an approved retarder shall be used when necessary to retain the workability of the concrete and to obtain the desired finish .
the leading edge of the freshly placed concrete shall be kept parallel to the substructure so that the girders will be loaded evenly during the placing and screeding operation .
i drainage and weep holes .
drainage and weep holes shall be constructed at locations shown on the plans or as ordered .
ports or vents for equalizing hydrostatic pressure shall be placed below low water .
forms for weep holes shall consist of approved form material .
wooden forms shall be removed after initial set of concrete has taken place .
inlets of weep holes shall be surrounded with num cubic foot of filter material in a burlap sack securely tied .
num num j construction joints .
construction joints shall be made only where located on the plans or shown in the placing schedule unless otherwise approved .
all construction joints shall be cleaned of surface laitance curing compound and other foreign materials before fresh concrete is placed against the surface of the joint .
abrasive blast methods shall be used to clean construction joints between concrete girders and adjoining deck slabs .
when the optional construction joints shown on the plans are used any additional reinforcing steel shall be furnished and placed by the contractor at no expense to the department .
surfaces on which concrete is to be placed shall be thoroughly moistened with water immediately before placing concrete .
when concrete is to be placed on or adjacent to hardened concrete surfaces the surface shall be saturated surface dry .
saturated surface dry concrete has no water on its surface .
the pores of the concrete beneath the surface are moist .
where construction joints are allowed on visible surfaces chamfer strips attached to the forms or other approved methods shall be utilized to provide an even joint appearance .
when the plans show new concrete to be joined to existing concrete by means of bar reinforcing dowels placed in holes drilled in the existing concrete the diameter of the holes shall be the minimum needed to place nonshrink grout or epoxy grout and the dowel .
immediately prior to placing the dowels the holes shall be cleaned of dust and other foreign material and sufficient grout placed in the holes so that there are no voids in the drilled holes after the dowels are inserted .
k float finish on horizontal surfaces .
all freshly placed concrete on horizontal surfaces shall be given a float finish except as otherwise provided in the plans .
bridge decks and bridge sidewalks shall be finished in accordance with subsection nume .
a float finish shall be achieved by placing an excess of material in the form and removing or striking off the excess with a template forcing the coarse aggregate below the mortar surface .
creation of concave surfaces shall be avoided .
after the concrete has been struck off the surface shall be thoroughly worked and floated with a suitable floating tool .
before the finish has set the surface cement film shall be removed with a fine brush in order to have a fine grained smooth but sanded texture .
l loading piers and abutments .
superstructure dead loads shall not be applied until piers and abutments have attained a compressive strength of numfc .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters in accordance with cp num .
the contractor shall provide an as constructed survey of the abutments and piers prior to girder erection .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a copy of the survey notes detailing the girder seat elevations anchor bolt locations and projections and span distances from centerline of bearing to num num centerline of bearing .
the survey notes shall indicate all adjustments necessary for bearing device dimensions other than those shown on the plans .
the contractor shall submit details for all adjustments to the engineer for approval .
m opening to traffic .
concrete structures shall remain closed to traffic and shall not carry contractors equipment for num days after placement of the concrete deck is completed .
the structure may be opened to traffic earlier if the concrete deck and all other concrete has attained the field compressive strength given in table num .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters in accordance with cp num .
in addition for castinplace prestressed bridges construction vehicles whose gross weight exceeds num pounds shall not be allowed on any span until prestressing steel for that span has been tensioned .
n epoxy bonder .
an epoxy bonder meeting the requirements of subsection num shall be used where epoxy bonder is called for on the plans .
o backfilling structures that support lateral earth pressure .
concrete compressive strengths shall reach fc before backfilling operations can begin with heavy equipment such as skidsteers or selfpowered riding compactors .
concrete compressive strengths shall reach numfc .
before backfilling operations can begin with hand operated equipment .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined by maturity meters in accordance with cp num .
curing concrete other than bridge decks .
when the ambient temperature is below num f the contractor shall maintain the concrete temperature above num f during the curing period .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine for himself the necessity for undertaking protective measures .
the minimum curing period shall be determined by one of the following methods .
the engineer shall review for adequacy the contractors determination of the curing period .
num the minimum curing period shall be num hours num the minimum curing period shall be from the time the concrete has been placed until the concrete has met a compressive strength of num percent of the required field compressive strength .
the contractor shall develop a maturity relationship for the concrete mix design in accordance with cp num .
the contractor shall provide the maturity meter and all necessary thermocouples thermometers wires and connectors .
the contractor shall place protect and maintain the maturity meters and associated equipment .
locations where the maturity meters are placed shall be protected in the same manner as the rest of the structure .
enclosures with artificial heat sources will be permitted .
if enclosures are used the contractor shall monitor the structural integrity of the enclosure .
artificial heat sources shall not be placed in such a manner as to endanger formwork or expose num num any area of concrete to drying due to excessive temperatures .
at the end of the curing period the protection shall remain in place until it can be removed without permitting the concrete temperature to fall more than num f in a numhour period .
sudden changes of concrete temperature shall be prevented .
immediately after placing fresh concrete all concrete shall be cured by one of the following methods .
the engineer shall review for adequacy the curing method proposed by the contractor .
a water method .
all surfaces other than slabs shall be protected from the sun and the whole structure shall be kept wet throughout the curing period .
surfaces requiring a class num finish may have the covering temporarily removed for finishing but the covering must be restored as soon as possible .
all concrete slabs shall be covered as soon as possible with suitable material so that concrete is kept thoroughly wet for at least five days .
the concrete surface shall be kept moist at all times by fogging with an atomizing nozzle until the covering is placed .
b membrane forming curing compound method .
curing compound may be applied only to those surfaces which are to receive a class i or class num final finish .
a volatile organic content voc compliant curing compound conforming to astm cnum type num shall be used on surfaces where curing compound is allowed except that type num curing compound shall be used on exposed aggregate or colored concrete or when directed by the engineer .
curing compound shall not be used on construction joints .
the rate of application of curing compound will be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation but shall not be more than num square feet per gallon .
all concrete cured by this method shall receive two applications of the curing compound .
the first coat shall be applied immediately after stripping of forms and acceptance of the concrete finish .
if the surface is dry the concrete shall be thoroughly wet with water and the curing compound applied just as the surface film of water disappears .
the second application shall be applied after the first application has set .
during curing operations all unsprayed surfaces shall be kept wet with water .
the coating shall be protected against marring for a period of at least num days after application .
coating marred or otherwise disturbed shall be given an additional coating .
should the surface coating be subjected continuously to injury the engineer may require that water curing as described in subsection numa be applied at once .
when using a curing compound the compound shall be thoroughly mixed within an hour before use .
if the use of a curing compound results in a streaked or blotchy appearance its use shall be discontinued .
water curing as described in subsection num a shall then be applied until the cause of the defective appearance is corrected .
c form method .
concrete shall be protected by forms during the curing period .
forms shall be kept moist when necessary during the curing period to insure the concrete surface remains wet .
d blanket method .
electrically heated curing blankets or insulation blankets num num may be used in cold weather to maintain specified curing temperature and to retain moisture in concrete .
blankets shall be lapped at least num inches and shall be free of holes .
blankets shall be secured at laps and edges to prevent moisture from escaping .
e the following procedures shall be followed if the temperature of the concrete structure falls below num f before the concrete reaches num percent of the required field compressive strength num the contractor will take cores at locations designated by the engineer .
num the engineer will take immediate possession of the cores and submit the cores to a petrographer for examination in accordance with astm cnum .
num all costs associated with coring transmittal of cores and petrographic examination shall be borne by the contractor regardless of the outcome of the petrographic examination .
num concrete damaged by frost as determined by the petrographic examination shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
finishing hardened concrete surfaces .
a general .
unless otherwise authorized all formed surfaces shall be finished with class num finish .
generally for form cured surfaces this finish will be constructed immediately following curing .
where curing compound is allowed by subsection numb the class i finish shall be applied immediately after the forms are removed and forms may be removed for only that portion of the work that can be finished in the remainder of a work day .
the exposed concrete shall be kept damp during the finishing period and covered with the curing compound immediately following the completion of the finishing .
structural concrete coating shall be the final finish for all concrete surfaces designated on the plans and in these specifications .
b classes of finish .
the various classes of finish are described as follows num .
class num ordinary surface finish .
all fins and irregular projections shall be removed from all surfaces except from those which are not to be exposed or are not to be waterproofed .
on all surfaces the cavities produced by form ties honeycomb spots broken corners or edges and other defects shall be thoroughly cleaned moistened with water and carefully pointed and trued with a mortar consisting of cement and fine aggregate and the surface left sound smooth even and uniform in color .
mortar used in pointing shall be not more than num minutes old .
the mortar patches shall be cured as specified in subsection num or other num num approved methods .
all construction and expansion joints in the completed work shall be left carefully tooled and free of all mortar and concrete .
the joint filler shall be left exposed for its full length with clean and true edges .
num .
class num rubbed finish .
after completion of class num ordinary surface finish the rubbing of concrete shall be started as soon as its condition will permit .
immediately before starting this work the concrete shall be moistened with water .
sufficient time shall have elapsed before the wetting down to allow the mortar used in the pointing to thoroughly set .
surfaces to be finished shall be rubbed with a medium coarse carborundum stone using a small amount of mortar on its face .
the mortar shall be composed of cement and fine sand mixed in the same proportions as the concrete being finished .
rubbing shall be continued until all form marks projections and irregularities have been removed all voids filled and a uniform surface has been obtained .
the paste produced by this rubbing shall be left in place after all concrete above the surface being treated has been cast the final finish shall be obtained by rubbing with a fine carborundum stone and water .
this rubbing shall be continued until the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform color .
after the final rubbing is completed and the surface has dried it shall be wiped with burlap to remove loose powder and shall be left free from all unsound patches paste powder and objectionable marks .
num .
class num sand blasted finish .
the cured concrete surface shall be sand blasted with hard sharp sand to produce an even finegrained uniform surface in which the mortar has been cut away .
an exposed aggregate finish will not be required .
however aggregate exposed incidental to achieving the specified surface will be acceptable .
num .
structural concrete coating .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the coating shall be applied to all exposed concrete elements of the structure above the ground line including the tops of all pier caps and abutment seats and shall extend num foot below the finished ground line .
bridge bearing devices curb and barrier cover plates fence and steel bridge rail shall be masked or otherwise protected to prevent structural concrete coating from coming into contact with them .
the final color of the structural concrete coating shall have the engineers written approval prior to batching and application on the project .
approval of the final color of the coating will be determined by the engineer as follows num a num foot by num foot sample of each color required by the plans shall be submitted to the engineer .
the sample coating shall be applied to surfaces similar in texture to the concrete surfaces to which the num num coating will be applied on the project .
the sample coating shall be applied by the same methods to be used in field application .
num at least three weeks prior to beginning application of the structural concrete coating num square foot test panels shall be prepared for each color selected by the engineer .
the test panels shall be produced on the actual concrete surface on which the final product will be placed at a location designated by the engineer where all the required color and texture combinations may be viewed adjacent to each other .
the coatings shall be applied to the test panels by the same methods to be used in the final field application .
the engineer shall be allowed one week after application of the last test panel for review and approval .
concrete surfaces to which the structural concrete coating will be applied shall be prepared as follows num following curing of the concrete in accordance with subsection num all projections and bulges shall be removed and the surface sandblasted .
sandblasting shall profile the concrete surface remove all form release agents and all other deleterious materials that would inhibit the bond of the structural concrete coating .
the profile of the sandblasted concrete surface shall be equivalent to concrete surface profile three csp num as defined in technical guideline no .
num selecting and specifying concrete surface preparation for sealers coatings and polymer overlays by the international concrete repair institute .
the contractor shall provide a csp num chip for use on the project .
num a mortar mix proportioned by volume consisting of one part portland cement two to three parts sand conforming to the requirements of astm cnum and an approved bonding agent shall be used to patch all holes produced by form ties honeycombing voids  inch or larger in any dimension broken corners and edges and other defects .
the mortar mix shall include an approved bonding agent .
the quantity and application procedure of the bonding agent shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the bonding agent .
areas to be patched shall be moistened with water before the mortar is applied and the patched area shall be float finished and left flush with the concrete surface without checking or cracking of patches .
patching shall be done when the ambient temperature is at least num f. holes deeper than  inch shall be filled in layers that do not exceed  inch in thickness .
num within num hours prior to applying structural concrete coating the concrete surface to be coated shall be cleaned by water blasting at a minimum pressure of num psi to remove dust dirt and other materials that would inhibit bonding of the coating .
if the surface is num num contaminated before application of the coating it shall be recleaned as required prior to application of the coating .
new concrete shall be at least num days old or as approved in writing by the coating manufacturer before the coating is applied .
the coating shall be applied at a rate that will provide a minimum dry film thickness of num to num mils without texturing agent .
the coating shall be mixed by a mechanical mixer and applied by spraying .
workmanship shall be such that the final coated surface is colored and textured uniformly and presents a pleasing appearance .
all areas determined by the engineer to be insufficiently coated shall be recoated .
the coating shall be applied only when the ambient temperature is between num f and num f and is anticipated to remain above num f for a minimum of num hours .
the surface to be coated shall be dry and free of frost .
bridge deck placing consolidating and finishing .
the contractor shall prepare a written process control plan pcp which defines the process control measures the contractor will use to ensure the placing consolidating and finishing curing and weather protection of the bridge deck conforms to the contract requirements .
the contractor may refer to the structural concrete prepour conference agenda in the departments construction manual for examples of items that should be included in the pcp .
it shall also identify the contractors method for ensuring that the provisions of the pcp are met .
the contractor shall submit the pcp to the engineer for written approval before the prepour conference .
a preplacement conference shall be held at a time mutually agreed upon before the initial placement of class h class ht or class snum concrete .
representatives of the ready mix producer and the contractor shall meet with the engineer to discuss the following topics num concrete mix ingredients and proportions cement content effect of admixtures etc .. num work schedule .
num applicable specifications and special notes .
num delivery details .
num planned construction joint locations .
num role of all personnel .
num construction details surface preparation finish joint locations etc .
num testing requirements .
num acceptance criteria .
num num num contingency plans for wind rain breakdown etc .
num curing details .
a surface preparation .
tops of girders precast deck panels pier caps and abutments that will come into contact with bridge deck concrete shall be heated to raise the temperature above num f prior to concrete placement .
the proposed preheating method is subject to approval by the engineer .
prior to placement of a class ht concrete overlay the deck shall be prepared as follows num .
newly placed decks or existing decks that have been used as the final driving surface .
the deck shall be shot blasted in preparation for a mechanically bonded surface .
shot blasting shall remove the upper surface of the deck down to the coarse aggregate which requires removing approximately  to num inch of .
the concrete .
num .
existing decks covered with one or more layers of bituminous pavement .
the deck shall be planed in accordance with subsection num to remove all overlying bituminous pavement bridge deck membrane and the upper  inch of the deck concrete .
if class ht concrete is not placed within one week of shot blasting or planing the area shall then be sandblasted and cleaned of all sand concrete fragments dirt and other foreign material within one week before placement .
the area shall be moistened at least two hours before placement in order that the substrate concrete is saturated .
the substrate concrete shall be allowed to dry and shall be saturated surface dry and free of visible water at the time of placement .
b test slab .
at least fourteen working days prior to initial placement of class h class ht or class snum concrete on or in a deck the contractor shall place finish and cure a test slab according to the project specifications using the same personnel methods and equipment including the concrete pump if used that will be used on the bridge deck .
the test slab shall be the same width as the bridge deck .
when the bridge deck width is greater than num feet the contractor may reduce the test slab width to a minimum of num feet .
the test slab shall have a length of at least num feet and shall have a thickness at minimum of the bridge deck thickness .
placement of class h ht or snum concrete in the deck shall not occur until approval is given by the engineer .
approval to place concrete on the deck will be based on satisfactory placement consolidation finishing and curing of the test slab and cores and will be given or denied within two working days of receiving the cores from the contractor .
a minimum of one day after construction of the test slab the contractor shall core four fulldepth num inch diameter cores one from each quadrant of the test slab and submit them to the engineer for visual inspection of degree of consolidation .
if an additional test slab is deemed necessary by the engineer it shall be placed at the contractors expense .
num num additional test slabs shall be placed as necessary to verify changes in design or procedures at the contractors expense .
test slabs that are placed as acceptable work in segments of concrete pavement or as approach slabs or other locations acceptable to the engineer will be paid for as the pay item for that element of the contract .
c placing .
concrete shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of subsection num except for the following concrete shall be placed in such manner as to require as little handling as possible and at sufficient depth to provide adequate material for screeding and finishing operations .
the concrete shall be discharged as near its final location as practicable .
the pattern of placement shall be such that lateral flow will be minimized .
concrete shall be placed against the leading edge of fresh concrete where practicable .
for class h ht and snum concrete environmental conditions shall be maintained on the entire bridge deck so the evaporation rate is less than num pounds per square foot per hour .
the temperature of class h ht and snum concrete immediately before placement shall be a minimum of numf and a maximum of numf .
this may require placing the deck at night in the early morning or on another day .
the evaporation rate as determined in the american concrete institute manual of concrete practice numr chapter num is a function of air temperature concrete temperature wind speed and relative humidity .
the effects of any fogging required by the engineer will not be considered in the estimation of the evaporation rate .
just prior to and at least once every hour during placement of the class h ht and snum concrete and until the water cure method is applied the contractor shall measure record and report to the engineer the air temperature concrete temperature wind speed and relative humidity on the bridge deck .
the contractor shall take and report to the engineer the air temperature wind and relative humidity measurements approximately num inches above the surface of the deck .
with this information the engineer will determine the evaporation rate .
when the evaporation rate is equal to or above num pounds per square foot per hour the contractor shall take actions such as cooling the concrete installing wind breaks sun screens etc .
to create and maintain an evaporation rate less than num pounds per square foot per hour on the entire bridge deck .
fogging using handheld equipment may be required by the engineer during unanticipated delays in the placing finishing or curing operations .
if fogging is required by the engineer the contractor shall not allow water to drip flow or puddle on the concrete surface during fogging placement of absorptive material or at any time before the concrete has achieved final set .
longitudinal joints for a class ht concrete overlay will be allowed only at the locations of lane lines and must be approved by the engineer .
num num if placing class h ht and snum concrete is delayed and the concrete has taken its initial set stop the placement the contractor shall saw the nearest construction joint approved by the engineer and remove all concrete beyond the construction joint .
transverse joints may be used when the engineer determines that the work is not progressing in a satisfactory manner or when required by a change in weather conditions .
the engineer may approve transverse joint locations to accommodate phased overlay construction .
d consolidating .
consolidation shall conform to subsection nume and to the following the contractor shall provide suitable mechanical vibrators to disperse the batch at the point of discharge and to densify the concrete within the forms .
the bond of fresh concrete to concrete previously placed shall be achieved by vibrating the new concrete together with the old .
immersion vibrators shall operate at a speed of at least num vibrations per minute in air .
internal vibration may be used along the edges of forms and in areas of congested reinforcing .
a combination of immersion vibration and surface consolidation shall be used .
e finishing .
following consolidation the concrete shall be struck off and finished by mechanical longitudinal floating mechanical rolling surface vibration or a combination of any of these methods .
surface vibrators shall be of the low frequency highamplitude type operating at a speed of num to num vibrations per minute .
a pavers steel scraping straightedge or lute num inch maximum width shall be the only hand tool permitted on deck surfaces except for a minimum use of hand floats and edgers along the forms and in areas where machine finishing can not be effectively used .
only minimum hand finishing will be permitted .
if the surface of the deck slab becomes dry immediately following finishing operations due to an excessive evaporation rate it shall be covered with wet burlap or fogged with water covering the entire deck surface using pneumatic atomizing nozzles .
the fog spray shall be just enough to retard surface evaporation and shall not change the watercement ratio .
during periods of excessive drying a cover of wet burlap or plastic sheeting shall be maintained on the slab at all times until final cure is placed .
monomolecular film coatings applied to the surface of the slab to retain moisture may be used provided they effectively retard surface evaporation and are adequately maintained until the final cure is placed .
surfaces of bridge decks and bridge approach slabs that will be the final riding surface shall be finished as follows num .
final finish .
for the final finish a seamless strip of plastic turf shall be dragged longitudinally over the full width of bridge deck after a seamless strip of burlap or other approved fabric has been dragged num num longitudinally over the full width of bridge deck to produce a uniform surface of gritty texture .
the drags shall be mounted on a bridge other than the bridge to be furnished for department use .
the dimensions of the drags shall be such that a strip of material at least num feet wide is in contact with the full width of pavement surface while each drag is used .
the drags shall consist of sufficient material and be maintained in such a condition that the resultant surface finish is of uniform appearance and reasonably free from grooves over num inch in depth .
where more than one layer of burlap drag is required the bottom layer shall be approximately num inches wider than the layer above .
drags shall be maintained clean and free from encrusted mortar .
drags that can not be cleaned shall be discarded and new drags installed .
num .
texturing .
when posted speeds are num mph or higher the finish shall be a grooved finish conforming to the following after the engineer has accepted the finished surface and after concrete has cured for at least seven days the bridge deck surface shall be textured by grooving with a mechanized saw sawed grooves .
grooving shall be done prior to the application of the concrete sealer .
only multiblade saw cutting equipment furnished with circular blades may be used .
single blade equipment may be authorized by the engineer where multiblade assemblies do not allow sawing a distance one foot from obstructions .
the grooving shall be rectangular and conform to the following depth  inch num inch width  inch num inch spacing  inch num inch center to center grooves shall be longitudinal and parallel to the centerline of the roadway .
overlapping of grooves by succeeding passes will not be permitted .
the grooves shall terminate num feet from the face of curb or bridge rail on each side of the overlaid bridge deck .
num .
grooving to bridge joint system .
for joint systems that are perpendicular to the roadway centerline grooving shall extend to num inches num inches from the armor of the joint .
for the joint systems that are not perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway grooving shall remain parallel to the centerline and shall not be nearer than num inches to the joint armor nor farther than num feet from the joint armor .
the distance between grooves from one side to other of the joint system shall not exceed num feet .
the contractor shall maintain the grooving equipment so that aggregate particles or cement buildup on the saws is promptly cleared or cleaned so that the grooves are neat true and in conformance with the specified dimensions .
num num f surface smoothness all bridge deck surfaces .
acceptability of the deck surface will be determined as follows the contractor shall furnish a num foot straightedge or other approved device .
when the concrete is sufficiently hard the contractor shall test the bridge deck surface with the num foot straightedge or other approved device .
areas showing high spots of more than  inch but not exceeding  inch in num feet shall be marked .
the marked area shall be immediately ground with an approved grinding tool so that the surface deviation will not be in excess of  inch in num feet .
grinding shall not reduce the concrete cover on reinforcing steel to less than num inches num inches for bare decks without an overlay .
decks that require additional corrective action shall be corrected with a concrete overlay approved by the engineer .
g movable bridges .
movable bridges or platforms shall be provided by the contractor and moved as directed to allow the inspectors to work over the freshly placed plastic concrete .
a movable bridge shall be kept as close to the finishing screed as practical .
the deck of the movable bridges shall be a minimum of num inches wide and no more than num inches above the surface of the concrete and shall be capable of supporting two people .
the contractor shall provide additional movable bridges as appropriate for the work .
h concrete bridge sidewalks .
bridge sidewalks shall receive a final transverse broom finish .
i crack repair .
if cracks in the deck concrete with a width of num inches or greater occur within two weeks of placement those cracks shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
cracks will be measured by the engineer by insertion of a wire gauge at any time and temperature within the two weeks .
the repair shall consist of filling the cracks with a low viscosity two part methacrylate or an approved equal .
the repair shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the crack filling material .
curing concrete bridge decks .
except for class h and ht concrete the minimum curing period shall be num hours .
for class h and ht concrete the minimum curing period shall be num hours .
the concrete surface shall be kept moist at all times by fogging with an approved atomizing nozzle or applying a monomolecular film coating to retard evaporation until the curing material is in place .
except for when class h ht concrete is used concrete bridge decks including bridge curbs and bridge sidewalks shall be cured as follows a decks placed from may num to september num shall be cured by the membrane forming curing compound method followed by the water cure method as follows num .
membrane forming curing compound method .
a volatile organic content voc compliant curing compound conforming to astm c num type num shall be uniformly applied to the surface of the deck curbs and sidewalks at the rate of num gallon per num square feet .
the curing num num compound shall be applied as a fine spray using power operated spraying equipment .
the power operated spraying equipment shall be equipped with an operational pressure gage and a means of controlling the pressure .
before and during application the curing compound shall be kept thoroughly mixed by recirculation or a tank agitator .
the application shall be within num feet of the deck finishing operation .
when the finishing operation is discontinued all finished concrete shall be coated with curing compound within  hour .
the curing compound shall be thoroughly mixed within one hour before use .
num .
water cure method .
the water cure method shall be applied as soon as it can be without marring the surface .
the surface of the concrete including bridge curbs and bridge sidewalks shall be entirely covered with wet burlap and polyethylene sheeting .
prior to being placed the burlap shall be thoroughly saturated with water .
the wet burlap and polyethylene sheeting shall extend at least twice the thickness of the bridge deck beyond the edges of the slab and shall be weighted to remain in contact with the surface .
the wet burlap and polyethylene sheeting shall remain in contact and be kept wet for the entire curing period .
b decks placed between november num and march num shall be cured by application of a membrane forming curing compound followed by the blanket method as follows num .
membrane forming curing compound method .
this method shall be applied in accordance with subsection numanum above .
num .
blanket method .
curing blankets with a minimum rvalue of num shall be placed on the deck as soon as they can be without marring the surface .
blankets shall be loosely laid not stretched and adjacent edges suitably overlapped with continuous weights along the lapped joints .
the blankets shall remain in place for a minimum of five days after placement .
c decks placed in april or october may be cured in accordance with either subsection numa or numb above .
d for decks above an elevation of num feet above mean sea level the engineer may modify the time of year requirements for the cure methods defined in subsection numa and numb above .
e class h class ht and class snum concrete shall be cured as follows water cure method .
the water cure method shall be applied as soon as it can be without marring the surface .
the surface of the concrete including bridge curbs and bridge sidewalks shall be entirely covered with wet burlap and polyethylene sheeting .
prior to being placed the burlap shall be thoroughly saturated with water .
the wet burlap and polyethelene sheeting shall extend at least twice the thickness of the bridge deck beyond the edges of the slab and shall be weighted to remain in contact with the surface .
the wet burlap and polyethylene sheeting shall remain in contact and be kept wet for the entire curing period num num f when the ambient temperature is expected to fall below num f during the curing period the contractor shall maintain the internal concrete temperature above num f during the curing period .
the contractor shall provide suitable measures such as straw additional burlap or other suitable blanketing materials andor housing and artificial heat to maintain the concrete temperatures between num f and num f as measured on the upper and lower surfaces of the concrete .
the contractor shall enclose the area underneath the deck and heat it so that the temperature of the surrounding air is as close as possible to the temperature of the concrete and between num f and num f .
when artificial heating is used to maintain the concrete adequate ventilation shall be provided to limit exposure to carbon dioxide .
the contractor shall maintain the wet burlap and polyethylene cover during the curing period .
heating may be stopped after the first num hours if the time of curing is lengthened to account for periods when the ambient air temperature is below num f .
for every day the ambient air temperature is below num f an additional day of curing with a minimum ambient air temperature of num f will be required .
after completion of the required curing period the contractor shall remove the curing and protection so that the temperature of the concrete during the first num hours does not fall more than num f. internal concrete temperature shall be determined by using thermocouples .
thermocouple wire connectors and hand held thermometer shall be supplied by the contractor .
the contractor shall install the thermocouples at locations designated by the engineer .
during the curing period the contractor shall monitor the enclosure at intervals acceptable to the engineer .
the contractor shall monitor concrete temperature and the structural integrity of the enclosure .
artificial heat sources shall not be placed in such a manner as to endanger formwork or expose any area of concrete to drying due to excessive temperatures .
if the internal concrete temperature at any location in the bridge deck concrete falls below num f during the first num hours of the curing period the engineer may direct the contractor to core the areas in question at the locations indicated by the engineer .
the engineer will take immediate possession of the cores .
the engineer will submit the cores to a petrographer for examination in accordance with astm c num .
concrete damaged by frost as determined by the petrographer shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
all costs associated with coring transmittal of cores and petrographic examination shall be borne by the contractor regardless of the outcome of the petrographic examination .
acceptance and pay factors .
these provisions apply to all concrete .
the contractor shall sample num pay items for both process control pc and owner acceptance oa in accordance with cp num .
the engineer will witness the sampling and take possession of the oa samples at a mutually agreed upon location .
the contractor shall be responsible for process control pc testing for num pay items .
pc testing shall be performed at least once per day and then once per num cubic yards for concrete slump unit weight and concrete temperature for each num pay item .
num num a air content .
the first three batches at the beginning of each days production for each num pay item shall be tested by the contractors pc and cdots oa for air content .
when the pc and oa air content measurements differ by more than num percent both the pc and oa air meters shall be checked in accordance with astm cnum .
when air content is below the specified limit it may be adjusted in accordance with subsection num .
successive batches shall be tested by the contractors pc and witnessed by the engineer until three consecutive batches are within specified limits .
after the first three batches cdot will follow the random minimum testing schedule .
after the first three batches the contractor shall perform pc testing at a frequency of one random sample per num cubic yards .
air content shall not be adjusted after a cdot oa test .
at any time during the placement of the concrete when an oa test on a batch deviates from the minimum or maximum percent of total air content specified the following procedure will be used to analyze the acceptability of the concrete .
num .
a batch that deviates from the specified air content by more than num percent and all class d dt ht and h concrete placed in bridge decks with air content exceeding num percent will be rejected .
portions of loads incorporated into structures prior to determining test results which indicate rejection as the correct course of action shall be subject to acceptance at reduced price no payment or removal as determined by the engineer .
num .
a batch that deviates from the specified air content by num percent or less may be accepted at a reduced price using table num. b slump .
slump acceptance but not rejection may be visually determined by the engineer .
any batch that exceeds the slump of the approved concrete mix design by more than num inches will be retested .
if the mix design slump is exceeded by more than num inches a second time that load will be rejected .
if the slump is greater than num inches lower than the approved concrete mix design the load may be adjusted by adding a water reducer or by adding water if the wcm allows and retested .
portions of loads incorporated into structures prior to determining test results which indicate rejection as the correct course of action shall be subject to reduced payment or removal as determined by the engineer .
c strength when specified .
the concrete will be considered acceptable when the running average of three consecutive strength tests per mix design for an individual structure is equal to or greater than the specified strength and no single test falls below the specified strength by more than num psi .
a test is defined as the average strength of three test cylinders cast in plastic molds from a single sample of concrete and cured under standard laboratory conditions prior to testing .
if the compressive strength of any one test cylinder differs from the average by more than num percent that compressive strength will be deleted and the average strength will be determined using the compressive strength of the remaining two test cylinders .
num num when the average of three consecutive strength tests is below the specified strength the individual low tests will be used to determine the pay factor in accordance with table num .
if less than three strength tests are available the individual low tests if any will be used to determine the pay factor in accordance with table num .
the pay factor will be applied to the quantity of concrete represented by the individual low test .
for concrete having a specified strength of less than num psi when the compressive strength test is below the specified strength by more than num psi the concrete represented will be rejected .
for concrete having specified strength of num psi or greater when the compressive strength test is below the specified strength by more than num psi but not more than num psi the concrete represented will be evaluated by the department for removal corrective action or acceptance at a reduced price .
all costs of the evaluation shall be at the contractors expense .
when the compressive strength test is below the specified strength by more than num psi the concrete represented will be rejected .
the contractor may take cores at its own expense and in accordance with colorado procedure num to provide an alternative determination of strength .
price reduction for strength will be based on the num day compressive strength of acceptance cylinders or corresponding cores strength whichever is greater .
the engineer may use cores to determine acceptance or rejection of a part of the structure instead of acceptance cylinders .
the engineer will notify the contractor within num working days after concrete placement that cdot may core the structure .
the location of the coring will be directed by the engineer .
coring and testing will be performed at the expense of the department regardless of the result .
cores will be taken and tested in accordance with aashto tnum between num days and num days after concrete placement .
cores will be a minimum of num inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
a minimum of three cores in a two square foot area will be obtained for locations of the structure that are suspect .
if the compressive strength of any one core differs from the average by more than num percent that compressive strength will be deleted and the average strength will be determined using the compressive strength of the remaining two cores .
if the compressive strength of more than one core differs from the average by more than num percent the average strength will be determined using all three compressive strengths of the cores .
if the average core compressive strength is greater than or equal to num percent of the specified num day compressive strength the concrete represented by the cores will be accepted .
if the average core compressive strength is less than num percent of the specified num day compressive strength the structure will be evaluated by the department according to subsection num for removal and replacement .
pay factors will not be based on cores taken by the engineer .
if the concrete represented by the cores is accepted all costs associated with the repair of the core holes including preparation and submittal of the repair method will be measured and paid for separately .
after the department performs additional core testing as described above the contractor may make one request that the structure be cored and reevaluated num num by the department within num days after concrete placement .
coring and testing costs will be at the expense of the contractor regardless of the result .
cores shall be taken at the same area of the structure as those obtained by the engineer .
the engineer will approve the location of the cores prior to the contractor coring the structure .
all costs associated with the repair of these core holes including preparation and submittal of the repair method will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
if the concrete in the structure is found to be sufficient resulting time delays will be considered excusable .
if the concrete in the structure is still found to be deficient resulting time delays will be considered nonexcusable for this evaluation .
compensation for time delays will be evaluated by the engineer in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall submit a proposed repair method for the core holes for approval prior to coring .
the method shall use an approved nonshrink concrete patching material with a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
the contractor shall submit the manufacturers recommendations along with the repair method .
the engineer will review and approve the proposed methodology prior to patching .
class ht concrete overlays shall not be opened to traffic including construction traffic for at least num days after placement .
at the engineers discretion the overlay may be opened to construction traffic sooner than num days but not until after the curing period has elapsed and the average strength of two field cured cylinders has reached num psi .
the field cured cylinders shall be made in accordance with aashto t num making and curing concrete test specimens in the field .
d pay factors .
the pay factor for concrete which is allowed to remain in place at a reduced price shall be determined according to table num and shall be applied to the unit price bid for item num structural concrete .
if deviations occur in air content and strength within the same batch the pay factor for the batch shall be the product of the individual pay factors .
num num table num pay factors percent total air strength deviations from specified air percent pay factor percent below specified strength psi num psi concrete pay factor percent below specified strength psi num psi concrete num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num reject over num reject num num num num num num num num num num reject over num e bonding of bridge deck overlay .
after the curing period for class dt and ht concrete has elapsed the overlay shall be sounded by the contractor in accordance with astm dnum standard practice for measuring delaminations in concrete bridge decks by sounding to determine if the class dt and ht concrete has bonded to the bridge deck .
in areas where the class dt and ht concrete has not bonded to the bridge deck it shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
f maturity meter strength .
when maturity meters are specified for determining strength for removing forms removing false work backfilling against structures or loading the structure the contractor shall provide the engineer a report of maturity relationships in accordance with cp num prior to placement of concrete .
if a maturity meter fails is tampered with is destroyed or was not placed the following shall apply the minimum curing time or waiting time for removing forms removing false work backfilling against structures or loading the structure shall be num days .
the contractor may choose at his own expense to core the structure represented by the maturity meter .
cores shall be obtained and tested according to cp num .
cores shall be a minimum of num inches in diameter .
a num num minimum of three cores in a two square foot area shall be obtained .
if the compressive strength of any one core differs from the average by more than num percent that compressive strength will be deleted and the average strength will be determined using the compressive strength of the remaining two cores .
if the compressive strength of more than one core differs from the average by more than num percent the average strength will be determined using all three compressive strengths of the cores .
the average compressive strength of the cores shall achieve the specified compressive strength of the structure .
a structure may be cored only once .
g water to cementitious material content wcm ratio .
when a nonstandard concrete is used the maximum wcm ratio is the wcm ratio that was used in the in the laboratory trial mix for the concrete mix design .
the wcm ratio shall be determined for each batch of nonstandard concrete by the contractor and provided to the engineer for approval prior to placement .
if an adjustment to the mix is made after the engineers approval the wcm shall be determined and submitted to the engineer prior to the continuation of placement .
any nonstandard concrete that is placed without the engineers approval shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
unless otherwise stated in the plans or specifications tolerances for concrete construction and materials shall be in accordance with aci num .
cast in place bridge decks and bridge slabs shall be no more than  inch thicker nor more than  inch thinner than the crosssectional vertical dimension shown on the plans .
method of measurement concrete will be measured by the cubic yard in accordance with the dimensions shown on the plans .
plan quantities reflect deductions for all voids designed into the structure except deductions will not be made for the volume occupied by pipes or conduits less than num inches in diameter ducts for prestressing steel reinforcing steel anchors weep holes piling and form liner textures and nominal chamfers .
concrete of the various classes will not be remeasured but will be the quantities shown on the plans .
exceptions for each class for each structure will be num when field changes are ordered or num when it is determined that there are discrepancies on the plans in an amount plus or minus num percent of the plan quantity for the structure .
class num finish will be measured by the square foot without deduction for areas occupied by bridge rail base plates other anchorages or weep holes .
class num finish will not be measured in the field but will be the quantity shown on the plans .
exceptions for each structure will be num num num when field changes are ordered or num when it is determined that there are discrepancies on the plans in an amount plus or minus num percent of the plan quantity for the structure .
bridge concrete shall consist of structural concrete of the designated class required for bridge construction shown on the plans completed and accepted .
box culvert concrete shall consist of structural concrete of the designated class required for concrete box culvert construction including wingwalls shown on the plans completed and accepted .
wall concrete shall consist of reinforced structural concrete of the designated class required for the construction of walls which are not part of bridges or box culverts completed and accepted .
miscellaneous concrete shall consist of the structural concrete of the designated class shown on the plans except bridge box culvert or wall concrete completed and accepted .
bridge deck finish sawed grooves will be measured by the square yard .
the area includes the length of the bridge and approach slabs with deductions for areas occupied by expansion devices as specified multiplied by the width of the roadway between the faces of curb or bridge rail on each side less num feet .
bridge deck finish sawed grooves will not be measured in the field but will be the quantity shown on the plans .
exceptions for each structure will be num when field changes are ordered or num when it is determined that there are discrepancies on the plans in an amount of plus or minus num percent of the plan quantity for the structure .
when permanent deck forms are optional bridge deck concrete and reinforcing steel shown on the plans which are based on a conventionally reinforced deck will be paid for in accordance with sections num and num under pay item num structural concrete and pay item num reinforcing steel .
quantities of bridge deck concrete and reinforcing steel will not be measured in the field but will be the quantities shown on the plans except when a plan change is ordered or when it is determined that there are discrepancies in an amount of plus or minus num percent of the plan quantity .
when permanent deck forms are required bridge deck concrete and reinforcing steel will be paid for in accordance with section num and num under pay item num structural concrete and pay item num reinforcing steel .
quantities of bridge deck concrete and reinforcing steel will not be measured in the field but will be the quantities shown on the plans except when a plan change is ordered or when it is determined that there are discrepancies in an amount of plus or minus num percent of the plan quantity .
num num when precast panel deck forms are required they will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
concrete and all reinforcing or prestressing steel required for the panels will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
structural concrete coating will not be measured in the field but shall be the surface area quantity shown on the plans except that measurements will be made when field changes are ordered or for an error of plus or minus num percent of the plan quantity for each structure to be coated .
maturity meters thermocouples and information cylinders will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price per unit of measurement for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit concrete class _____ cubic yard concrete class_____bridge cubic yard concrete class_____box culvert cubic yard concrete class_____wall cubic yard concrete class_____miscellaneous cubic yard class num finish square foot bridge deck finish sawed grooves square yard structural concrete coating square yard payment will be full compensation for all work necessary to complete the designated pay item in accordance with subsection num .
polyolefin fiber reinforcement will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for structural concrete coating will be full compensation for all work and materials necessary to complete the item and shall include but is not limited to num water based form release agent .
num sample preparation .
num abrasive blasting .
num patching materials and application .
num structural concrete coating and application .
num num when requested by the engineer the contractor shall provide the engineer with a certified invoice from the coating supplier indicating the total volume of structural concrete coating supplied to the project .
epoxy bonder material when specified on the plans will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
when permanent steel bridge deck forms are specified or allowed by the contract they will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work including all labor and additional concrete and other materials required to use these forms .
preparation of designated surfaces for application of class num finish will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
concrete finish is included in the work unless a separate pay item is included in the bid schedule .
the contractors pc testing will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num reinforcing steel description this work consists of furnishing and placing reinforcing steel in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the plans .
materials reinforcing steel and welded wire fabric that will be furnished either uncoated or epoxy coated shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
the coating material shall be a light colored powdered epoxy resin which will highlight rusting of untreated bar areas .
reinforcing steel that requires welding shall conform to astm a num .
welding shall be done in accordance with ansiaws dnum .
all accessories including reinforcing steel supports ties and splicers used in conjunction with epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall be plastic or epoxy coated .
reinforcing steel not identified on the plans as epoxy coated may be supplied as epoxy coated at the contractors option at no additional cost to the department .
length of lap splices for epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with aashto standard specifications for highway bridges unless otherwise specified .
construction requirements bar list .
two copies of a list of all reinforcing steel and bending diagrams shall be furnished to the engineer at the site of the work at least one week before the placing of reinforcing steel is begun .
such lists will not be reviewed for accuracy .
the contractor shall be responsible for the accuracy of the lists and for furnishing and placing all reinforcing steel in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
bar lists and bending diagrams which are included on the plans do not have to be furnished by the contractor .
when bar lists and bending diagrams are included on the plans they are intended for estimating approximate quantities .
the contractor shall verify the quantity size and shape of the bar reinforcement against those shown on the plans and make all necessary corrections before ordering .
protection of materials .
reinforcing steel and its epoxy coating shall be protected at all times from damage .
when placed in the work the reinforcing steel shall be free from dirt loose mill scale paint oil loose rust or other foreign substance .
bending .
unless otherwise permitted all reinforcing bars shall be bent cold .
bars partially embedded in concrete shall not be field bent except as shown on plans or permitted .
bars shall not be bent or straightened in a manner that will num num injure the material or the epoxy coating .
should the engineer approve the application of heat for field bending reinforcing bars precautions shall be taken to assure that the physical properties of the steel will not be materially altered .
hooks and bends shall conform to the provisions of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
bars which are shown as hooked on the plans shall have standard hooks unless otherwise indicated .
the term standard hook as used herein shall mean one of the following num a num degree turn plus an extension of four bar diameters but at least num inches at the free end of the bar or num a num degree turn plus an extension of num bar diameters at the free end of the bar or num for stirrup and tie anchorage only i no .
num bar and smaller num degree turn plus an extension of six bar diameters at the free end of the bar .
ii no .
num num and num bar num degree turn plus an extension of num bar diameters at the free end of the bar .
iii no .
num bar and smaller num degree turn plus an extension of six bar diameters at the free end of the bar .
the inside diameter of bend measured on the inside of the bar other than for stirrups and ties shall be as follows bar size grade num no .
num thru no .
num num bar dia .
no .
num no .
num and no .
num num bar dia .
no .
num and no .
num num bar dia .
the inside diameter of bend for stirrups and ties shall not be less than four bar diameters for sizes no .
num and smaller and five bar diameters for no .
num to no .
num inclusive .
inside diameter of bend in welded wire fabric smooth or deformed shall not be less than four wire diameters for deformed wire larger than dnum and two wire diameters for all other wires .
bends with inside diameter of less than eight wire diameters shall not be less than four wire diameters from the nearest welded intersection .
placing and fastening .
the minimum spacing center to center of parallel bars shall be num times the diameter of the bar .
however the clear distance between the bars shall not be less than num times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate or num inches whichever is greater .
bundle bars shall be tied together at not more than num foot centers .
num num all reinforcement shall have a clear coverage of num inches except as shown on the plans .
clear coverage shall be measured from the surface of the concrete to the outside of the reinforcement .
reinforcement used in posttensioned concrete shall be adjusted or relocated during the installation of prestressing ducts or tendons as required to provide location and planned clearances to the prestressing tendons anchorages jacks and equipment as approved by the engineer .
all reinforcement shall be tied at all intersections except where spacing is less than num foot in each direction in which case alternate intersections shall be tied .
in concrete bridge decks the upper mat of bars shall be tied to the lower mat of bars at num foot maximum spacing in each direction .
slab bolsters for the bottom mat and high chairs for the top mat shall each be placed at a maximum spacing of num feet on centers .
welding on reinforcing bars will not be permitted except as noted on the plans .
reinforcement placed in any member shall be inspected and approved before any concrete is placed .
the placing fastening splicing and supporting of reinforcing steel and wire mesh or bar mat reinforcement shall be in accordance with the plans and the latest edition of crsi recommended practice for placing reinforcing bars .
in case of discrepancy between the plans and the crsi publication stated above the plans shall govern .
automated tie wire devices may be used .
the total crosssectional area of the automated tie wire wrap shall roughly equal the total crosssectional area of a manually installed tie wire wrap .
the tie wire shall be epoxy coated or plastic coated for use with epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
all epoxy coating on the reinforcing steel that is damaged from the use of automated tie wire devices shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
precast concrete blocking or other approved blocking material shall be used to support footing bars and bars in slabs on grade .
all other reinforcing steel shall be supported with steel chairs or precast mortar blocks .
all chairs coming in contact with forms shall be crsi class num or class num type b .
the location of splices except where shown on the plans shall be based upon using num foot stock length bars for no .
num bars and larger and num foot stock length bars for no .
num and no .
num bars this does not preclude the use of num foot .
minimum splice lengths are as shown on the plans .
where bars of different size are spliced together the splice length for the smaller bar will govern .
unless otherwise shown on the plans or approved splices in adjacent lines of reinforcing bars shall be staggered .
the minimum distance between staggered splices for reinforcing bars shall be the length required for a lapped splice in the bar .
lapped splices will be permitted only at locations where the concrete section is sufficient to provide a minimum clear distance of num inches between the splice and the nearest adjacent bar .
the clearance to the surface of the concrete shall not be reduced .
num num reinforcing bars may be continuous at locations where splices are shown on the plans .
reinforcing bars no .
num and no .
num shall not be spliced by lapping but shall be joined by butt welding in accordance with aws dnum in such a way as to develop at least num percent of the specified yield strength of the bar in both tension and compression .
alternate systems of welding or mechanical butt splices may be submitted for approval .
epoxy coated bars shall be placed on plastic supports or steel supports fully coated with plastic or epoxy .
care shall be taken to prevent coated bars from coming into contact with other steel items .
method of measurement the weight of reinforcing steel for payment will not be measured but shall be the quantities designated in the contract except measurements will be made for revisions requested by the engineer or for an error of plus or minus num percent of the total weight shown on the plans for each structure .
prospective bidders shall verify the weight of reinforcing steel before submitting a proposal .
adjustment will not be made in the weight shown on the plans other than for approved design changes or for an error as stipulated above even though the actual weight may deviate from the plan weight .
the computed weight of epoxy coated reinforcing bars will be based on the nominal weight before application of the epoxy coating .
nominal weights for various bar sizes are shown below .
bar size weight per linear foot in pounds bar size weight per linear foot in pounds  inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of reinforcing steel will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound .
no allowance will be made for supports clips wire or other material used for fastening reinforcement in place .
num num payment will be made under pay item pay unit reinforcing steel pound reinforcing steel epoxy coated pound num num section num culverts and sewers description this work consists of the construction of culverts cross drains side drains storm drains and sanitary sewers hereinafter referred to as conduit where a specific pipe material is required and nestable semicircular pipe for encasement .
work shall be in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall meet the requirements shown on the plans and in the following subsections corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num corrugated steel pipe nestable num corrugated aluminum pipe num reinforced concrete pipe num nonreinforced concrete pipe num pipe joint sealing compounds num plastic pipe num vitrified clay pipe num ductile iron pipe num gaskets num resilient compression ring material num reinforced concrete pipe jacked num plastic end sections shall not be used .
when plastic pipe is to be installed with end sections steel end sections conforming to standard plan mnum shall be used .
construction requirements general .
pipe shall be protected during handling against impact shocks and free fall .
when new sanitary sewer facilities interfere with the existing flow of sewage the contractor shall provide satisfactory bypass facilities at no expense to the department .
sanitary sewers and all appurtenances shall be thoroughly cleaned before final acceptance of this work .
excavation .
trenches shall be excavated in accordance with the requirements of section num to a width sufficient to allow for proper jointing of the num num conduit and thorough compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the conduit .
the completed trench bottom shall be firm for its full length and width .
the trench for cross drains shall have a minimum longitudinal camber of num percent of the length of the pipe .
camber may be increased to suit height of fill and supporting soil .
when conduits are to be installed in new embankments the embankment shall first be constructed to the required height of at least num times the outside diameter or raise of the conduit and for a distance each side of the conduit location of at least num times the diameter or span of the conduit after which the trench shall be excavated and the conduit installed .
excavation shall be by open cut from the surface except when pipe jacking is specified or directed in writing by the engineer .
when pipe is to be jacked trenching will not be permitted .
pipe must be jacked without disrupting traffic .
methods of installing pipe other than by jacking may be used only with written approval from the engineer .
methods that may cause damage to the embankment or roadway area will not be approved .
damage to the pipe or installation area caused by jacking operations shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
the area around the outer surface of the pipe shall be thoroughly grouted .
the grout mixture shall consist of one part portland cement and three parts of fine aggregate by volume or it may be determined by prior documented experience with similar materials equipment and field conditions .
the grout shall be thoroughly mixed with the minimum quantity of water needed to obtain the proper consistency for the existing soil conditions .
bedding for concrete or clay conduit .
bedding shall be prepared in accordance with details as shown on the plans .
the bed shall consist of a layer of loose structure backfill at least num inches in thickness .
recesses shall be made to accommodate the bell of bellandspigot pipe .
adjustments to line and grade shall be made by scraping or filling under the body of the conduit .
wedging or blocking the bell will not be permitted .
placing conduit .
the conduit laying shall begin at the downstream end of the conduit line .
the lower segment of the conduit shall be in contact with the prepared bedding throughout its full length .
bell or groove ends of concrete or clay conduits and outside circumferential laps of metal or plastic conduits shall be placed facing upstream .
paved or partially lined conduit shall be placed so that the longitudinal center line of the paved segment coincides with the flow line .
elliptical shaped pipe and circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement shall have the top clearly marked with paint or with imprinted letters and with lifting eye holes in which laying pins can be used .
holes shall be finished smooth with grout or with plugs .
conduits shall be placed with the vertical axis within five degrees of a vertical plane through the longitudinal axis of the conduit .
num num joining conduit .
joint systems for siphons irrigation systems and storm drains shall be watertight .
a concrete or clay conduit .
conduit sections shall be joined in such manner that the ends are fully entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even .
at locations where rubber gaskets are specified in the contract for conduits used for storm drains and cross culverts rubber gaskets conforming to subsection num shall be used .
at locations where the type of joint is not otherwise specified in the contract for conduit used for storm drains and cross culverts joints shall be made with joint sealing compound .
primer shall be furnished when recommended by the manufacturer of the joint sealing compound .
primer shall conform to and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to both surfaces of the conduit sections being joined for the full circumference .
sealing compound shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when a specific type of sealing compound is desired it shall be as shown in the contract .
rubber gaskets conforming to subsection num shall be used for concrete pipe sanitary sewer joints .
resilient pressure ring material conforming to subsection num shall be used for clay pipe sewer joints .
b metal conduit .
corrugated metal pipe sections shall be placed and aligned to within  inch of the adjacent section and shall be firmly joined with either onepiece or twopiece coupling bands .
pipe with helical corrugations shall be joined with the corrugations matched across the joints and with all corrugations of the pipe completely engaged by the corrugations or dimples of the coupling band .
where existing corrugated metal pipe culverts are to be extended damaged ends shall be cut off or repaired in an approved manner .
all ends of pipes requiring extensions shall be cleaned within the area necessary for proper installation of connecting bands .
arch culverts shall be extended with pipe having a compatible arch shape .
when special joint treatment is called for on the plans to prevent infiltration or exfiltration the joints shall be made using a sealing compound conforming to subsection num with the connecting band .
c plastic conduit .
couplings shall be as recommended by the conduit manufacturer .
watertight joint systems for plastic pipe shall conform to subsection num .
elongation .
where required by the plans round metal and plastic conduit shall be preformed to an elliptical shape by elongating the vertical axis num percent .
backfilling .
after the conduit or section of conduit is placed it shall be inspected before any backfill is placed .
reinforced concrete pipe rcp shall be visually inspected in accordance with aashto lrfd bridge construction num num specifications section num .
conduit found to be damaged shall be replaced and conduit found to be out of alignment or unduly settled shall be taken up and relaid .
the trench shall then be backfilled with material in accordance with section num .
sanitary sewer lines when completed shall be tested for watertightness before any backfill is placed .
the installation shall not show infiltration or exfiltration in excess of num gallon per inch of internal pipe diameter per num feet of sewer line per hour when tested at num psi by hydraulic means .
testing of joints shall be performed by the contractor in accordance with approved methods .
should any section of the sewer line fail to meet the test requirements it shall be corrected at the contractors expense .
special care shall be taken when backfilling around conduit to bring the backfill materials up on both sides of the conduit evenly and simultaneously .
protection of conduits during construction shall be the contractors responsibility .
damage to the conduit due to contractors operations shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
trenches in existing streets except streets which are to be closed or abandoned shall be resurfaced as soon as practicable with the type and thickness of bases and pavement shown in the contract or as designated .
after culvert pipe is backfilled and earthwork over the pipe is complete to the top of the subgrade the pipe deflection shall be measured in the presence of the engineer .
the maximum allowable deflection shall be num percent .
deflection is a reduction in the inside diameter of the pipe measured in any direction .
measurement shall be made using a mandrel laser profile or other method approved by the engineer .
measurement shall be made num days or more following the pipe installation .
pipe having any deflections in excess of num percent at any location within the pipe shall be removed and reinstalled .
pipe that is permanently deformed or damaged in any way shall be replaced .
replaced pipe shall be retested num days or more after the installation in accordance with the method described above .
deflection testing of metal and plastic pipe .
after a metal or plastic pipe is backfilled and earthwork over the pipe is complete to the top of the subgrade the pipe deflection shall be measured in the presence of the engineer .
the maximum allowable deflection shall be num percent .
deflection is a reduction in the nominal diameter of the pipe measured in any direction .
measurement shall be made using a mandrel laser profile or other method approved by the engineer .
measurement shall be made num days or more following the pipe installation .
pipe having any deflections in excess of num percent at any location within the pipe shall be removed and reinstalled at the contractors expense .
pipe that is permanently deformed or damaged in any way shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
replaced pipe shall be retested num days or more after the installation in accordance with the method described above .
repair of damaged culvert .
coating on corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches and corrugated steel pipe nestable shall be repaired in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
damaged pipe shall not be repaired .
the engineer num num will determine when the pipe is either acceptable or unacceptable in accordance with the provisions of subsection num .
unacceptable pipe shall be removed and replaced .
method of measurement conduit used for culverts and storm drains of the different types and sizes and corrugated steel pipe nestable will not be measured but will be the net length of pipe called for on the plans except when field changes are ordered or when there are errors on the plans .
in case of exceptions the quantity to be measured shall be the actual net length of conduit measured along the bottom centerline .
extra length of conduit due to joint creep will not be measured and paid for .
corrugated steel pipe nestable used for encasement will be measured as complete circular pipe .
jacked pipe will be measured by the linear foot complete in place and accepted .
structure excavation structure backfill grout materials and grouting operation for jacked pipe will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
end sections will be measured by the number of units installed .
the size designation of metal pipe arch and metal pipe arch end section shall refer to the diameter of round pipe normally used to fabricate the pipe arch or the pipe portion of the end section .
relaid pipe will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
except as otherwise indicated on the plans or in the special provisions all joints elbows concrete collars connecting bands and other connecting devices will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit ___inch corrugated steel pipe linear foot ___inch corrugated steel pipe nestable linear foot ___inch steel end section each ___inch equiv .
corrugated steel pipe arch linear foot ___inch equiv .
arch steel end section each ___inch corrugated aluminum pipe linear foot ___inch aluminum end section each ___inch equiv .
corrugated aluminum pipe arch linear foot ___inch equiv .
arch aluminum end section each ___inch reinforced concrete pipe linear foot ___inch reinforced concrete end section each num num ___inch nonreinforced concrete pipe linear foot ___inch x ___inch reinforced concrete pipe elliptical linear foot ___inch x ___inch reinforced concrete end section elliptical each ___inch vitrified clay pipe linear foot ___inch cast iron pipe linear foot ___inch plastic pipe linear foot ___inch reinforced concrete pipe jacked linear foot ___foot x ___foot concrete box culvert precast linear foot structure excavation and structure backfill will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num except that any void in the structure excavation prism created by the removal of pipe or box culvert will be excluded from measurement and payment of structure excavation .
repair of damaged coatings will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the cost of the item .
num num section num manholes inlets and meter vaults description this work consists of the construction of manholes inlets and meter vaults in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials concrete for these structures shall meet the requirements of section num structural concrete .
other materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections clay or shale brick num concrete brick num concrete masonry blocks num frames grates covers and steps num grade ring num reinforcing steel num precast concrete units num construction requirements excavation .
excavation shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
manholes inlets and meter vaults .
a general .
concrete construction shall conform to the requirements of section num .
masonry shall conform to the requirements for the respective type .
when specified the outside face of structures shall be plastered with a  inch thick cementsand mortar coat .
unless otherwise provided exposed surfaces of concrete and masonry shall be cured as defined in subsection num .
pipe sections on the inside of manholes or inlets shall be treated as shown on the plans or as directed and shall project outside sufficiently for proper connection with next pipe section .
masonry shall fit neatly and tightly around the pipe .
b manholes .
wherever directed by the engineer pipes of the proper type and size shall be built into a manhole where future laterals are to be connected .
these pipes shall be sealed at their outer ends and an invert shall be built into each manhole for such lateral connections .
num num when a manhole is located in the pavement area it shall not be constructed to final grade until the pavement has been completed .
c inlets .
where inlets are placed in existing curbs or gutters the contractor shall carefully remove sections of present curb gutter or curb and gutter .
all damage to sections to remain in place shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
the top portion of inlets shall be constructed concurrently with the adjacent curb and gutter to insure proper alignment of grades unless otherwise permitted in writing .
d meter vaults .
meter vaults shall be of sufficient size to properly accommodate the size of the meter installed including regulatory devices or fittings required for the utility supplied .
provisions for grounding ventilation drainage or other safety precautions shall be constructed as required .
meter vaults may be castinplace or precast and shall conform to the rules and regulations for the utility service supplied in the vault .
e brick masonry .
all bricks shall be thoroughly wetted before being laid either by immersion or in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
special care shall be taken to make the face of the brick work smooth .
all joints on the interior surface of the manholes and appurtenances shall be carefully struck .
brick shall not be laid upon a concrete foundation until the concrete has set .
backfilling .
unless otherwise directed all excavations shall be backfilled immediately after the structures are built .
backfilling shall conform with section num and as shown on the plans .
resurfacing .
excavations in existing streets except streets which are to be closed or abandoned shall be resurfaced as soon as practicable with the type and thickness of bases and pavement shown on the plans or as designated .
cleaning .
the structures and all appurtenances shall be thoroughly cleaned before final acceptance of the work .
when the new facilities interfere with the existing flow of sewage the contractor shall provide satisfactory bypass facilities at the contractors expense .
method of measurement manholes and inlets will be measured by the complete unit including ring and cover or grating and frame .
manhole ring and cover used separately will be measured by the unit .
inlet grating and frame used separately will be measured by the unit .
manhole and inlet depth h will be measured as shown on the plans .
measured depth and pay depth of manholes and inlets shall conform to the following num num measured depth pay depth num to num feet num feet num to num feet num feet num to num feet num feet continued thus meter vaults will be measured by the complete unit including ring and cover .
structure excavation and structure backfill for manholes inlets and meter vaults will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
except as otherwise indicated on the plans or in the special provisions all connecting devices will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit meter vault each manhole ______ ____ each inlet type ______ _____foot each manhole ring and cover each ___ inlet grating and frame each num num section num subsurface drains description this work consists of constructing underdrains edge drains geocomposite drains and french drains in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections corrugated steel pipe num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe num drain tile num vitrified clay pipe num corrugated aluminum pipe num plastic pipe num gaskets num filter material num geotextiles num geocomposite drains num pipe for subsurface drains shall be any type of pipe material listed above .
when corrosion resistant pipe is specified on the plans the materials shall conform to the requirements of section num for the corrosion resistance number specified .
subsurface drain outlet pipe may be perforated or nonperforated and shall meet the requirements specified in subsections num num num or num .
construction requirements pipe underdrain and pipe edge drain .
the trench shall be excavated to the dimensions and grade shown on the plans .
sufficient geotextile drainage class num shall be placed along the bottom and sides of the trench as shown on the plans to provide the required overlap over the top of the filter material .
filter material of the class designated on the plans shall be placed in the bottom of the trench for its full width and length .
perforated pipe shall be placed with the perforations down and the pipe sections shall be joined securely with the appropriate coupling fittings or bands .
joining shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num except as noted above .
after the pipe installation has been inspected and approved the designated filter material shall be placed to a height of num inches above the top of pipe .
care shall be num num taken not to displace the pipe or the covering at open joints .
the remainder of the filter material shall then be placed to the required height the drainage geotextile folded over the top of the filter material and the remainder of the trench backfilled .
geocomposite drains .
the geocomposite drain for subsurface drainage behind a retaining wall shall be placed along the full length of the wall .
it shall be attached to the wall with an approved adhesive or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the trench for geocomposite underdrain and geocomposite edge drain for subsurface drainage at pavement edge and elsewhere as specified on the plans shall be excavated to the dimensions and grade shown on the plans .
the geocomposite drain material shall then be placed along the downhill side or the pavement side of the trench and secured to the trench side .
backfill shall be placed so as to avoid damage to the geocomposite drain material .
french drain .
the trench for french drain shall be excavated to the width and depth shown on the plans .
the trench shall be lined with geotextile drainage class num and filled with the designated filter material to the depth shown on the plans .
the drainage geotextile shall be folded over the top of the filter material .
any remaining unfilled upper portion of trench shall be backfilled with embankment material .
subsurface drain outlet .
the trench for subsurface drain outlet shall be excavated to the width and depth necessary to place the pipe on a drainable grade as shown on the plans or as directed .
pipe shall be laid in the trench with all ends joined securely with the appropriate couplings fittings or bands .
after inspection and approval of the pipe installation the trench shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with subsection num .
where the outlet pipe ends on a slope or ditch it shall be constructed with an erosion control pad and an animal guard .
the location shall be marked with a delineator post that conforms to section num .
the animal guard screen shall be held securely in place with a coupling or fastening band or by another approved method .
method of measurement pipe underdrain and pipe edge drain will be measured by the linear foot of pipe of the size specified placed and accepted .
french drain will be measured by the linear foot of trench excavated and filled with filter material and accepted .
geocomposite underdrain and geocomposite edge drain will be measured by the linear foot along the base of the geocomposite drain material for the full length installed and accepted .
geocomposite drain both with and without pipe will be measured by the square yard of geocomposite drain material placed on the vertical wall surface and accepted .
subsurface drain outlet will be measured by the linear foot of pipe placed and accepted from the end of a subsurface drain to the discharge end of the outlet pipe .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities of subsurface drains will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit ___inch perforated pipe underdrain linear foot french drain linear foot geocomposite underdrain linear foot geocomposite drain without pipe square yard geocomposite drain with pipe square yard geocomposite edge drain linear foot pipe edge drain linear foot subsurface drain outlet linear foot payment shall be full compensation for all work and materials required to complete the item including drainage geotextile drainage core securing devices adhesives sewn seams pipe filter material excavation and backfill .
payment for subsurface drain outlet shall include the erosion control pad the animal guard and the delineator post .
num num section num guardrail description this work consists of the construction of guardrail in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
the construction of the various types of guardrail shall include the assembly and erection of all component parts and materials complete at the locations shown on the plans or as directed .
the types of guardrail are designated as follows type num guardrail w beam type num guardrail thrie beam type num guardrail fshape concrete barrier use of type num precast concrete barrier is not permitted .
materials materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections w beam rail and thrie beam rail num guardrail hardware num guardrail posts num paint for field painting of guardrail shall conform to subsection num structural steel bridge paint .
concrete for precast or castinplace barrier shall conform to the requirements of section num .
reinforcing steel unless otherwise noted shall conform to the requirements of section num .
during production of slipformed barrier and subsequent to mix design approval the contractor may adjust the mix proportion requirements as follows the range for air content may be adjusted to be num percent to num percent the weights of coarse and fine aggregates may each be adjusted up to num percent .
these adjustments may be made at the contractors discretion and do not require approval of a revised mix design before use .
the contractor shall inform the engineer in writing of each adjustment of aggregate proportions before concrete with the adjusted mix design is placed .
concrete for bridge rail shall be macro fiberreinforced class d concrete and conform to the requirements of section num .
num num the contractor may furnish either wood or steel posts and wood or fhwa approved synthetic material blocks for guardrail as shown on the plans .
except as designated on the plans only one type of posts and blocks shall be furnished for the project .
components on which the spelter coating has been burned by welding or otherwise damaged shall be regalvanized recoated in accordance with aashto m num or painted with one full brush coat of zinc rich paint meeting military specification dodpnuma .
construction requirements post and rail elements .
a posts .
posts shall be set firm and aligned with a tolerance of plus or minus  inch from plumb grades and lines as staked .
all fittings and metal plates shall be placed securely in position to conform to designated dimensions and requirements .
posts shall be set by one of the following methods num driven in place .
num set in dug holes .
num set in concrete base .
num posts on bridges shall be as shown on the plans .
driving of posts shall be accomplished by methods and equipment that will leave the posts in their final position free from any distortion burring or any other damage .
excavated post holes shall have a firm bottom and be backfilled with acceptable material placed in layers and thoroughly compacted .
dissimilar metaltometal or aluminumtoconcrete post or rail installations shall have contact surfaces separated by an approved protective coating .
wood posts cut in the field shall have the cut surfaces protected with two coats of an approved preservative .
when the cut surface is above ground the treating solution to be used shall be the same type as was used in the original treatment .
b rail .
rail elements shall be erected in a manner resulting in a smooth continuous installation .
all bolts in the finished rail shall be drawn tight .
bolts shall be of sufficient length to extend beyond the nuts .
rail shall be shop bent for installations on horizontal curves having a radius of num feet or less .
c temporary end treatment .
in construction zones not closed to traffic installation of rail element shall closely follow the setting of posts to keep the number of posts without rail at a minimum .
when necessary to minimize potential hazards the engineer will specify the direction in which the rail num num installation is to advance and the number of posts installed ahead of rail installation .
at the end of the contractors work day the contractor shall treat the ends of installed guardrail as follows num if the end is at the location of a planned end section install the end section .
num if the end is not at the location of a planned end section the last rail section shall be installed with one end attached to the rail already in place and the free end resting on the ground .
the free end on the ground shall be restrained by tying the rail to the posts by ropes or cables .
guardrail shall not be left in this configuration more than num hours unless protected by an approved attenuating device .
concrete .
where paving is removed or damaged due to the contractors operations the contractor shall furnish an acceptable mix and shall repair the paving as required at the contractors expense .
in construction zones not closed to traffic the contractor shall treat the ends of installed concrete guardrail at the end of the work day as follows num if the end is at the location of a planned end section install the end section .
num if the end is not at the location of a planned end section install a temporary impact attenuator or provide treatment as shown in the contract .
a permanent concrete barrier .
permanent concrete barrier may be constructed by precast type num castinplace or slipform methods .
the trench for the base of the castinplace reinforced barrier end anchorages shall be excavated to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
the bottom of the trench shall be compacted to the density specified in subsection numa .
the compacted trench bottom shall be watered and approved before placing concrete .
the num inch minimum deep keyway cut or formed in the pavement surface for the barrier base shall be cleaned and approved before placing concrete .
concrete finish for all precast type num barriers used as permanent installations and all castinplace barriers shall be class num in accordance with subsection num .
slipform barriers shall not receive additional finishing unless permitted by the engineer .
exposed vertical surfaces of slipformed barrier shall receive a vertical broom finish .
when hand finishing is allowed it shall be performed in conformance with subsection numa .
the engineer may determine that the exposed surfaces of the guardrail shall be tested with a num foot straightedge laid along the exposed surface in a longitudinal direction .
the contractor shall furnish an approved num foot straightedge and provide an operator to aid the engineer in testing the exposed surfaces .
all surface tolerances shall be measured in a longitudinal direction .
deviation of any exposed surface in excess of the tolerance specified shall be corrected at the contractors expense .
num num longitudinal surface tolerances for the top of the barrier and the sides of the barrier from the top to a line num inches below the top of the barrier are num on tangent roadway alignments and curves with radius greater than num feet num inch from the edge of the straightedge .
num on sharp vertical curves and horizontal curves with radius of num feet or less num inch from the edge of the straightedge with allowance made for curve deflection .
longitudinal surface tolerances for the remaining surfaces of the barrier are num on tangent roadway alignments and curves with radius greater than num feet num inch from the edge of the straightedge .
num on sharp vertical curves and horizontal curves with radius of num feet or less num inch from the edge of the straightedge with allowance made for curve deflection .
the contractor will be allowed a maximum of three days of slipform production if barrier being placed does not meet the specified tolerances .
after the third day of placement of out of tolerance slipform barrier the contractor shall stop production .
the contractor shall submit a corrective action plan to the engineer for review .
the plan shall address corrective actions to the equipment and materials and a time frame for completion of the corrective actions .
the plan shall address methods and materials to be used to correct out of tolerance barrier .
patching will not be allowed to correct out of tolerance barrier .
further placement of barrier will not be allowed until all previously placed barrier which failed to meet tolerances is corrected or removed .
each occurrence of out of tolerance slipform barrier shall be subject to the same corrective cycle .
b precast type num concrete barrier .
precast type num concrete barrier conforming to standard plan mnum may be formed upside down to minimize air pockets and improve surface finish .
concrete finish for precast barriers shall be class num in accordance with subsection num .
each segment of the precast barrier shall not have spalls corner breaks and bottom spalls totaling more than num square feet of surface area which includes the base .
all required hand finishing shall be performed in conformance with subsection numa .
connecting loops shall not be frayed stretched or deformed .
gaps between units shall not exceed the dimensions shown in the plans .
precast barrier units shall not be lifted or stressed in any way before they have developed the strength of the concrete specified .
units shall be supported at designated pickup points .
connecting loops shall not be used as pickup points .
care shall be taken during fabrication storage handling and transporting to prevent cracking twisting or other damage .
minor chips on edges may be patched with the approval of the engineer .
breakage and chipping may be cause for rejection .
units damaged in such a way as to impair their appearance or suitability in the opinion of the engineer shall be replaced at the contractors num num expense .
units rejected by the engineer shall be marked on both sides with an orange painted r approximately num inches high and num inches wide .
the base for placing precast barrier shall be prepared to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
when it becomes necessary to connect castinplace barrier sections to precast barrier installations during construction the castinplace sections shall be constructed complete with connecting hardware in accordance with standard plan mnum to join the castinplace sections to the abutting precast sections .
a ten foot transition section shall be provided when attaching barriers of differing shapes .
method of measurement guardrail will be measured by the linear foot along the centerline of the rail from end to end of completed and accepted rail as shown on the plans excluding end anchorages median terminals and transitions .
end anchorages median terminals and transitions will be measured by the actual number placed and accepted .
each end anchorage median terminal or transition shall include all concrete reinforcing steel anchor bolts cable rods turnbuckles backing rail plates bolts nuts washers and all other work and material necessary to complete the item .
posts will be included in the quantities of guardrail of the specified type and not measured separately .
additional posts required for guardrail adjacent to bridges and obstructions as shown on the plans will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price for the type specified .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit guardrail type___ linear foot end anchorage type___ each guardrail type___ ____post spacing linear foot median terminal each end anchorage _____ each transition type _____ each all work and materials necessary and incidental to the temporary treatment of guardrail ends will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num partial payments will not be made for partially completed guardrail runs that do not conform to the end treatments specified in subsections numc or num .
polyolefin fiber reinforcement will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num fences description this work consists of the construction of fence and gates and removal of temporary plastic fence in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections woven wire num barbed wire num chain link fabric num fence posts num snow fence num timber for wood sound barrier num reinforcing steel shall conform to section num .
concrete shall conform to section num .
foundation concrete for fence posts braces anchors and gates shall be class b .
concrete with lightweight aggregates conforming to astm c num will be permitted .
field mixed concrete consisting of a minimum of one part cement to six parts of aggregate by volume may be used in lieu of class b if approved .
pre packaged concrete may be used if approved .
fence plastic shall be orange colored material at least num feet in height .
construction requirements the contractor shall perform such clearing and grubbing as may be necessary to construct the fence to the required grade and alignment .
right of way fence shall be constructed approximately num inches inside the boundary of the highway right of way shown on the plans or as staked .
anchorages footings or fence appurtenances shall not extend beyond the limits of the highway right of way without the written consent of the abutting property owner .
at locations where breaks in a run of fencing are required at intersections with existing fences or at ditch canal or channel crossings appropriate adjustments in fence alignment and post spacing shall be made to satisfy the requirements for the type of closure indicated or the conditions encountered .
num num when the plans require that posts braces or anchors be embedded in concrete they shall be securely braced to hold the posts in proper position until such time as the concrete has set sufficiently to hold the posts .
unless otherwise permitted materials shall not be installed on posts or stress placed on guys and bracing set in concrete until the concrete has set sufficiently to withstand the stress .
the tops of all posts shall be set to the required grade and alignment .
cutting of the tops or bottoms of treated timber posts will be allowed only with the approval of the engineer .
posts cut in the field shall have the cut surfaces protected with two coats of an approved wood preservative .
wire or fencing of the size and type required shall be firmly attached to the posts and braces in the manner indicated .
all wire shall be stretched taut and be installed to the required spacing .
wood sound barrier fence shall be constructed according to the details shown on the plans .
all fence boards shall be tightly butted to minimize cracks .
fence plastic shall be placed as shown on the plans or as directed to define the limits of the work area beyond which no access is allowed to the surrounding wetlands or vegetation to be protected .
method of measurement fence will be measured by the linear foot .
measurement will be along the base of the fence from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence including length of barbed wire gates but excluding the length of driveway gates and walk gates .
driveway gates and walk gates will be measured as complete units of the size and type specified .
gates shall be the same type and height as the adjacent fence unless otherwise designated .
end posts corner posts and line brace posts required for chain link fence barbed wire and combination wire fence will be measured by the actual number used .
end posts corner posts and line brace posts for snow fence or barrier fence will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
line posts required for reset fence will be measured by the actual number used .
line posts required for new fence will not be measured separately but shall be included in the contract unit price for new fence .
end posts special corner posts special and line brace posts special required for fence deer will be measured by the actual number used .
fence wood sound barrier will be measured by the linear foot .
fence plastic will be measured by the linear foot .
posts will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num measurement will be along the base of the fence from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence and shall include all wood hardware concrete reinforcing steel excavation and backfill and all other incidentals to the erection of the fence .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of fence will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit fence ____ _____inch linear foot ____foot gate ____ each line post each end post each corner and line brace post each end post chain link each corner and line brace post chain link each end post special each corner and line brace post special each deer gate each fence wood sound barrier _____inch linear foot fence plastic linear foot payment for fence plastic shall be full compensation for furnishing erecting maintaining removing and disposing of all materials required .
fence plastic shall remain the property of the contractor .
num num section num sidewalks and bikeways description this work consists of the construction of bituminous or concrete sidewalks bikeways and curb ramps in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections joint fillers num bed course material num concrete for sidewalks bikeways and curb ramps shall be class b and meet the requirements of section num .
bituminous material for sidewalks bikeways and curb ramps shall meet the requirements of section num .
concrete and bituminous mixes will be subject to inspection and tests as required to assure compliance with quality requirements .
construction requirements concrete sidewalks and bikeways.excavation .
excavation shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of the forms .
the foundation shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown on the plans or as staked .
when the engineer determines that material is uncompactable the material shall be removed and replaced in accordance with subsection num. b forms .
forms shall be of wood metal or other suitable material and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete .
all forms shall be straight free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing .
bracing and staking of forms shall be such that the forms remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal .
a satisfactory slip form method may be used .
c placing concrete .
the foundation shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to the placing of the concrete .
the proportioning mixing and placing of the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements for the class of concrete specified .
d finishing .
the surface shall be floated with a wooden or magnesium float and given a transverse broom finish .
plastering of the surface will not be permitted .
all required hand finishing shall be performed in conformance with num num subsection numa .
all outside edges of the slab and all joints shall be edged with a  inch radius edging tool .
e joints .
expansion joints at intervals of not more than num feet shall be filled with  inch thick full depth preformed expansion joint filler .
the sidewalk or bikeway shall be divided into sections by dummy joints formed by a jointing tool or other acceptable means as directed .
these dummy joints shall extend into the concrete for at least  of the depth and shall be approximately  inch wide .
dummy joints shall be spaced at intervals approximately equal to the width of the sidewalk or bikeway .
construction joints shall be formed around all appurtenances such as manholes utility poles etc .
extending into and through the sidewalk .
preformed expansion joint filler  inch thick shall be installed in these joints .
expansion joint filler  inch thick or the thickness indicated shall be installed between new concrete and any fixed structure such as a building or bridge .
this expansion joint material shall extend for the full depth of the contact surface .
f curing .
immediately upon completion of the finishing sidewalks and bikeways shall be moistened and kept moist for three days or they shall be cured by the use of membrane forming curing compound .
the method and details of curing shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
during the curing period all traffic both pedestrian and vehicular shall be excluded .
vehicular traffic shall be excluded for such additional time as the engineer may direct .
bituminous sidewalks and bikeways .
a excavation and forms .
excavation and forms shall meet the requirements of subsection num a and b. b bed course .
bed course material shall be placed in layers not exceeding num inches in depth and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted .
c placing bituminous material .
bituminous sidewalk and bikeway material shall be placed on the compacted bed course in one or more courses as indicated so as to give the required depth when rolled .
when practicable spreading finishing and compaction shall be accomplished by equipment conforming to the requirements of section num .
when the engineer determines such equipment is not practicable bituminous material may be spread by small or special pavers by spreader boxes or by blade graders and may be compacted by small self propelled rollers or vibratory compactors acceptable to the engineer .
in areas inaccessible to the roller hand or mechanical tamping will be permitted .
bituminous material shall be uniformly compacted .
the contractor shall state at the preconstruction conference what type of paving equipment will be used .
num num method of measurement concrete sidewalks bikeways and curb ramps will be measured by the square yard of finished surface .
bituminous sidewalks bikeways and curb ramps will be measured by the ton of bituminous mixture placed .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit concrete sidewalk square yard bituminous sidewalk ton concrete curb ramp square yard bituminous curb ramp ton concrete bikeway square yard bituminous bikeway ton bed course material will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
all work necessary and incidental to the construction of sidewalks bikeways and curb ramps will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num curb and gutter description this work consists of the construction of curb gutter or combination curb and gutter in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
the types of curb are designated as follows type num castinplace concrete curb type num dowelled concrete curb type num sloping curb the section will be as shown on the plans .
materials except as provided below the materials used shall meet the requirements of the following subsections bed course material num joint filler num reinforcing steel num concrete for curb shall be class b and meet the requirements of section num .
bituminous curb shall be constructed of the same gradation of aggregate and the same grade of bituminous material as the top layer or top course of bituminous pavement used on the project .
concrete and bituminous mixes will be subject to inspection and tests at the plants for compliance with quality requirements .
construction requirements castinplace concrete curb .
all required hand finishing shall be performed in conformance with subsection numa .
a excavation .
excavation and bedding shall conform to the requirements of subsection num a. b forms .
forms shall be of wood or metal straight free from warp and of such construction that there will be no interference to the inspection of grade or alignment .
all forms shall extend for the entire depth of the curb and shall be braced and secured sufficiently so that no deflection from alignment or grade will occur during the placing of the concrete .
num num c mixing and placing .
concrete shall be proportioned mixed and placed in accordance with the requirements for the class of concrete specified .
compaction of concrete curb gutters or combination curb and gutter placed in forms shall have thorough consolidation which shall be achieved by tamping and spading vibrating or other acceptable methods .
forms shall be left in place until the concrete has set sufficiently so that they can be removed without injury to the curb .
upon removal of the forms the exposed curb face shall be immediately finished to a uniform surface .
for the purpose of matching adjacent concrete finishes or for other reasons the engineer shall approve methods of finishing .
plastering will not be permitted .
d sections .
curb shall be constructed in sections having a uniform length of num feet unless otherwise ordered .
sections shall be separated by open joints  inch wide except at expansion joints .
e expansion joints .
expansion joints shall be formed at the intervals shown on the plans using a  inch preformed expansion joint filler .
when the curb is constructed adjacent to or on concrete pavement expansion joints shall be located opposite the expansion joints in the pavement .
expansion joints shall be installed between concrete curb and any fixed structure or bridge .
expansion joint material shall extend the full depth of contact surface .
f curing .
immediately upon completion of the finishing the curb shall be moistened and kept moist for three days or the curb shall be cured by the use of membrane forming curing compound .
the method and details of curing shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
g backfilling .
after the concrete has set sufficiently the spaces in back of the curb shall be backfilled to the required elevation with suitable material which shall be thoroughly tamped .
h curb machine .
with the approval of the engineer the curb may be constructed by the use of a curb forming machine .
i surface tolerance .
the engineer may determine that the exposed surfaces of the concrete curb gutters or combination curb and gutter shall be tested with a num foot straightedge laid along the exposed surface in a longitudinal direction .
the contractor shall furnish an approved num foot straightedge and provide an operator to aid the engineer in testing the exposed surfaces .
all surfaces shall be measured in a longitudinal direction .
deviation of any exposed surface in excess of that specified shall be corrected at the contractors expense .
longitudinal surface tolerances for the top and face are num on tangent roadway alignments and curves with radius greater than num feet num inch from the edge of the straightedge .
num num num on sharp vertical curves and horizontal curves with radius of num feet or less num inch from the edge of the straight edge with allowance made for curve deflection .
unused bituminous curb .
a preparation .
bituminous curb shall be placed on a clean dry surface .
immediately prior to placing of the bituminous mixture the surface shall receive a tack coat of bituminous material of the type and grade approved by the engineer .
the rate of application of the tack coat material shall be num to num gallons per square yard of surface .
in the application of this tack coat the contractor shall prevent the spread of this tack coat to areas outside of the area to be occupied by the curb .
b placing .
bituminous curb shall be constructed by use of a selfpropelled curb machine or a paver with curb attachments .
the automatic curb machine shall meet the following requirements and shall be approved prior to its use num the weight of the machine shall be such that compaction is obtained without the machine riding above the bed on which curb is constructed .
num the machine shall form curb that is uniform in texture shape and density .
num the engineer may permit the construction of curb by other means when short sections or sections with short radii are required or for such other reasons as warranted .
the resulting curb shall conform in all respects to the curb produced by the use of the machine .
upon completion of placement of bituminous curb a fog coat of emulsified asphalt shall be placed on the exposed surfaces of the curb at the rate of approximately num gallon per square yard .
c painting and sealing .
when sealing or painting is required it shall be performed only on a curb which is clean and dry and which has reached the ambient temperature .
method of measurement curb will be measured by linear foot along the front face of the section at the finished grade elevation .
gutter will be measured along centerline of the gutter .
curb and gutter will be measured along the face of the curb .
deduction in length will be made for drainage structures such as catch basins drop inlets etc .
installed in the curb gutter or curb and gutter .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule including dowels and expansion joint material .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit curb type__ section____ linear foot gutter type__ ____foot linear foot curb and gutter type__ section____ linear foot bed course material will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
fog coat and tack coat for curb type num will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num median cover material description this work consists of the construction of median cover over the median area or over other areas designated in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials bituminous median cover material shall conform to the requirements of section num and as shown on the plans .
concrete shall be class b and shall conform to section num .
coloring agent if required shall be as shown on the plans or specified .
aggregate for median cover shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
plastic sheeting shall be black polyethylene with a minimum thickness of num mils or approved equal .
herbicides shall conform to the requirements of section num .
construction requirements median cover operations shall not be started until the underlying surface has been compacted smoothed and if required treated with herbicides .
other requirements are as follows a bituminous median cover material .
bituminous median cover material shall be placed in conformance with the requirements of subsection numc .
b concrete .
construction requirements shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the surface finish or pattern shall be as shown on the plans or in accordance with the recommendations of the supplier of the median cover material .
c stone .
areas to receive stone median cover shall be treated if required with an approved herbicide treatment in accordance with section num or as directed .
immediately after the placement of the herbicides the plastic sheeting and stones shall be placed in accordance with details shown on the plans or as specified .
method of measurement bituminous median cover material will be measured by the number of tons of bituminous material placed and accepted .
concrete median cover material will be measured by the square foot of surface placed and accepted .
num num stone median cover material will be measured by the number of tons of aggregate placed and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit median cover material bituminous ton median cover material concrete square foot median cover material patterned concrete square foot median cover material stone ton herbicide treatment will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
subgrade compaction and plastic sheeting will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num cattle guards description this work consists of the construction of cattle guards in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and details shown on the plans or established .
materials concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
structural steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
timber shall conform to the requirements of section num .
fencing items shall conform to the requirements of section num .
construction requirements cattle guards shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the plans .
all work shall be done in accordance with the applicable construction methods contained in these specifications .
method of measurement cattle guards will be measured by the number of units of the various sizes installed and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of cattle guards of the various sizes will be paid for at the contract unit price each when included in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit _____cattle guard each num num section num delineators and reflectors description this work consists of the installation and furnishing of delineators and reflectors in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and details shown on the plans or established .
materials materials for the various types of delineators and reflectors shall be as follows a delineators .
num .
steel posts .
details for each type of delineator are shown on the plans .
posts shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans and reflectors shall conform to the requirements in subsections num and num .
num .
flexible posts .
flexible posts shall be manufactured from an impact resistant flexible material and shall conform to the following requirements a. workmanship .
the posts shall exhibit good workmanship and shall be free of burrs discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects which affect appearance or serviceability .
b .
base anchoring .
the posts shall be designed to facilitate a permanent installation that resists overturning twisting and displacement from wind and impact forces .
it shall have an anchoring depth of num to num inches .
actual depth shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
if soil conditions prohibit anchoring to a depth of num inches installation shall be in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
the posts or belowground anchors shall be capable of being driven into an earth shoulder or roadside with or without a pilot hole .
installation shall be accomplished with typical maintenance equipment .
c. reflective elements .
posts shall be shaped to accommodate the installation of reflective elements .
reflective elements shall be num inches square for type i num inches by num inches for type ii and num inches by num inches for type iii hazard marker delineators .
reflective material shall be type iv reflective sheeting meeting the requirements of subsection num .
the top of the reflective element shall be mounted no more than num inches from the top of the post with the reflective element facing in the direction of the oncoming traffic .
the reflective element shall be mounted in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to prevent loss of the reflective element during the life of the post .
num num the reflective element shall be protected from scratches abrasions and other physical damage during shipping and driving by an easily removable masking sheet .
d. marking .
the tops of the posts on the side away from traffic shall be datestamped showing the month and year of fabrication .
the numerals shall be at least  inch in height and shall be either die stamped or legibly stamped with permanent ink .
in addition each post shall be marked with a black horizontal stripe to denote an num inch embedment depth .
e. dimensions .
num width .
the post shall have a minimum width of num inches and a maximum width of num inches facing traffic .
num length .
the post shall be of such length to provide a height of num inches above the edge of the pavement and to provide the required anchoring depth .
f. physical properties and performance requirements .
flexible posts shall conform to the following physical properties and performance requirements .
num heat resistance the post shall be conditioned a minimum of two hours in an oven at num f num f. the conditioned post shall be capable of straightening itself within five minutes when bent num degrees at the midpoint for each of four bends .
the conditioning temperature shall be maintained while the test on each post is completed .
num cold resistance the post shall be conditioned a minimum of two hours at num f num f in an environmentally controlled test chamber .
testing shall be performed in the environmental chamber .
i the post shall not be adversely affected when a person standing approximately at the center of the post bends the free half of the post to a num degree angle with the remaining section being stood upon .
the post shall return to its original shape within num seconds for each of four separate bends .
ii a steel ball weighing num pounds shall be dropped a distance of num feet through a virtually frictionless vertical guide to impact the surface of the post .
the surface of the post being struck by the steel ball shall be in a horizontal position with the post supported and held in position at both ends .
the post shall be subjected to five impact tests concentrated near the middle of the post .
fracturing cracking or splitting of the post shall constitute failure .
num colorfastness post shall be exposed for num hours in a carbon num num arc type weatherometer astm gnum method num .
the post shall show no signs of delamination distress or discoloration and the reflective sheeting shall not be removable from the post without damage .
num impact resistance the post shall be manufactured from an impact resistant material and be so designed that an installed post is capable of self erecting and remaining serviceable after being subjected to a series of direct impacts by a typical passenger sedan at temperatures of num f or above .
the posts to be tested shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
the posts shall be furnished complete with attached reflectors proposed for use .
posts shall be capable of withstanding a series of ten impacts head on num degrees into traffic face of the post at a speed of num mph .
posts shall also be capable of withstanding a series of five impacts at an angle of num degrees to the traffic face of the post at speeds of num mph .
the impacting vehicle shall suffer little or no damage during the impact test series .
after each impact the post shall i remain intact and securely anchored .
ii return to its original vertical orientation within an angle of num degrees from vertical .
iii show minimal signs of distress cracking loss of rigidity .
iv retain a minimum of num percent of its original amount of reflective sheeting .
num each post prior to and after installation shall be visibly free of bends or twists .
num the posts shall have a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per square inch as determined in accordance with astm d num .
num the color of the posts shall be interstate green in accordance with federal standard no .
numb color number num unless otherwise specified .
g. sampling and acceptance .
prior to shipment of the posts the manufacturer shall submit certified test reports and test data developed by an approved testing laboratory which attests to the fact that their marker post complies in all respects with requirements covered in the specifications .
num .
reflector strip .
reflector strip shall be numm scotchlite series num. b median barrier reflector .
details for the median barrier reflector are shown on the plans .
reflectivity shall conform to the requirements in subsection num .
num num construction requirements spacing location color of reflectors and placement of delineator posts shall be as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall install reflector strips in conformance with manufacturers recommendations .
the length of each reflector strip shall be num inches unless otherwise approved .
the contractor shall adjust the spacing between reflector strips as recommended by the manufacturer to fit the location called for in the contract .
cutting of the reflector strips will not be permitted .
method of measurement delineators and reflectors for median barrier will be measured by the actual number of the various types installed and accepted .
reflector strips will be measured by the actual number that are installed and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the pay items listed below that are included in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit delineator type______ each delineator flexible type___ each reflector median barrier each reflector strip __ inch each concrete for anchor embedment will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
surface preparation brackets fasteners and adhesive for reflector strips will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num lighting description this work consists of furnishing and installing foundations light standards luminaires lamps conduit cable wiring and incidental materials for highway lighting in accordance with these specifications and in conformance with the details lines grades and locations shown on the plans or established .
materials highway lighting materials shall conform to section num and shall be compatible with the requirements of the local electrical utility company .
a foundation .
concrete foundation pads and light standard foundations shall be precast concrete or castinplace concrete .
a complete foundation includes the concrete reinforcing steel ground rods connector bolts and anchor bolts .
connector bolts and anchor bolts shall accommodate the anchorage of the light pole from its base flange to the transformer base and from the transformer base to the light standard foundation .
b light standard .
a complete light standard includes the metal light pole mast arm or arms base or transformer base approved breakaway device optional inuse receptacles optional grounding system and all hardware .
when a transformer base is not used the pole shall have a handhole .
pole and mast arm or arms shall be the type and size shown on the plans .
c conduit .
conduit includes all elbows and fittings required to install complete runs .
d electrical warning tape .
electrical warning tape shall consist of pre manufactured nonadhesive polyethylene material that is unaffected by acids alkalis and other soil components .
the color of the tape shall be red and it shall be at a minimum num mils thick and num inches wide .
its tensile strength shall be num psi lengthwise .
the electrical tape shall include the following identification printed in black letters continuously along the length of the tape caution buried electric line below .
the identification note and color of tape shall conform to the requirements of the america public works association apwa uniform color codes red electrical power lines cables conduit and lighting cables .
e luminaire .
a complete luminaire includes the housing lens light emitting diode led luminaire luminaire housing driver or power generator slip fitting clamp or approved manufacturer mounting all necessary internal num num wiring and photoelectric control .
luminaires shall operate at either num vac num hz or num vac num hz .
luminaires shall meet electrical utility company requirements .
f lighting control center .
a complete lighting control center includes the load center grounding system contactors relays meter housing maintenance receptacle photoelectric control nema num enclosure and all related components and connections to the power supply .
g secondary service pedestal .
a complete pedestal includes the nema num enclosure and all related components and connections to the power supply .
h wiring .
complete wiring includes control wiring luminaire wiring main circuit wiring ground wiring service entrance wiring and all other wiring necessary for a complete installation i materials list .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the engineer three copies of a list of all materials and equipment to be incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall include the following items on the list num light standard foundations .
num foundation pads .
num light standard type steel or aluminum .
num luminaire manufacturers product information including data in illuminating engineering society of north america iesna format iesna photometric distribution type for vertical and lateral distribution example bnumunumgnum type iii and a photograph or line drawing .
num luminaire mounting hardware .
num luminaire lumen range .
num led driver or power supply .
num lighting control centers and photoelectric control devices .
num secondary service pedestals .
num all other items required for a complete installation .
the engineer will return lists that are incomplete or that include unacceptable materials to the contractor for correction and resubmission .
the contractor shall not order materials or equipment until the engineer and the party or agency responsible for maintenance have reviewed and approved the materials and equipment list .
the engineers approval of the list shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the proper functioning of the completed installation .
num num j led luminaire warranty .
the contractor shall ensure that the led roadway luminaire has a manufacturers minimum warranty of num years for all parts materials and shipping required to repair or replace the luminaire .
the contractor shall provide the manufacturers warranty to the engineer prior to installing the luminaire .
the warranty shall cover all failures including num failure in luminaire housing wiring connections drivers and photoelectric control devices .
num more than num percent decrease in lumen output num significant change in color the warranty shall begin upon the date the contractor receives the luminaire .
the bill of lading shall be provided to the engineer prior to final payment of the lighting .
k technical support .
during the manufacturers warranty period technical support shall be available from the manufacturer via telephone within num hours of the time the call is made from the contractor and this support shall be made available from factory certified personnel or factory certified installers at no additional charge to the department .
construction requirements general .
all work shall conform to these specifications and the national electrical code and shall comply with applicable regulations as specified in subsection num .
each system shall be installed as shown on the plans or as designated .
the contractor shall furnish and install all incidentals necessary to provide a complete working unit or system .
concrete foundation pads and light standard foundations .
foundations shall be installed as shown on the plans complete with grounding .
the contractor shall test and report soil conditions to the engineer as necessary to ensure proper installation of foundations .
foundations shall be installed at the final grade as shown on the plans .
all anchor bolts shall be positioned by means of steel templates .
the center of the template shall coincide with the center of the base .
conduits shall be properly positioned and anchored before the concrete is placed .
all foundations shall have ground rods conforming to the national electrical code .
all foundations on structures shall be grounded to the structure steel by a method that is in accordance with the national electric code and which is approved by the engineer .
num num light standards .
poles shall be set plumb on the light standard foundation using noncorrosive metal shims .
defects and scratches on galvanized poles shall be given two coats of acceptable zincrich paint as directed .
defects and scratches on painted poles shall be primed and painted .
luminaires and lamps .
roadway luminaires shall be mounted on the mast arm by a slipfitter clamp or other approved device .
luminaires shall be adjusted vertically and horizontally to provide the required orientation and maximum light distribution on the roadway and to meet illuminating engineering society of north america iesna tmnum uplight rating of unum .
each luminaire shall be controlled a photoelectric control in a centralized control cabinet .
for modified systems individual photoelectric control may be used .
the photoelectric control shall be positioned northward to minimize sun interference .
after their installation and prior to their acceptance refractors and lenses shall be cleaned to provide maximum lumen output .
luminaires of the specified type and lumen output shall be installed as shown on the plans .
the type and lumen output shall be marked on each luminaire or pole in accordance with american national standards institute ansi specifications .
ansi approved tags shall be provided and installed by the contractor .
wall type luminaires for use under overpass structures shall be mounted as shown on the plans .
all wall type luminaires shall include side shielding to prevent glare in the motorists view .
the beam angle setting shall be adjusted to meet the illumination requirements .
conduit .
the electrical conduit system shall be installed in accordance with cdots a policy on the accommodation of utilities on colorado highways rightsofway and the following plastic conduit shall be in accordance with subsection num in the conduit system the locations of conduit pull boxes splice boxes and expansion joints shown on the plans are approximate .
actual locations shall be established during construction .
the conduit system shall be located to avoid interference with known present or known future construction installations .
all underground conduit runs and conduit risers on poles shall be installed as needed even though they may not be shown on the plans .
all conduit installed under the roadway shall be at least num inch inside diameter unless otherwise designated on the plans .
the contractor may use larger conduit than specified .
if larger conduit is used it shall be for the entire run from outlet to outlet .
reducer couplings shall not be used .
existing underground conduit to be incorporated into a new system shall be cleaned with a mandrel or cylindrical wire brush and blown out with compressed air .
num num where new conductors are to be added to existing conductors in a conduit all conductors shall be removed and the conduit cleaned as described above .
all conductors shall be pulled into the conduit as a unit .
conduit terminating in standards or pedestals shall extend approximately num inches vertically above the foundations and shall slope toward the handhole opening .
conduit entering pull boxes shall terminate num inches inside the box wall and num to num inches above the bottom and shall slope toward the top of the box to facilitate pulling of conductors .
conduit entering through the bottom of a pull box shall be located near the end walls to leave the major portion of the box clear .
at all outlets conduits shall enter from the direction of the run .
the ends of all conduits whether shop or field cut shall be reamed to remove burrs and rough edges .
cuts shall be made square and true so that the ends will butt or come together for their full circumference .
slip joints or running threads shall not be used for coupling conduit .
when a standard coupling can not be used for coupling metal type conduit an approved threaded union coupling shall be used .
all threads on ferrous metal conduit not previously treated with a corrosion preventative shall be painted with rust preventive paint before couplings are connected .
all couplings for metal type conduit shall be tightened providing a continuous electrical connection throughout the entire length of the conduit run .
areas where the coating on ferrous metal conduit has been damaged shall be painted with rust preventive paint .
nonmetallic conduit shall be cut with a hacksaw or other approved tool .
non metallic conduit connections shall be the solventweld type .
all metal conduit ends shall be threaded and capped until wiring is started .
when caps are removed the threaded ends shall be provided with conduit bushings .
non metallic conduit ends shall be capped until wiring is started .
conduit connections at junction or splice boxes shall be tightly secured and waterproofed .
all conduit ends shall be sealed with duct seal after installation of wiring .
the duct seal shall be rated for rated for outdoor use .
when specified conduit shall be installed under existing pavement by jacking or drilling operations .
where plans show that existing pavement is to be removed jacking the conduit is not required .
jacking or drilling pits shall be kept a minimum of num feet clear of the edge of pavement .
water shall not be used as an aid in the jacking or drilling operations .
when trenching is specified to place conduit under existing pavement that is not to be removed the trench width shall be num inches or less .
trenches shall be filled to num inches below the existing grade with structure backfill flowfill or another material if directed .
the remaining num inches shall be filled to existing grade with hot mix asphalt within one calendar day after the roadway is trenched .
trenching shall be backfilled and compacted as follows backfill shall be deposited in uniform layers .
the thickness of each layer shall be num inches or less num num thick prior to compaction .
the space under the conduit shall be completely filled .
the remainder of the trench and excavation shall be backfilled to the finished grade .
the backfill material shall be compacted to the density of at least num percent of maximum dry density .
the maximum dry density and optimum moisture content omc for anum anum .
anum and anum materials will determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
the maximum dry density and omc for all other materials will determined in accordance with aashto t num as modified by cp num .
materials shall be compacted at numpercent of optimum moisture content omc .
materials having greater than num percent passing the num m no .
num sieve shall be compacted at num to num percent above omc .
each layer shall be mechanically compacted by tamping with power tools approved by the engineer .
compaction methods or equipment that damage the conduit shall not be used .
red electrical warning tape shall be installed between num inches and num inches below finished grade for all underground conduit runs .
underground conduit shall be buried a minimum of num feet below finished grade .
there shall be no sag between boxes .
conduit under roadways shall be buried at least num inches below finished grade .
rigid metallic conduits on bridges shall have an expansion fitting at every expansion joint of the bridge .
expansion joint fittings shall be precisely aligned with the conduit run to ensure proper expansion and deflection and to prevent binding .
for vertical conduit runs the fitting shall be installed close to the top of the structure to prevent water running across the fitting and entering the conduit .
the fittings deflection sleeve coupling and pressure bushing at the barrel of the expansion body shall be installed flush with the structure ends only the connecting expansion nipple shall cross the opening between structures .
the fitting shall be supported by points on the conduit immediately adjacent to the fitting .
the fitting shall have an external bonding jumper .
pull or splice boxes shall be installed every num feet or less .
boxes shall be placed at conduit ends at all wiring splices at all conduit angle points and at all other locations shown on the plans .
the contractor may install additional pull or splice boxes to facilitate the work .
where practical pull and splice boxes near curbs shall be placed adjacent to the back of the curb .
pull boxes adjacent to light standards shall be placed along the side of foundations as shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown on the plans pull and splice boxes shall be installed so that the covers are level with curb or sidewalk grade .
covers shall be level with the surrounding ground when no grade is established .
where a conduit stubout is called for on the plans a sweeping elbow shall be installed in the direction indicated .
the stub out shall be terminated in a box .
all conduit stub outs shall be capped .
num num wiring .
unless otherwise authorized the multiple system of electrical distribution shall be used .
conductors of the size and material required whether single or in cable shall be installed for control wiring luminaire wiring main circuit wiring ground wiring service entrance wiring and all other wiring necessary for a complete installation .
conductors shall be sized to prevent a voltage drop of more than num percent per feeder run .
all conductors shall be installed in conduit .
when num volt luminaires are installed num vac shall be brought to the base of each light standard and individual luminaires shall be connected to one leg or the other in a manner that minimizes overall voltage drop .
a complete grounding system shall be installed for the entire lighting installation .
grounding shall consist of ground cables conduits grounding rods wire or strap and ground fittings as required by the national electrical code .
all electrical conductors shall be identified and tagged as follows electrical conductor cable tags shall be located at each splice termination .
the tags shall be attached with cable ties .
the information shall be written on the tag with a permanent marker .
the information shall include the direction and approximate length of the cable and the feeder or circuit destination line and load sides .
each incoming line side conductor shall be individually color coded with one tape mark each outgoing conductor load side shall be coded with two tape marks .
bonding and grounding shall conform to the requirements of subsection num c. lighting control center and secondary service pedestals .
each lighting control center and secondary service pedestals shall include a load center a panelboard contactors a maintenance receptacle a meter housing a photoelectric control a grounding rod system a nema num enclosure with all related components and connections to the power supply .
one copy of the cabinet drawings one line diagram a luminaire schedule and a list of all system components and their manufacturers shall be placed in a heavy duty plastic envelop with side opening that is attached to the inside cabinet door .
testing .
prior to final acceptance the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineers satisfaction that all electrical and lighting equipment installations are in proper working condition .
temporary power and all cable connections required for testing shall be provided by the contractor .
the contractor shall operate the lighting system from sunset to sunrise for ten consecutive days .
lamps ballasts power generators and photoelectric control that fail shall be replaced immediately .
however replacement of these items will not require a restart of the test .
the contractor shall perform grounding tests at each grounding system location including light standards lighting control centers and other ground rod locations .
grounding tests shall show that the ground resistance is num ohms or less .
if the measured resistance to ground exceeds num ohms additional ground rods shall be num num added to the grounding electrode system .
the contractor shall perform voltage drop tests at furthest point on each circuit such that voltage drop is within num percent of supply voltage .
the contractor shall certify the records of all testing including grounding voltage drop within num percent and other required tests as meeting specification requirements and submit the records to the engineer .
method of measurement concrete foundation pads and light standard foundations will be measured by the actual number installed and accepted .
light standards will be measured by the number of light standards installed .
luminaires will be measured by the number of luminaires of the specified wattage installed .
lighting control centers will be measured by the number of centers installed .
secondary service pedestals will be measured by the number of pedestals installed .
conduit will be measured by the linear foot in place .
all wiring necessary for the complete installation will be measured as a single lump sum .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit light standard foundation each concrete foundation pad each light standard_____ _____foot furnish only install only each luminaire _______watt each luminaire wall type ______ watt each luminaire ____ ____watt furnish only install only each luminaire wall type __________watt furnish only install only each luminaire led __ lumens each luminaire led __ lumens furnish only install only each ___inch electrical conduit furnish only install only linear foot num num ___inch electrical conduit plastic furnish only install only linear foot ___inch electrical conduit jacked furnish only install only linear foot wiring lump sum lighting control center each secondary service pedestal each when the contractor at his option installs larger conduit than specified it will be paid for at the original contract price for the size specified .
the following items will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work num soil testing for foundations num junction boxes splice boxes pull boxes pull wire weatherheads adaptors and expansion joints for conduit num additional pull or splice boxes installed at the contractors option num saw cutting trenching excavation backfill jacking drilling pits underground electrical warning tape removal of pavement sidewalks gutters and curbs and their replacement in kind to match existing grade and all other work necessary to complete conduit installation num electrical conductor tagging num direct burial cable in conduit num testing of the lighting installation including temporary power and all required cable connections the lump sum price bid for wiring will be full compensation for all electrical circuitry necessary to complete the lighting installation as shown on the plans .
all conductors in conduit regardless of type are part of the wiring item and will not be measured and paid for separately .
num num section num traffic control devices description this work consists of the construction of traffic signs and sign structures traffic signals and systems barricades rumble strips masking sign legends on new sign panels providing and installing multidirectional steel sign breakaway assemblies and modification of sign posts and legends .
this work shall be done in accordance with these specifications the latest revision of the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways published by the fhwa and adopted by cdot the latest revision of the colorado supplement thereto and in conformity with the details shown on the plans or established .
this work includes the installation of single or double tubular steel sign posts supporting tubular sockets and concrete footings at locations shown on the plans .
materials sign posts and sign structures .
concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num .
steel for sign posts and sign structures shall conform to the material grade and type specified in the contract .
steel plates shapes and bars shall conform to the requirements of section num .
tubular steel shall conform to the requirements of ansiaws dnum .
timber sign posts shall conform to the following num species douglas fir south or douglas fir larch grade no.num num finish snums num moisture content num percent or less num num percent free of heart center prior to use all timber shall be stored banded and kept dry .
all lumber shall be manufactured in accordance with product standard num as published by the department of commerce and shall be grade marked by a grading agency or have an accompanying certificate from the grading agency .
the grading agency shall be certified by the board of review of the american lumber standards committee .
underground portions of timber sign posts plus at least num inches above groundline shall be treated according to awpa standard mnum .
timber sign posts size num inches by num inches shall be provided with two num inch diameter holes through the neutral axis at right angles to the roadway for induced breakaway function one drilled at num inches and one at num inches above the ground level .
tubular sockets shall be round num gauge galvanized steel that meet the requirements of astm num .
num num concrete footing shall be made of class b concrete .
the contractor may use an alternate material that meets the requirements for class b concrete in section num as approved by the engineer .
structure backfill around concrete footings shall be class num in accordance with section num .
overpass mounted sign bracket .
material for overpass mounted sign bracket shall conform to the structural steel requirements of section num .
sign panels .
sign panel materials shall conform to section num and to the details shown on the plans .
sign panels shall be produced in accordance with the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
layout and font design shall conform to the standard highway signs published by fhwa .
font selection for guide sign legends shall conform to the most recent version of the cdot sign design manual .
sign layouts for special signs shall be in accordance with the detailed sign layouts proved on the plans or by the engineer .
silk screen and digital process figures shall be in accordance with the plans and series figures described in the current editions of standard highway signs published by the fhwa and the colorado supplement to standard highway signs .
all exposed lockbolt fastener heads on the faces of the sign panels shall be covered with material matching the background of the panel .
all sign panels shall be identified with the month and year that the sign was manufactured .
the date shall be located on the lower right side of the back of the sign panel and shall be approximately  inch high .
the date shall be stamped or adhered onto the sign panel material for a permanent record .
this work will be paid for as part of the item .
sign illumination and illuminated signs .
electrical work shall conform to section num .
lens and reflectors for flashing beacons shall be of a type as described in the november num edition of the ite equipment material standards chapter num section num traffic signal lenses and section num reflectors .
led modules shall meet the requirements described in the november num edition of the ite equipment material standards chapter numa sections num through num .
flashing beacon .
flashing beacon shall be as shown on the plans .
if solar power is called for on the plans or if the engineer approves the use of solar power then the beacon head shall be numv led type operated at num watts .
the solar power system shall be capable of operating the flashing beacon continuously for ten days without any sunlight .
the solar panel and battery power system shall be augmented to protect it from vandalism or theft .
the solar power system shall be complete including all elements required for an operational installation .
num num barricades .
wood used in barricades shall be untreated snums and shall conform to the applicable portions of subsections num and num .
retroreflective sheeting shall be type iv and shall conform to subsection num .
underground portions of timber barricade posts plus at least num inches above ground line shall be painted with any preservative listed in aashto m num .
any portion of a timber barricade not covered with reflective sheeting or treated shall be painted white in accordance with subsection num and the plan details .
traffic signal materials .
a general .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit for approval a list of equipment and materials which will be installed .
each item shall be identified by trade name size and number .
materials shall conform to the requirements of section num to the requirements shown on the plans or as designated and to the following all electrical equipment shall conform to the standards of ite ieee ul or eia wherever applicable .
in addition to the requirements of the plans these specifications and the special provisions all materials and workmanship shall conform to the requirements of the national electrical code nec rules for overhead electrical line construction of the colorado public utilities commission standards of astm ansi and all local ordinances which may apply .
wherever reference is made to any of the standards mentioned above the reference shall be construed to mean the code order or standard that is in effect on the date of advertisement for bids .
materials and equipment for traffic signal installations and modifications within existing traffic signal systems shall be compatible and the equipment interchangeable with the existing equipment .
all traffic signal equipment which is supplied shall be of models which are currently manufactured by the suppliers of such equipment .
the locations of signals standards controllers services and appurtenances shown on the plans are approximate and the exact locations will be established by the engineer in the field .
upon completion of the work the contractor shall submit record drawings or corrected plans or any additional data required by the engineer showing in detail all construction changes including but not limited to wiring cable and location and depth of conduit .
the contractor shall submit two sets of schematic wiring diagrams for the traffic signal controller the signal installations light circuits and all auxiliary equipment including units and values for each component used to the engineer .
these diagrams shall show in detail all circuits and parts .
such parts shown thereon shall be identified by name or number and in such manner as to be readily interpreted .
num num all diagrams plans and drawings shall be prepared using graphic symbols shown in ansi ynum graphic symbols for electrical and electronic diagrams .
the cabinet drawings shall be non fading prints using the xerography method .
blue line drawings will not be accepted .
one copy of the controller cabinet diagram and the intersection and phase diagram as approved by the engineer shall be placed in a heavy duty plastic envelope with side opening and attached to the inside of the door of each controller cabinet .
manufacturer guarantees furnished with installed equipment shall be furnished to the engineer .
the extent of such guarantee will not be a factor in selecting the successful bidder .
steel incorporated into traffic signals shall conform to the material grade and type specified in the standard plans .
steel plates shapes and bars shall conform to the requirements of section num .
tubular steel shall conform to the requirements of ansiaws dnum .
b traffic signal controllersgeneral .
the traffic signal controller shall be a type nume constructed in accordance with the fhwaipnum specification except as revised in numbnum .
and num. below .
the controller assembly shall consist of a controller unit cabinet and all necessary auxiliary equipment to provide the operation as shown on the plans .
the output file shall have eight flash programming jumper blocks one for each of the eight phases .
the power distribution assembly shall be the pda no .
num .
the pda no .
num shall have field circuit breakers num to provide num amperes of operating ac current to the field load switches .
if one of the field breakers is set off the indicating switch shall place power on the mc coil and ftr coils causing a flashing operation .
the prom module shall be a numb system memory module .
the module shall comply with details and connections shown on the plans for the model nume traffic prom module .
all electrical connections in and out of the module shall be through a printed circuit connector having two rows of num independent bifurcated contacts on num inch centers .
the module shall be designed so that persons inserting or removing the assembly shall not be required to insert hands or fingers within the microprocessor unit housing this modular assembly .
a handle or gripping device protruding no more than num  inches from the front panel shall be attached to the front of the assembly .
the front panel shall be connected to ground .
all inputs and outputs shall be tri state buffered enabling them to drive a load consisting of num ttl gates and num picofarads .
when this module is not being addressed the data inputs and outputs shall be disabled into a high impedance state and the data io lines shall not source or sink more than num num num micro amperes .
all address inputs shall not load the bus by more than one ttl gate load and num picofarads .
there shall be provided a positive method to prevent this module from being inserted upside down in the prom slot with the front panel of the nume closed .
the memory module shall consist of a minimum of three numpin sockets for jdec pin compatible memory devices ranging in sizes from numk x num num to numk x num num .
the selection of address and backup power shall be made via soldered wire jumper options .
one numpin socket shall be designed to house only eprom memory devices .
the remaining two numpin sockets shall be designed to house ram novram or eprom memory devices .
solder jumper options shall route the optional battery backup power to each of these two sockets when specified .
when specified the backup battery power shall enable volatile memory devices to retain the data in their memory in the event of a power failure or when the module has been removed from the nume controller for a period of at least one year .
the entire memory map address map shall be user definable such that each socket can be addressed independently .
the decode shall be provided by bipolar prom .
when the bipolar prom recognizes an address within the range of the prom module the appropriate decode output shall become active thereby enabling the appropriate memory device .
resistors shall be used to pull up the memory select lines to the num volt power bus if the device is selected for battery backup power .
this shall provide data detention in the event of a controller power failure .
there shall be provided on the numb system memory module a regulated num volts power supply derived from the num volt supply available on the prom module .
this supply shall provide a minimum of num milliamperes on the assembly .
this num volt supply shall power only the module address bus the data bus and the bus buffers .
there shall be a wire protect circuit to write protect the memory devices when power has been removed and to delay writing for a short time after power has been restored .
the numb shall have provisions for an optional battery backup supply voltage for ram devices when the power is removed from the module .
this optional battery when called for shall be an aa size lithium battery .
all modules shall be provided with a battery disconnect switch and battery holder clip devices for the aa battery .
the assembly shall operate and mate with all model nume controller units .
the following configurations are required for the operation of wapiti software used by cdot .
num num the numb prom module shall be configured for a num eprom at address numffff and novrams at numfff and numfff unless otherwise specified .
when specified that the numb prom module will be used for a master controller a num eprom shall be used a address anumffff a ram shall be used at numfff and novram configured for numfff and numfff .
the num prom module shall be on the colorado qualified products list .
num nume traffic signal controller .
each controller shall be a type nume with num acia connectors and num modem slots per fhwaipnum specifications except as noted below .
in addition to the manual as specified in the fhwaipnum specifications two d size num inch x num inch drawings of all schematics and assembly prints contained in the manual shall be supplied for each twenty controllers or revision change .
the nume controller shall come with a blank panel to cover the prom module opening if the cdot chooses to use a prom module .
this panel will have all the necessary hardware to be attached to the front panel .
fhwaipnum specifications vendors testing certification shall be modified to read the vendor shall supply with each shipment a full test report of the quality control and final test conducted on each item .
in addition the contractor shall supply a statement with each nume controller that the unit was tested in accordance with section num as modified below .
num shall be modified to read a minimum numhour burnin of all modules .
this burnin shall include num hours of monitored testing at the high and low temperatures as described in num and num .
num training .
the contractor shall provide num hours of training at a site designated by cdot .
this training shall include but not be limited to diagnostic software and circuit theory and operation of the nume controller .
the training will be provided by a person knowledgeable in the operation and repair of the nume controller num and num cabinets and associated diagnostic software .
num prom module .
the prom module shall be a separate item that shall be provided only when requested .
the prom module shall be a numb type prom module unless otherwise specified .
when the equipment is supplied for a project the contractor shall contact the regional supervisor to obtain the traffic program revision that is to be provided .
c controller cabinets .
the controller cabinet shall be either a model num or nums as specified in the contract .
the nums cabinet shall include a base extension assembly .
each cabinet shall be natural aluminum with anchor bolts in accordance with the fhwaipnum specification .
the input files shall num num meet the requirements of the split input file below .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the cabinet shall include the following quantity item num internal frontback fluorescent lamps num model num transfer relays num model num numcircuit flasher cube type num amp output num model num load switches cube type num amp output num model num dc isolators num model num loop amplifiers num model num monitor with absence of red monitoring num new york num pullout drawer assembly num auxiliary detector termination panel assembly num transient voltage surge suppression system a num conductor cable assembly for monitoring the red outputs of all signal load switches shall be provided and mounted to the back panel assembly .
the cable shall be routed to the front of the assembly and be plugged into the connector on the front of the conflict monitor .
a means of selecting the active red monitor channel shall be provided on the rear of the monitor panel .
selection shall be accomplished by means of a two position jumper shunt with the center position wired to a red monitor input and select of numv ac to the right and red load switch output to the left .
moving the jumper to the right will provide continuous red input and override while moving a jumper to the left will attach the monitor channel to the corresponding load switch output .
this jumper assembly shall be accessible while the intersection is in operation .
means shall be provided to prevent shock to personnel operating jumper selection devices .
a minimum of num selections are required eight phase selections and four overlap selections shall be provided with jumper selections .
red monitoring disable control shall be provided within the red monitor cable assembly .
pin six on tbnum shall connect to a numv dc relay coil .
this relay is designated rm control relay .
the normally closed contacts shall provide numv ac to the red monitor select line and pin num on the monitor cable .
when a logic ground signal is applied to tbnum the rm relay shall energize and open the cable .
the relay power will be derived from the cabinet numv dc cabinet power supply .
electrical characteristics of the device that will be used for series transient protection on the num and nums cabinet system shall include tests run using a velonex num surge generator and tektronix oscilloscope type num or equivalent hardware .
using ansiieee num waveforms for normal num num mode and common mode ring wave and impulse tests each unit shall comply with the following minimum characteristics num clamping level numv peak normal mode and numv peak common mode .
trace photos and other test related information will be available upon request .
num emiefi noise rejection derived via standardized num ohm insertion loss tests shall have amplitude of at least numdb over a minimum spectrum from num khz with a numdb being the most desirable .
num diagnostics indicators shall clearly display the status of the suppression circuit .
the indication shall warn of the loss of protection .
num transient energy suppression shall be in excess of num joules .
num rated voltage is numv ac with rated output current minimum num amperes single phase operation .
all of the above components provided on the project excluding the signal monitor unit shall be on the colorado qualified products listing .
split input file shall be an sf num that will operate in the nums cabinets .
the split input file shall use the same form factors as the present older input file and shall be completely interchangeable with these older input files except as follows .
the input file shall use a split num pin connector num rows of num pins which provide for num unique contacts rather than the num double contacts as provided by the former input file .
this design shall interface electrically with the older num and num channel devices available under the num and nema tsnum specification as well as the newer num and num channel devices as specified in the tsnum nema specification .
the input file shall be divided into two partitions .
the first partition shall include the first eight slots from the left the second partition shall include the next six slots .
all num slots shall be able to be tied to one common communication drop if desired .
the serialttl transmit and receive pairs shall be wired across the back panel .
txo dxo and groundnum serve the first eight slots txnum dxnum and groundnum serve the next six slots .
black plane addressing is automatically assigned in the rear of the input file such that slot num address num slot num address numslot num address num all three line low addressing from the front of any input device shall override the back plane addressing .
serial connections shall use a standard quick lock connection .
num num d magnetic detectors .
magnetic vehicle detectors shall have a moistureproof housing and shall be capable of withstanding all types of soil conditions .
the magnetic vehicle detector shall be designed for underground operation and installed in a nonmetallic conduit housing .
magnetic detector amplifiers shall have a continuously adjustable sensitivity level control which shall be adjustable over the full range of amplification of the unit .
each magnetic detector shall be capable of being activated by a voltage induced in the coil of the sensing element by the passage of a vehicle at any speed from num to num miles per hour .
any vehicle passing within num inches of either end of the sensing element shall provide an output signal .
each amplifier shall be provided with an integral power supply .
each amplifier shall be designed to provide ease of maintenance with all electronic components readily accessible .
all input and output circuits for each amplifier shall enter via a single ms connector circuitry for which shall be as shown in the following table connector circuitry for magnetic detector amplifiers ms connector circuit num pin magnetic detector a magnetic detector b ac num volts c chassis ground d detector common e output n.o .
f output n.c. g ac grounded conductor h all controls indicator lights fuse holders and connectors shall be mounted on the front panel of the amplifier .
the magnetic detector sensing element casing shall be constructed of nonferrous materials suitable for use in the environment in which it will operate and shall be sealed to prevent the entrance of moisture .
the sensing element shall be designed to facilitate easy installation repositioning and removal .
e micro loop detectors .
micro loop detectors shall conform to the following and to the details shown on the plans .
num num the sensing element shall be no larger than num inches in diameter by num inches high and shall contain no moving parts .
the unit shall be a passive transducer which converts magnetic field intensity into inductance for use with conventional inductive loop detector units for the passage detection of vehicles .
the operating field shall be num to num oersted inductance numuh and dc resistance of num ohms plus numuh and num ohms per num feet of probe cable .
each micro loop detector shall be capable of being activated by a change in magnetic field caused by the passage of a vehicle within the lane of required detection at any speed from num to num miles per hour .
the probe shall operate at temperatures from num to num f and at a relative humidity of num to num percent including submersion in solutions of chemicals typical of roadway runoff .
leadin cable shall be factory assembled polyurethane jacketed four conductor no .
num awg and shall be of a length specified on the plans .
f pedestrian push buttons .
pedestrian push buttons shall be of the direct push button contact type .
they shall operate on a voltage not to exceed num volts dc .
they shall be of tamperproof design and equipped with a push button instruction sign .
the assembly shall be weatherproof and so constructed that it will be impossible to receive any electrical shock under any weather conditions .
the housing shall be shaped to fit the curvature of the pole to which it is attached to provide a rigid installation .
saddles shall be provided to make a neat fit when required .
materials for pedestrian push button post assemblies shall conform to the following num the pedestrian push button post assembly and sign shall meet all ada requirements .
num the post for the pedestrian push button post assembly shall be tubular steel schedule num .
num the steel post and slip base assembly shall be galvanized in accordance with section num unless painting is called for on the plans .
painting shall be in accordance with section num duplex coating system .
the post and slip base shall be constructed as shown on the plans .
num concrete for the foundation shall be class b .
num wiring for the pedestrian push button post assembly shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
num num g traffic signal poles .
all traffic signal poles mast arms concrete foundations and necessary hardware shall conform to the appropriate requirements of sections num num num and num these specifications and the details shown on the plans .
all traffic signal poles and mast arms shall be of like manufacture .
workmanship and finish shall be equal to the best general practice of metal fabrications shops .
pole shafts shall be straight with a permissive variation not to exceed num inch measured at the midpoint of a num foot or longer pole and not to exceed  inch measured at the midpoint of a pole shorter than num feet .
plumbing the pole shall be accomplished by adjusting the nuts before the foundation is finished to final grade .
shims or other similar devices for plumbing or raking will be permitted only when approved .
span wire poles may be seamless or may be fabricated as one piece without transverse joints or welds and with only one longitudinal seam which shall be continuously welded and ground or rolled flush .
h traffic signal faces .
all pedestrian signal faces and all vehicle signal faces shall conform to the requirements of subsection num the plans and the following all vehicle signal faces shall be of the adjustable vertical type with the number and type of sections detailed herein and as shown on the plans .
they shall provide a light indication in one direction only and shall be adjustable through three hundred and sixty degrees about a vertical axis .
they shall be mounted at the location and in the manner shown on the plans .
unless otherwise shown on the plans all signal faces shall be standard and shall contain three sections arranged vertically redtop yellowcenter greenbottom .
all vehicle signal faces shall be focused to allow maximum visibility to approaching motorists .
all new faces installed at any one intersection shall be of the same make and type .
when specified on the plans the optical units of all vehicle signal faces and all pedestrian signal faces shall be an led traffic signal section optical unit conforming to the requirements of subsection num .
the led optical units shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
i backplates .
where shown on the plans backplates shall be furnished and installed on signal faces .
no background light shall show between the backplates and the signal face or between sections .
j programmed visibility vehicle signal faces .
all programmed visibility vehicle signal faces shall conform to the requirements of subsection num the plans and the following num num each programmed visibility signal section shall provide a nominal num inch diameter circular or arrow indication .
color and arrow configuration shall conform to ansi dnum .
each section shall be provided with a sun visor .
each signal section shall be provided with an adjustable connection that permits incremental tilting from num to num degrees above or below the horizontal while maintaining a common vertical axis through couplers and mountings .
terminal connection shall permit external adjustment about the mounting axis in five degree increments .
the signal shall be mountable with ordinary tools and capable of being serviced without tools .
adjustment shall be preset at four degrees below the horizontal unless otherwise specified .
prior to programming each signal section with a yellow indication shall provide a minimum luminous intensity of num candela on the optical axis and a maximum intensity of num candela at num degrees horizontal from the axis .
each such signal section shall be capable of having its visibility programmed to achieve the following luminous intensities a minimum of num candela on the optical axis a maximum of num candela at from  to num degrees horizontal from the axis and a maximum of num candela at from num to num degrees horizontal from the axis .
under the same conditions the intensities of the red indication and the green indication shall be at least num and num percent respectively of the yellow indication .
the contractor shall program the head as recommended by the manufacturer or as directed .
the visibility of each programmed visibility signal face shall be capable of adjustment or programming within the face .
when programmed each signal faces indication shall be visible only in those areas or lanes to be controlled except that during dusk and darkness a faint glow to each side will be permissible .
k traffic signal electrical conductors and control cable .
conductors and cables shall conform to subsection num .
a  inch nylon rope shall be installed in all new conduit and all existing conduit where a cable is added or an existing cable is replaced .
at least num feet of pull wire or rope shall be doubled back into the conduit at each termination .
signal light conductors shall conform to the redyellowgreen color sequencing with different colored tracers for each phase provided .
sufficient signal light conductors shall be provided to perform the functional operation of the signal system .
additional conductors for service interconnect etc .
shall be provided as noted on the plans .
a separate set of three spare conductors shall be provided from the controller cabinet to the base of each pole .
num num conductors shall be permanently identified as to function .
identification shall be placed on each conductor or each group of conductors comprising a signal phase in each pull box and near the end of terminated conductors .
identification shall be by bands fastened to the conductors in such a manner that they will not move along the conductors .
loop detector wire shall consist of specified loop wire encased in  inch od num inch id vinyl or polyethylene tubing .
all inductive loop detector harness cables shall be shielded .
all detector and pedestrian pushbutton circuits shall consist of separate two conductor wire systems .
all signal light cable conductors shall have individual terminal lugs for connection to terminal strips .
all detector leadin cable shall consist of two no .
num copper conductors with each conductor insulated with high molecular weight heatstabilized colored polyethylene .
the conductors shall be twisted and the twisted pair shall be protected with a shield of tinned copperbrass or aluminumpolyester .
a no .
num minimum stranded tinned copper ground drain wire shall be provided .
the cable shall be provided with a chrome vinyl outer jacket with a minimum thickness of num mils suitable for use in conduit or for direct burial when used in conjunction with magnetic or magnetometer detectors .
loop detector wire prefab special shall meet or exceed the following the loop shall consist of no .
num awg wire and the minimum number of turns as specified in the plans .
the conductors shall maintain their relative position to each other throughout the entire loop configuration .
twisting of the conductors within the loop configuration will not be permitted .
the loop wires shall be installed in protective tubing constructed of a cross linked polyethylene material or equivalent .
the outside diameter shall not exceed num inches .
the preformed loop shall be hermetically sealed at the tee and at the leadin header to prevent the entrance of water .
the loop leadin wires from the preformed loop to the pull box shall be a twisted num awg wire with at least five turns for every three feet .
wiring shall be encased in the same crosslinked polyethylene tubing material or equivalent .
installation of preformed loops shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
prior to installation the contractor shall provide a paper copy of the installation procedures for the project .
the preformed loops shall be manufactured to the dimensions shown on the plans and designed to be laid in place immediately prior to paving operations .
the contractor shall determine the length of the loop lead in wires required from the preformed loop to the first pull box outside the roadway and shall num num furnish a copy of the lengths to the engineer .
regardless of type there shall be no splices in the pull box special .
the loops shall be delivered to the project at least seven days prior to installation and placement .
the contractor shall check the continuity of the loops upon delivery to the project once set on grade immediately prior to the paving operation and after the paving operation .
the contractor shall check both continuity and resistance to ground the following day or as directed and shall record and submit the results .
l traffic signal vehicle detector amplifier .
num .
general system requirements .
vehicle detector amplifier shall consist of high performance multiple channel inductive loop vehicle detector units and data acquisition software that can provide binned traffic data and realtime traffic measurements on a vehiclebyvehicle basis .
the system shall provide current measurements and vehicle detection information on the last vehicle for use in local control incident detection and advanced traffic management systems .
a communication link shall provide remote access to the detector for reading unit configuration settings for fault identification and verification for realtime system monitoring and data collection on up to four channels of detection .
it shall include password security to the detector to change configuration settings .
the communication link shall provide for party line communication on up to eight units using numbit hardwired addresses to the card edge connector andor num software programmable addresses in eeprom memory .
the interface and data acquisition software shall be organized by application and facilitate setup realtime traffic monitoring and collection of binned count and occupancy data .
a vehicle log shall provide a means for logging of vehicle speed vehicle length looptoloop travel time and detection duration .
optional modes of operation shall include a vehicle travel direction detection setup capability using overlapped num foot by num foot loops a longloop count mode to provide turning movement counts and a microloop mode selection when channels are connected to microloop sensors .
the contractor shall supply data acquisition and interface software and vehicle detectors that meet all the operational and functional performance requirements in accordance with the terms and conditions of this specification .
the contractor shall obtain the manufacturers standard warranty and surrender it to the engineer .
num num num .
general hardware standards and performance requirements .
the inductive loop detector units shall be fully interchangeable whether used for system counting occupancy measurement speed and length measurement directional detection binned data collection remote data acquisition in advanced traffic management systems or for local intersection control including longloop counting .
detector configuration data shall be entered using special interface and data acquisition software .
a communication interface shall provide for remote connection and configuration of detectors realtime activity monitoring and data acquisition via modem to remote devices .
inductive loop detector units shall meet the latest edition of the national electrical manufacturers association nema standard tsnum for type num controller and cabinet assemblies plus the functional and performance requirements of this specification .
the detectors shall be configured as plugin devices which meet the requirements for nema tsnum section num actuated type num anum operation and type i al operation in numpin input files .
detectors shall comply with nema tsnum section num table num for fourchannel rack mount type units nema designation d except that delay and extension timing shall be provided on all four channels in lieu of nema tsnum section num requirements .
detectors shall also be suitable for use in californianew york type num and atc cabinets with numpin input files .
detectors shall detect and hold the presence of all licensable motor vehicles including small motorcycles .
this shall be accomplished without detecting traffic in the adjacent lane beyond num feet from the loops except as noted below on the following loop configurations with from num feet up to num feet of homerun cable .
one to six series connected num foot by num foot square loops with three turns of num awg wire or with four turns of num awg wire .
a num foot wide by num foot long loop with two or three turns of num awg wire when set to detect small motorcycles may detect adjacent lane traffic .
a num foot wide by num foot to num foot long quadruple loop with a winding of twofourtwo turns of num awg wire .
when sensitivity is set to detect small motorcycles adjacent lane traffic shall not be detected .
single double and triple microloop probe sets .
each channel shall automatically self tune with full sensitivity to any loop and leadin combination resulting in a total inductance of num to num micro henries with a q factor of five or greater within four seconds after application of power .
num num num .
special features and performance requirements .
detectors shall be microprocessor controlled and be capable of being configured with manual switch settings and via software settings in eeprom memory .
detectors shall include eight sensitivity settings thresholds in num steps .
threshold settings shall directly relate to nanohenries of inductance change l .
each increase in presence or pulse mode settings shall double the sensitivity reduce the threshold from the previous setting .
the highest sensitivity smallest change setting shall have a l threshold value of eight nanohenries while the lowest sensitivity setting shall have a l threshold of num nanohenries .
each detector shall have a single switched oscillator system to sequentially excite and measure each channel .
each detector shall have a threeposition toggle switch to manually select one of three operating frequencies .
these three frequencies shall also be software selectable .
each detector shall have two serial ports a front panel rsnum port and transmitreceive pins on the card edge connector for serial communication .
each serial port shall have a multidrop mode and be capable of party line communication with up to eight detectors on the party line .
the detector unit shall be designed to accommodate the addition of either an optional plugin memory module or a plugin communication module .
the communication module shall allow expansion of the multidrop capability to num devices on a common serial port bus and convert the rear port into an independent port .
with the optional module installed communication with a pc through the front port shall not interfere with system communication on the rear serial port and the baud rates shall be independently settable for the front and rear serial ports .
baud rates shall be selectable at num num num num or num bps using the interface software .
the memory module shall expand the memory used for onboard count and occupancy binning .
the front panel serial port shall have eianum electrical characteristics and shall terminate with a front panel numpin circular minidin connector .
a communication cable with a dbnum female connector for a computer serial port connection and a numpin minidin male connector for the front panel serial port connection shall be provided for direct num num communication with a remote reporting device or a pc running the interface and data acquisition software .
units shall have software settable addresses from num to num .
address num shall be assigned as a wildcard to be used only when connected to the front panel port to establish connection and read the correct address from the device .
units shall have numbit back panel hardwired addressing capability to allow selection of one of num hardwired addresses .
backpanel addressing shall be enabled via the interface software .
an external numvdc green control input shall be provided to control the output timing .
if true ground level num to numvdc the green input shall disable delay and enable extension timing .
if false num to numvdc or open the green input shall disable extension and enable delay timing .
software shall provide for an option to disable green gating so that delay or extension timing is provided unconditionally .
detector units shall have a presence or pulse mode output option .
selection shall be via front panel switches or software settable options .
each channel shall have a pushwheel sensitivity switch to enable manual selection of one of seven presence mode or eight pulse mode settings or an off position .
presence output shall hold vehicle detection for at least four minutes minimum for small licensed motor vehicles numcc .
motorcycles and for at least num minutes for automobiles before tuningout vehicles dropping recognition of vehicle presence over a num foot by num foot square loop with three or four turns of wire .
the presence output shall not tune out when vehicle motion exists defined as vehicle entry and departures continue every few minutes and vehicles remain present in the sensing zone for at least num minutes .
in fast recovery mode the channel shall recover to full sensitivity within num milliseconds after all vehicles leave the inductive loop sensing zone .
pulse mode shall provide a single output pulse of num num milliseconds in response to an num foot long vehicle traveling over a num foot by num foot loop at num mph and for successive vehicles traveling over the same loop at speeds ranging from num to num mph with a onesecond headway .
pulse width shall be programmable from interface software .
if a vehicle remains over the loop further detection shall be inhibited for a numsecond rephase delay and then full sensitivity shall return immediately regardless of continued presence of the vehicle .
pulse rephase shall be programmable from interface software .
detector units shall have opticallyisolated fet outputs to provide fail safe solid state operation .
num num loop detector channels shall continue to function with a single point short to ground on the loopleadin system .
each channel shall be capable of detecting and displaying current and historical faults a short to ground an open circuit or an inductance change p num percent in the inductive loop or leadin system .
each channel shall have two led indicator lights on the front panel a green detect led and a red fault led .
the green detect indicator shall indicate detection output status and output timing in process .
the green detect indicator shall indicate an extend flash while the call output is actuated following a directional detection unless failsafe for a particular condition is disabled using the interface software .
the green detect indicator shall flash during delay and extension timing to provide a visual indication of timed output .
delay and extension flash rates shall differ by at least four times the others rate .
delay shall be four flashes per second and extension shall be num flashes per second .
the green detect indicator shall be on continuously during a fault condition .
during a fault condition on a channel the channel shall display a continuous call indication on its green detect led and generate a continuous failsafe output on the primary output regardless of the pulse or presence operating mode selected .
a status output shall provide a serial coded message to external devices controllers that are capable of using the serial information in accordance with nema conventions described in tsnum .
a red fault led shall indicate current or historical channel fault condition status and type .
the fault indicator shall flash a coded message during an open loop condition a shorted loop system condition and a num percent change of inductance condition .
the associated channels red fault led shall provide visual indication of fault type and current or historical status with a unique flash code .
a fault indication shall be enabled for as long as the fault remains except by turning the channel off in software or by selecting the x setting on the sensitivity switch .
if the fault heals or is corrected the affected channel shall immediately retune and be capable of normal detection .
the visual fault indication shall remain active until reset by a momentary change in the mode or sensitivity setting a momentary interruption of power or by pressing a reset switch .
primary output of each detector channel shall provide accurate detect duration in response to an automobile over a three or four turn num foot by num num num foot square inductive loop to enable accurate speed length and occupancy measurements by external devices .
the detector channel with a num microhenry loopleadin attached to each channel shall for any negative inductive change which exceeds its sensitivity threshold generate a ground true logic level output response within num milliseconds for a sensitivity setting of num nanohenries and within num milliseconds for a sensitivity setting of num nanohenries .
loop detectors shall have a multiposition switch to reset all channels and to provide normal and fast recovery modes of operation .
the fast recovery setting shall cause the detector to adapt instantly to large changes of apparent inductance in the noncall direction .
the normal recovery mode shall cause the detector to adapt at a default rate of num thresholds per second to apparent changes of inductance in both directions .
loop detectors shall have a remote reset input pin on the card edge connector .
the unit shall reset and establish a new reference for each loop that is turned on when voltage on pin c is less than num volts dc for a period of greater than num milliseconds .
delay timing shall be adjustable from zero to num seconds minimum in increments of num seconds in lieu of nema tsnum section num increments .
delay timing shall occur if the green input is false .
extension timing shall be adjustable from zero to num seconds minimum in increments of num seconds in lieu of nema tsnum section num increments .
extension timing shall occur if the green input is true .
each channel shall be capable of being configured for longloop count mode for counting each individual vehicle moving onto or over a single inductive loop which has a length greater than num feet regardless of previous vehicles being stationary on moving over or leaving the detection zone .
the call output in the longloop count mode shall be a presence output .
the configuration of the channel and the retrieval of the long loop count shall be accomplished via the serial ports using the software .
two channels channels num and num or num and num shall be capable of being assigned to directional detection mode for detecting the direction of travel of a vehicle over two overlapping num foot by num foot loops with leading edge to leading edge spacing of num feet .
a call output shall be generated and stored as a directional count by the second channel that detects the vehicle in the direction of the vehicles travel .
the configuration of the detector for directional detection and the retrieval of the directional count shall be accomplished via the serial ports using the software .
each channel of the vehicle detector shall be capable of collecting and storing counts and occupancy in time bins .
the detector memory shall allow storing count and occupancy in num minute time bins for a duration of num hours and with the optional memory module for a duration of num num num hours .
the configuration of the time bin intervals and the retrieval of the stored counts and occupancy shall be accomplished via the serial ports using the software .
num .
interface software requirements .
the detector unit shall be capable of remote configuration system diagnostic measurements and realtime data collection .
a communication link shall provide remote access to the detector for reading its configuration for fault identification and verification for realtime monitoring and data collection on up to four channels .
the link shall provide optional password protection to change unit configuration settings .
interface software shall display and report current loop inductance measurements current or last historical fault information and information specific to the last vehicle detected and vehicle counts .
vehicle information shall include vehicle change of inductance speed length and time over loop .
a windows based interface and data acquisition software program shall be provided to perform these functions via a remote reporting device running under a windows operating system compatible with the regions existing signal operating system software .
the software shall establish and maintain the communication link to a remote reporting device via a field modem or by direct connection to one of the serial ports on the detector the software shall be organized by application to simplify setup and monitoring of channel activity measurements traffic counting longloop count logging of vehicle speed and vehicle length loop to loop travel time detect duration binning of count and occupancy and sensing of vehicle travel direction with directional detection and call duration .
the software shall allow selection of the pcs communication port and baud rate .
the software shall include a phone book and dialing utility .
the interface and data acquisition software shall provide a read from device command on the file menu .
the read from device shall allow the selection of an address to establish remote communication with a detector unit .
the initial screen shall open with a settings icon a realtime vehicle logging icon and a traffic data binning icon .
after communications have been established with a detector other icons shall appear .
these shall include the realtime activity monitoring icon force all outputs and leds icon a reset icon and a scantime utility icon .
a settings window shall be divided into nine tabs to organize the settings by application .
num num a general tab shall allow selection of the configuration source to be either from eeprom or switches the oscillator frequency for the unit the vehicle count period and channel sensitivity and mode .
a communications tab shall provide for the setting of a field modem command string transmit delay selection of the communication baud rates on the front and rear ports for setting a programmable address and to enable a backpanel address .
there shall be provisions to establish cancel and change a password .
if password protection is set up in a detector the unit shall not respond to any requests to perform a reset or change settings until the correct password has been issued .
after a verified password has been issued the detector shall respond to all requests for reset or settings changes for num minutes .
after num minutes the unit shall revert back to password protected mode until the password has been issued .
reset shall cause immediate reinstatement of password protection .
a timing tab shall provide for setting the delay or extend time options and the timing increments for each channel .
there shall be an option to select enable green gating to condition the timing functions to green inputs .
a microloop tab shall provide for selecting microloop mode of operation and setting some of the parameters that are unique to the performance of microloop sensors in special applications .
a long loop tab shall provide for selecting the option to count vehicles over long loops set to operate in presence mode .
setup options shall be included to allow for calibrating the algorithm to improve count accuracy on loops num to num feet long .
vehicle counts shall be available over the serial communication ports .
a directional tab shall provide the option of setting up travel direction sensing on channel pairs i num and num num .
with the paired channels connected to num foot by num foot loops that are overlapped by num feet vehicles shall be counted in both directions .
the directional detection call output shall be assigned to the last loop a vehicle crosses when traveling in the direction that is to be detected .
call duration shall be selectable for the directional output on the trailing channel of the paired sets .
an output tab shall provide for the option to enable the status output for nema tsnum type controllers .
software provision shall also exist to disable the failsafe call output .
a noise immunity tab shall provide for selecting several noise options including a power line filter which can be enabled .
an adapt tab shall provide for selecting the adaptation parameters for the detector unit to modify default operation .
num num a realtime vehicle logging icon shall provide for setting up channels to monitor vehicle speed and length measurements .
facilities shall be provided to insert a loop description id label a loop type configuration and a calibration utility to select effective magnetic field loop sizes to improve measurement accuracy .
the utility shall also provide for setting up loop assignments and leading edge distances from loop to loop to calculate vehicle speeds .
facilities shall be included to activate and view the log with channel id loop descriptions dates times speeds lengths durations loop to loop times displayed in realtime .
provisions shall be made to save the log to a file and print the log .
a traffic data binning icon shall open a window to setup and collect binned count and occupancy data from the detector .
a tab shall provide for setting up the channels to be binned the start date and time the end date and time and the binning intervals .
software shall be included to inform the user when the detector will run out of memory based on the setup information provided .
if continuous binning is selected the data shall wraparound so that the oldest data will be overwritten with the latest entries .
a realtime activity window shall be provided to display all current detection information pertaining to each channel including current measurements loop inductance loop frequency reference frequency green input state and loop status last fault or historical fault information fault type time and date plus information specific to the last vehicle detected dl in nanohenries detect duration detect time and detect date and traffic counts count directional count and the count period remaining .
the activity window shall include a freeze capability to capture the current activity information while the unit continues to display the most recent changes .
a window shall be included to verify the operation of a detectors outputs and leds and confirm the wiring of a control cabinet to issue the call output to a device or controller .
this utility shall allow selection of specific detect leds call outputs fault leds and channel status outputs to be forced on or off for testing the system .
a window shall be included to remotely reset a detector .
it shall be possible to select specific channels all channels or the entire unit .
a window shall be included to provide a realtime view of the detectors selfmeasured scantime .
this interactive utility shall continuously read and display the detectors scantime and display the theoretical detection performance based on userselectable parameters .
the software shall allow printing of settings activity measurements and binned and logged vehicle data .
num num a comprehensive online help utility shall be included with detailed descriptions of unit features and setup information .
the help text shall include hyperlinks to all subjects related to applications or setup sequences .
help screens shall include a print function to print the page .
construction requirements highway signs and traffic signals .
aluminum shall be heliarc welded and conform to the aws requirements for welding aluminum .
portions to be welded shall be cleaned and prepared to assure num percent penetration butt weld .
oxygen cutting will not be permitted .
preheating if used shall not exceed num f for num minutes .
defective welds shall be removed and rewelded .
acceptable aluminum welds shall be in accordance with aws with num ksi the minimum tensile strength for reduced section specimens .
welding and fabrication of traffic control devices shall conform to ansiaws dnum as amended herein .
fillet welds connecting tubular steel to a shape or plate shall be qualified in accordance with ansiaws dnum section num .
the fillet weld procedure qualification record pqr all welding procedure specifications wpss and welder qualification records wqrs inspection and nondestructive testing reports shall be submitted to the cdot staff bridge fabrication inspectors num east arkansas avenue denver co num for approval prior to fabrication .
cdot acceptance of submitted pqrs wpss and wqrs establishes prequalification to fabricate traffic control devices .
all ungusseted traffic signal mast to pole bracket pole bracket to pole and pole to base plate attachment welds shall conform to ansiaws dnum section num .
prior to welding base metal surfaces shall be blasted or ground to eliminate mill scale visible rust oil or debris .
welding shall be performed prior to galvanizing metallizing or application of zinc coatings to the piece .
the fabricator shall submit a written practice for the administration of personnel qualification and certification program in accordance with the american society for nondestructive testing asnt snttcnuma for approval .
personnel performing the weld evaluations shall be certified as asnt level i or ii .
certification of level i and level ii individuals shall be performed by a level iii individual who has been certified by num the american society for nondestructive testing or num has the education training experience and has successfully passed the written examination prescribed in snttcnuma .
all welds shall be visually inspected by the fabricator .
all welds shall meet the acceptance criteria specified in ansiaws dnum table num tubular connections all loads .
num num the arm simplex plate pole simplex plate to gusset gusset to pole pole to base plate and all sign bridge beam to pole clamp welds shall be magnetic particle tested mt .
the alternating current ac yoke method shall be performed .
the yoke spacing shall be num inches .
the yoke shall be calibrated each day in accordance with astm enum .
daily calibration records shall be maintained and made available for review upon request .
the acceptance criteria shall be as specified in ansiaws dnum table num tubular connections all loads .
structural steel shall be galvanized in accordance with astm a num .
pole hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with astm a num .
all signs must be clean prior to erection .
installation shall be of such sequence as to result in maximum traffic safety .
signs shall be erected in conformity with the plans .
prior to final positioning the sign shall be inspected at night by the engineer and adjustments will be made if necessary to eliminate specular reflection .
footings for ground signs and overhead sign structures shall be in accordance with the contract .
the tops of drilled caissons used for overhead sign structure footings shall be formed to at least num inches below ground line in accordance with section num .
timber sign posts shall be set in drilled or excavated holes and tamped firm and plumb .
unum posts and steel tubing posts may be driven plumb or set in the same manner as timber posts .
the sequence of erection of new and reset sign installations shall be correlated with the removal of the existing traffic controls .
the decision regarding the sequence shall be worked out with the engineer prior to starting the work .
longitudinal and lateral adjustments of sign locations to fit field conditions shall be as directed .
electrical service for all sign illumination shall consist of all the electrical circuitry necessary from the power source to the switch box at the structure .
this includes grounding fusing direct burial cable or conductor in conduit .
electrical service shall be num volt ac num amp .
fused circuit and shall be installed underground unless otherwise shown on the plans or permitted .
electrical work including photoelectric control shall conform to section num and to the details shown on the plans .
mask sign legend shall consist of providing a separate removable aluminum panel at least num inches thick and of sufficient dimensions to completely mask the legend .
this panel shall be furnished with reflective sheeting conforming to section num and shall be the same color as the background of the sign .
panels shall be securely fastened to the main panel by mechanical means using a minimum number of fasteners .
adhesives glues or tapes shall not be used .
modifications shall be as follows num steel sign posts .
this work shall consist of providing breakaway devices as shown on the plans for existing steel posts and shall include shortening and repainting the posts .
num num num timber sign posts .
this work shall consist of providing breakaway devices as shown on the plans for existing num inch by num inch timber posts .
num sign legend .
this work shall consist of modifying the legend on existing signs as shown on the plans and shall include all work necessary to remove and respace existing legend to furnish and install new legend and border as required .
num tubular steel sign supports .
tubular steel sign post slipbase or socket and wedge footing and mounting clamps shall be installed in accordance with standard plan snum and the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall make all arrangements to have a manufacturertrained installer of the manufacturers products onsite during the construction of the entire assembly and associated signs to ensure proper installation .
prior to the placement of the posts the contractor shall submit to the engineer written documentation of the installers qualifications and training in the construction of tubular steel sign supports .
upon completion of installation the contractor shall obtain and submit documentation from the trained installer that the installation of the sign posts was in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the flashing beacon shall be installed as shown on the plans .
the solar power system shall be placed outside the clear zone of the roadway or behind guardrail .
batteries shall be placed in a lockable container attached to a supplemental pole supporting the solar panels that is installed outside the clear zone or behind guardrail .
traffic signal systems construction .
a general .
the contractor shall submit an as built plan showing in detail all construction changes including wiring cabling locations and depth of conduit .
the as built plan shall include a sketch identifying the cables by numbers and a code describing the function and color of each conductor contained within the cables .
b traffic signal electrical conductors and control cable .
all cables and conductors not shown on the plans as aerial cable or imbedded loop detector shall be installed in conduit unless installed in poles pedestals or mast arms .
each mast arm mounted signal face shall be wired separately back to the pole base .
the signal face position farthest from the pole shall be wired from the face to the controller to accept a fivesection leftturn signal face whether such a signal face is called for or not .
aerial cable shall be installed where specified on the plans and secured to messenger cable with rings .
selfsupported cable shall not be installed unless that cable is specifically designed for this purpose .
drip loops shall be provided on all conductors where they enter pole weatherheads or signal heads .
num num wiring and splices shall conform to nec practices .
wiring within cabinets junction boxes etc .
shall be neatly arranged and within cabinets shall be laced .
splicing of cable will not be permitted in the conduit or outside of pull boxes standards or pedestals at the handhole locations .
powdered soapstone talc or other approved lubricant shall be used in placing conductors in conduit .
when splices are made soldered splices or approved solderless connectors shall be individually taped with an approved polyvinyl chloride tape with a rubberbased pressure sensitive adhesive .
the outside sheath shall be replaced by a minimum of two layers of this approved tape .
shellac compounds shall not be used .
all overhead splices shall be ttapped and either soldered or connected by an approved copper compression ring .
if a compression ring connector is used the ring shall be applied by a ratchet tool which will not release until the proper crimping force is applied to the connector .
all splices in detector sensing circuits shall be soldered and taped to exclude moisture .
all splices done in cables containing solid wire shall be soldered .
splices in underground systems shall be waterproofed .
all underground splices shall be capable of satisfactory operation under continuous submersion in water .
conductors between detectors and the controller cabinet shall not be contained in the same cable with any other signal control circuits but may be carried in the same duct or conduit as other signal circuits with not more than one splice in each detector sensing circuit .
at least num feet of slack shall be left for each conductor at each support pole and at least num feet of slack at each pull box containing cable connections .
a minimum of num inches of slack shall be left at each splice except within handholes where num inches shall be left .
when conductors and cables are pulled into the conduit ends of all these conductors and cables shall be taped to exclude moisture and shall be so kept until the splices are made or terminal appliances attached .
ends of spare conductors shall be taped .
multiconductor cables shall be spliced and insulated to provide a watertight joint and to prevent absorption of moisture by the cable .
c bonding and grounding .
metallic cable sheaths conduit metal poles and pedestals shall be made mechanically and electrically secure to form a continuous system and shall be effectively grounded .
bonding and grounding jumpers shall be a num awg bare copper wire or copper strap of the same cross num num sectional area .
sheath for detectors shall be grounded in control cabinet only .
the other end of the sheath shall be taped and left ungrounded .
a ground electrode shall be installed at each pole pedestal and control box .
each ground electrode shall be onepiece copperweld rod of  inch diameter and num feet in length driven to a depth of at least num feet below the surface of the ground .
bonding of poles and pedestals shall be by means of connecting to the ground rod a bonding strap attached to an anchor bolt or a num inch diameter or larger brass or bronze bolt installed in the lower portion of the shaft .
d excavation and backfilling .
excavation and backfilling shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of section num and to the following all excavation and backfilling shall be made before other improvements are completed so as to not require the repair or replacement of new sidewalks pavement or landscaping .
excavation for the installation of conduit foundations and other appurtenances shall be performed in such a manner as to cause the least possible damage to the streets sidewalks landscaping and other improvements .
the trenches shall not be excavated wider than necessary for the proper installation of the electrical appurtenances and foundations .
excavation shall not be performed until immediately before installation of conduit and other appurtenances .
the material from the excavation shall be placed in a position that will not cause damage or obstruction to vehicular and pedestrian traffic or interfere with surface drainage .
excavations after backfilling shall be kept well filled and maintained in a smooth and well drained condition until permanent repairs are made .
excavations in the street or highway shall be performed in such a manner that not more than one lane of traffic in each direction is restricted at any time unless otherwise approved by the engineer or in the special provisions .
improvements such as sidewalks curbs gutters portland cement concrete and asphalt concrete pavement underlying material lawns and plants and any other improvements removed broken or damaged by the contractors operations shall be replaced or reconstructed at the contractors expense with the same kind of material as found on the work or with materials of equal quality .
e foundations .
all foundations shall be portland cement concrete conforming to the applicable requirements of section num .
the bottom of concrete foundations shall rest on firm ground .
foundations shall be poured monolithically where practicable .
for poles and pedestals the top num inches shall be poured after the pole or pedestal is in proper position .
the exposed portions shall be formed to present a neat appearance .
num num forms shall be true to line and grade .
tops of foundations except as noted on the plans shall be finished to curb or sidewalk grade or as ordered .
forms shall be rigid and securely braced in place .
conduit ends and anchor bolts shall be placed in proper position and to proper height and shall be held in place by means of a template until the concrete sets .
both forms and ground which will be in contact with the concrete shall be thoroughly moistened before placing concrete .
where obstructions prevent construction of a planned foundation the contractor shall construct an effective foundation as directed .
strain and mast arm poles shall be installed with the proper rake as recommended by the manufacturer of the poles so as to assure a substantially vertical set when the specified signal and lighting equipment is installed .
f loop detector installation .
loop detectors shall be installed in the configuration shown on the plans .
a complete installation consists of a conductor loop or group of loops installed in a saw cut in the roadway leadin cable and a sensor unit with power supply installed in a traffic signal controller cabinet .
the saw cut shall be made  inch wide and a minimum of num inches deep .
the slot shall be as straight as possible and shall not vary more than  inch when checked with a num foot straightedge .
saw cuts shall be hydroblasted with a mixture of water and air and then blown free of water and debris with compressed air only .
the cuts shall be as dry as possible prior to placement of wire .
all corners shall be rounded to full depth as directed to prevent angle bends in the loop wire .
after saw cut is cleaned of debris the wire shall be placed for the loop by pushing it into the slot with a blunt nonmetallic object .
a screwdriver or other sharp tool shall not be used .
care shall be used to avoid abrading or damaging the insulation .
after the loops are properly seated and tested for continuity and proper loop inductance the slots shall be filled with an approved twopart self curing self bonding weatherproof epoxy or an approved alternative material .
one continuous length of wire shall be used for each loop from the signal base or pull box around the loop with the specified number of turns and back to the signal base or pull box .
detector leadin pairs shall be symmetrically twisted five turns per num foot .
two inch conduit shall be placed under the curb and into a signal base or pull box to accommodate detector loop wires .
conduit may be pushed or trenchlaid depending on conditions at project site and upon approval from the engineer .
num num conductors of all loops to be operated by each sensor unit shall be run continuously to the nearest signal base or pull box .
the loops shall be joined in the signal base or pull box in combination of series and parallel as shown on the plans so that optimum sensitivity is obtained at the sensor unit .
final splices between loops and leadin cable shall not be made until the operation of the loops under actual traffic conditions is approved by the engineer .
the loop detector wires shall be spliced to the shielded leadin cable in the signal base or pull box and then pulled into the controller cabinet via the shortest possible distance using other existing conduit or messenger cable .
a minimum of num feet of slack shall be provided in the controller cabinet for attachment to the detector amplifier .
each detector cable shall be clearly labeled in the control cabinet identifying phase relationship and approach leg .
g magnetic detector installation .
magnetic detector sensing elements shall be installed within num inch ul approved schedule num pvc conduit as directed .
conduit shall extend across the traveled way as shown on the plans .
bottom of conduit shall be placed num inches below top of pavement .
h painting .
all paint shall conform to section num .
the painting of all electrical equipment requiring paint shall be done in accordance with section num .
the painting of all electrical equipment specified to be painted may be required at any time as directed .
all metal parts of poles pedestals standards and fittings shall be cleaned of all rust scale grease and dirt prior to applying paint .
if an approved prime coat has been applied by the manufacturer and it is in good condition an application of primer by the contractor other than for repairs will not be required .
all exterior surfaces shall be examined for damaged paint and all such damage shall be given a spot coat of primer and the entire exterior surface repainted .
factory finish on new equipment will be acceptable if of proper color and if equal in quality to the specified finish .
paint shall not be applied to aluminum controller cabinets or to aluminum or galvanized poles pedestals standards hardware conduit etc .
unless specified .
all steel poles shall be painted aluminum unless otherwise shown on the plans .
controller cabinets including inside door surface shall be wire brushed or sanded to reduce reflectivity .
all paint coats may be applied either by hand brushing or by approved spraying machine in the hands of skilled operators .
the work shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner .
the engineer reserves the right to require the use of brushes for the application of paint should the work done by the paintspraying machine prove unsatisfactory or objectionable as determined by the engineer .
conduit and conduit fittings above ground shall be given one coat of primer and one coat of enamel conforming to the color of the adjacent standard or pedestal .
num num i maintaining existing and temporary electrical systems .
the existing traffic signals shall be kept in effective operation for the benefit of the traveling public .
where power to all signals must be turned off the contractor shall provide an off duty police officer or other qualified person to direct traffic during the period the signals are off .
the local traffic enforcement agency shall be notified prior to any operational shutdown of a traffic signal .
the above does not apply to intersections which are completely closed to all traffic due to construction .
the contractor shall maintain at all times a minimum of two threesection red yellow green traffic signal heads for each approach .
if temporary signals are necessary to maintain the minimum signal display the contractor shall be responsible for furnishing all materials equipment tools and labor necessary to install and maintain the temporary signals .
the state or local agency will continue operation and maintenance of existing electrical facilities .
the state or local agency will furnish electrical energy for operation and will repair or replace facilities damaged by public traffic .
where damage is caused by the contractors operations the contractor shall at his expense repair or replace damaged facilities promptly in accordance with these specifications .
signal faces which are installed prior to turning on shall be covered or directed away from traffic to clearly indicate that the signal is not in operation .
j field tests and turn on .
prior to completion of the work the contractor shall make the following tests on all traffic signal circuits in the presence of the engineer num each circuit shall be tested for continuity .
num each circuit shall be tested for grounds .
num an insulation resistance test shall be made on each circuit between the circuit and a ground .
the insulation resistance shall not be less than the values specified in the provisions of the nec .
num a functional test shall be made in which it is demonstrated that each and every part of the system functions as specified or intended herein .
the functional test for each traffic signal system shall consist of at least five days of continuous satisfactory operation .
if unsatisfactory performance of the system develops the condition shall be corrected and the test shall be repeated until the five days of continuous satisfactory operation is obtained .
functional tests shall start on any working day except friday or the day preceding a legal holiday .
num num turn on of new or modified signal systems shall be made only after all traffic signal circuits have been thoroughly tested as specified .
the initial turnon shall be made between num a.m. and num p.m. unless specified otherwise .
prior to turnon all equipment as shown on the plans shall be installed and operable .
this includes pedestrian signals pedestrian push buttons and vehicle detectors .
all louvers hoods and signal heads shall be directed to provide maximum visibility .
during the test period the state or local agency will provide the electrical energy and repair any damage caused by public traffic .
all other maintenance will be the responsibility of the contractor .
all systems shall be complete and in operation to the satisfaction of the engineer .
barricades .
construction shall conform to the requirements of section num .
rumble strips .
rumble strips shall conform to the details and locations shown on the plans .
method of measurement overhead sign structures sign bridge structures butterfly structures sign bridge cantilever structures and cantilever structures will be measured by the number of units of the various types and sizes installed and shall include structural frame members mounting brackets posts excavation and backfill and when called for on the plans safety walkways and light fixtures including all electrical equipment as required .
drilled caissons used for overhead sign structure ootings will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
installing only of sign structures will be measured by the number of units installed and shall include all hauling concrete footings removing existing sign panels respacing and adding walkway brackets adding walkways repainting excavation and backfill and furnishing and installing light fixtures including all electrical equipment as required .
overpass mounted sign brackets will be measured by the number furnished and installed and shall include all structural members required to install sign panels on overpass structures as shown on the plans and all light fixtures including all electrical equipment as required .
sign panels shall be furnished and installed under the appropriate item .
ground signs will be measured as follows concrete footings by the number used sign posts by the length in linear feet of the various types used and sign panels by the square feet of facing .
for signs other than rectangular or triangular shape the area in square feet will be computed from dimensions of the smallest rectangular shape from which a panel can be fabricated .
sign panels shall include all mounting and backing angles required .
num num mask sign legend will be measured by the actual number of signs masked and shall include panel reflective sheeting and fastening the panel to the sign .
steel sign post extensions if required will be measured and paid for as steel sign post of the type shown on the plans .
sign panels shall include background message backing zees classes num and num date of manufacture and all necessary hardware .
multidirectional breakaway assemblies will not be measured and paid for separately but will be paid for under the appropriate item e.g .
all brackets nuts bolts shims hinge plates and couplings will be paid for as steel sign post of the appropriate size anchors and concrete footings will be paid for as concrete footing of the appropriate size .
steel sign support post will be measured by the actual number of linear feet of posts not to include length of tbrackets or ubrackets that are installed and accepted .
tbrackets ubrackets wedges and mounting clamps that are required to complete the assembly as shown on the plans will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
steel sign support socket will be measured by the actual number of sockets that are installed and accepted .
concrete footing will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
when called for on the plans sign posts sockets and footings wedges and mounting clamps will be regarded as a single assembly and will be measured by the actual number of steel sign support post and socket that are installed and accepted .
steel sign support slipbase will be measured by the actual number that are installed and accepted .
concrete footing will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
when called for on the plans sign post slipbase and footing will be regarded as a single assembly and will be measured by the actual number of steel sign supports post and slipbase that are installed and accepted .
light fixtures shall include lamps switch boxes photoelectric controls electrical conduit electrical conduit in foundations and all necessary wiring in the structure only .
illuminated signs will be measured by the actual number installed including switch box footing electrical conduit in the footing post and shall also include the wiring from the light to the switch box .
barricades will be measured by the number used .
flashing beacon will be measured as a unit complete in place including sign panel and shall include all work necessary to complete the item .
solar power system for flashing beacons poles and lockable container will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num traffic signal poles shall include mast arms and all necessary hardware required to complete the item in place .
drilled caissons used as foundations for traffic signal poles will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
cabinets shall include pedestals and concrete foundations as required .
span wire poles shall include span wire cable jaw deadends cable rings concrete footings and all necessary hardware .
pole height shall be as indicated on the plans .
traffic signal controllers type nume shall include the cabinet pedestrian detectors and all auxiliary equipment required on the plans and shall include all work necessary to provide and install a complete system .
loop detector wire will be measured by the linear foot and shall include loop wire pavement sawing slot sealant leadin conduit as shown on the plans excavation backfill and all other work necessary to complete the item .
preformed loop systems will be measured as the actual length in linear feet of the sealed continuous loop system that is run to the first pull box regardless of type and accepted .
traffic signal magnetic detectors shall include all shielded leadin wire and non metallic conduit housing and all wiring necessary for the operation of the system .
traffic signal loop detector amplifiers will be measured by the number of two channel units or four channel units and shall include all incidental materials and wiring necessary for the operation of the item .
pedestrian push button post assembly will be measured by the actual number that are installed and accepted and shall include all work and materials required to complete the item .
all costs for making electrical service connections from the power source to the service switch will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
rumble strips will be measured by the actual number of linear feet that are placed and accepted adjacent to or on the roadway surface excluding gaps .
measurement of length for payment will be parallel to the roadway centerline or shoulder stripe .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract price per unit of measurement for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under num num pay item pay unit monotube overhead sign cantilever size each monotube overhead sign bridge size each monotube overhead sign bridge with cantilever size each sign bridge structure install only each overpass mounted sign bracket each concrete footing _______ each steel sign post _______ linear foot timber sign post _______ linear foot steel sign support numinch round post linear foot steel sign support numinch round socket each steel sign support numinch round post and socket each steel sign support num inch round npnum post linear foot steel sign support num inch round npnum slipbase each steel sign support num inch round npnum post and slipbase each steel sign support num inch round sch num post linear foot steel sign support num inch round sch num slipbase each steel sign support num inch round sch num post and slipbase each sign panel class square foot mask sign legend each illuminated sign each barricade type _____ each flashing beacon each modification of steel sign post each modification of timber sign post each modification of sign legend each lump sum pedestrian signal face type_____ furnish only install only each traffic signal face type_____ furnish only install only each traffic signal controller cabinet furnish only install only each traffic signal controller type_____ furnish only install only each num num pay item cont pay unit cont loop detector wire furnish only install only linear foot loop detector wire prefab special linear foot traffic signal vehicle detector amplifier type_____ furnish only install only each traffic signal vehicle detector type_____ furnish only install only each traffic signallight pole type_____ furnish onlyinstall only each traffic signal pole type_____ furnish only install only each traffic signal pedestal pole type_____ furnish only install only each traffic signal span wire pole type_____ furnish only install only each pedestrian push button post assembly each rumble strip linear foot the traffic signal component item will be furnish and install unless the summary of approximate quantities indicates whether it is to be furnish only or install only as appropriate .
the led optical units will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the cost of the traffic signal face .
the pedestrian led optical units will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the cost of the pedestrian signal face .
all costs associated with the manufacturers representative and obtaining the required documentation for tubular steel sign supports will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment for loop detector wire prefab special will include all loop wire preformed loop conduit to the first pull box outside the roadway excavation backfill and all other work and materials necessary to complete the item .
wire from the first pull box outside the roadway to the controller will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num under the pay item wiring lump sum .
conduit will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num under the pay item for the appropriate diameter of conduit .
payment for pedestrian push button post assembly will be full compensation for all work and materials including wiring required to complete the item .
num num section num water control devices description this work consists of the construction of water and erosion control devices in accordance with these specifications details shown on the plans and to the lines and grades established .
materials slide headgates and automatic drain gates shall be of the sizes designated and shall be approved by the engineer .
parshall measuring flumes including wings shall be made of galvanized sheet steel material .
galvanize coating shall be light commercial minimum .
thickness of material and fabrication method shall be as approved .
measuring flumes shall have reinforced edges and an inlet throat of the dimensions designated on the plans .
embankment protectors shall be made from material conforming to the applicable sections of these specifications .
construction requirements construction methods shall conform to the requirements of section num .
method of measurement automatic drain gates parshall measuring flumes and embankment protectors will be measured by the number of units of the various sizes installed .
slide headgates will be measured by the number of units of the various sizes and frame heights installed .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit ______inch slide headgate ______foot frame each ______inch automatic drain gate each ______inch x _____inch parshall measuring flume each embankment protector type______ each pipe concrete or other material used with any of the above items will be bid under the appropriate section .
num num section num siphons description this work consists of the construction of invert siphons in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and details shown on the plans or established .
materials concrete pipe .
concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of subsection num except that pipe and gaskets shall be of a type that will insure a watertight structure .
joints shall be selfcentering .
gaskets shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
trash guards .
steel shall conform to the requirements of subsection num and to the details shown on the plans .
trash guards shall be given one shop coat of primer and two field coats of aluminum paint in conformity with section num .
drain valves and valve boxes .
drain valves shall be gate type with flanged iron body brass trim and brass fittings .
size will be as designated on the plans .
valve boxes shall be the adjustable cast iron type with a num inch minimum inside diameter .
drain valves and valve boxes shall be approved prior to use .
drain pipe .
pipe for the drain shall conform to section num .
concrete shall conform to section num and reinforcing steel to section num .
the pipe attached to the siphon and leading to the drain valve may be nonperforated corrugated steel pipe conforming to aashto m num or of standard galvanized pipe conforming to the requirements of astm a num schedule num .
this pipe when attached to steel siphon pipe shall be bituminous dipped along with the siphon pipe .
flanges for attaching the drain valve may be galvanized or asphalt dipped .
any damaged spelter shall be repaired in accordance with subsection num both inside and outside the pipe .
construction requirements siphon pipe including drains shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
siphons shall show no leakage when filled with water and allowed to stand full for num hours .
this test shall be performed before backfilling .
method of measurement siphon pipe of the designated type will not be measured but will be the net length of pipe called for on the plans except when field changes are ordered or num num when there are errors on the plans .
in case of exceptions the quantity to be measured shall be the actual net length of conduit measured along the bottom centerline of the installed pipe .
trash guards drain valves and valve boxes will be measured by the number installed and accepted .
drain pipe will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
concrete will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
reinforcing steel will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
structure excavation and structure backfill will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
drain valves shall include the pipe for connecting the valve to the siphon together with all necessary fittings and gaskets used therewith .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit _____inch concrete siphon pipe linear foot _____inch trash guard each _____inch valve and valve box each num num section num reserved num num section num prestressed concrete description this work consists of fabricating furnishing and installing prestressed concrete members in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
this work includes the furnishing and installation of all appurtenant items necessary for the particular prestressing systems to be used including but not limited to ducts anchorage assemblies and grout used for pressure grouting ducts .
for castinplace prestressed concrete the term member as used herein shall be considered to mean the concrete which is to be prestressed .
the term tendon as used herein shall be considered to mean the prestressing steel within a duct .
both temporary and permanent posttensioning shall comply with the requirements of this section .
the term temporary posttensioning refers to the posttensioning required to control stresses during handling and erection of precast elements .
materials materials shall conform to the following anchorage devices shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
prestressing steel shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
elastomeric bearing pads shall meet the requirements of subsection num .
all reinforcing and embedment item supports bolsters chairs and spacers shall be cdot approved .
these items shall be plastic rubber or epoxy coated at all areas that will contact external concrete surfaces unless otherwise shown on the plans .
a prepackaged grout for posttensioned ducts .
num .
water .
the water used in the grout shall conform to subsection num .
num .
grout .
the grout shall meet the requirements of subsection numb .
grout.materials shall conform to the following b steel and metal for prestress members .
all steel and metal products incorporated into the work shall meet the requirements of section num .
the contractor shall keep certified mill test reports cmtrs on file for all steel and metal products used and shall furnish copies of cmtrs when requested .
num num galvanizing and metallizing of steel products shall be done in accordance with the product applicable astm method .
the product shall be galvanized after welding and fabrication is complete .
minor repair of galvanizing shall be brush coated with an approved zincrich compound that is acceptable to the qa representative .
materials and fabrication procedures shall conform to astm or ansi aws requirements .
the materials and work shall conform to the following requirements and specifications unless otherwise indicated in the contract .
num .
reinforcing bars .
all reinforcing bar material shall be grade num minimum and shall conform to astm anum or astm anum epoxy coated bars shall also meet astm dnum .
reinforcing bars that require welding shall conform to astm anum .
welding of anum bars shall be done in accordance with ansi aws d.num .
num .
welded wire reinforcement .
steel welded wire reinforcement for concrete reinforcement shall conform to astm anum .
num .
plate steel .
all plate steel shall conform to astm anum grade num specifications .
fabrication and welding of plate steel products shall be done according to ansi aws d.num .
num .
steel and metal products shall be free of loose rust and foreign substances before incorporation into the cast product .
the presence of rust on strand shall not necessarily be cause for rejection .
light rust and rust that does not result in visible pitting of the prestressing steel with the unaided eye shall be acceptable .
prior to evaluation rust shall be removed from representative lengths of prestressing strand by heavy duty scouring pads or wire brush .
after rust removal visual comparisions shall be made to picture sets in the article evaluation of degree of rusting on prestressed concrete strand published in the num mayjune edition of the pci journal .
surface conditions comparable to picture sets num through num shall be acceptable while conditions comparable to picture sets num and greater shall be cause for rejection of the prestressing strand .
c concrete for pretensioned and combination tensioned products .
materials for concrete class ps shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections hydraulic cement num fly ash num fine aggregate num coarse aggregate num curing materials num air entraining admixtures num chemical admixtures num water num num num d concrete and steel for other members .
concrete for other members shall conform to the requirements of section num and the plans .
reinforcing steel for other members shall conform to the requirements of section num .
construction requirements prestressed members .
members may be pretensioned posttensioned or a combination of pretensioned and posttensioned .
members shall be fabricated and finished as shown in the contract .
minimum cover for prestressing steel shall be num inches unless otherwise shown in the contract .
minimum clearance for reinforcing steel shall be num inch unless otherwise shown in the contract .
if the plans show only pretensioning details use of a posttensioning system will be allowed only if complete details of all necessary modifications are approved by the engineer of record .
castinplace members shall be posttensioned unless otherwise shown on the plans .
all falsework for castinplace members shall remain in place until all post tensioning and grouting has been completed and accepted by the engineer .
shop drawings .
a general .
the contractor shall furnish shop drawings in conformity with subsection num for all prestressed components .
when the contractors engineer completes or revises design details or engineering drawings then those engineering drawings and details that are submitted to the engineer shall contain the endorsement seal of a professional engineer registered in the state of colorado .
cdot review of the shop drawings does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the adequacy of the prestressed members .
minor changes to design details or engineering drawings that do not represent a significant change to the original design will not require a professional engineer seal .
the contractor shall submit supporting calculations for these changes along with the shop drawings .
b pretensioned members .
the shop drawings shall include the following num superstructure framing plan .
num all unit dimensions .
num location and arrangement of prestressing strands .
num initial and final jacking forces .
num location description and detail of structural reinforcing items excluding minor items used for field erection .
num location of all holddown devices .
num location and description of all plates .
num provisions for diaphragm connections .
num num num blockout and keyway dimensions if any .
num location and detail of debonded strands .
num strand detensioning sequence .
c posttensioned members .
the shop drawings for posttensioned members shall show the following num strand and bar properties including material type modulus of elasticity ultimate strength diameter and crosssectional area assumed in the design .
num duct properties including material type and minimum inside and maximum outside diameters and friction coefficients of the ductstrand system if different from shown on the plans .
num the position and profile of the ducts and tendons along the length of the member .
each duct position shall be defined at tenth points along the length of the member .
the minimum clearance from the edge of concrete to the edge of a duct shall be shown .
num location of closure pours and associated duct splices and details of duct splice including the details and specifications of the shrink sleeve material .
num the maximum offset between the center of the duct and the center of force in the duct for each unique strand and bar and duct combination .
the resultant force of all permanent tendons in the member shall match the profile indicated on the plans .
num the initial and final force at each anchorage .
the initial force is defined as the largest force at each anchorage before anchor set and after friction losses .
the final force is defined as the residual force remaining after anchor set and long term losses .
num complete dimensions and properties necessary to fabricate and install each unique anchorage device including the type of materials yield strengths distribution plates wedges trumpets anchorage blocks and other appurtenant items .
adjacent reinforcement shall be detailed showing how it will coordinate with the anchorage device and its reinforcement .
num the dimensions and properties necessary to fabricate and install the bursting splitting and other reinforcement required by the prestressing system as shown on the plans or as proposed by the contractor .
included shall be crosssectional areas yield strength the location of the reinforcement and the diameter and pitch of the spirals .
if no additional bursting steel is required it shall be so stated on the shop drawings .
num the minimum length of strand or bar projection at the live ends and accessible dead ends .
num num num the preload force for each unique tendon .
the preload force is defined as num percent of the jacking force .
num the required total jacking force for each unique tendon .
num the total final elongation after dead and live end anchor sets and the measurable elongation for each tendon .
the measurable elongation is defined as the total elongation at the live end after preload while the stressing equipment is tensioning the tendon to the total jacking force .
the tendon length used for calculations shall include the full length of strand that is being stressed .
num the sequence of stressing including temporary and permanent post tensioning .
num blockout or buildout concrete dimensions and reinforcement details .
num if the contractor elects to submit an alternative system as defined in subsection numcnum the contractor shall also provide the following as appropriate .
if the anchorage device will differ from what is shown on the plans the contractor shall submit calculations or manufacturer test certification consistent with the contract .
the calculations shall show the complete design of the anchorage device including splitting steel bursting reinforcement the distribution plate and the bearing stresses transmitted to the concrete by the anchorage device .
the manufacturers test certification shall certify the adequacy of the anchorage device .
the shop drawings shall reflect the anchorage device design .
if the flare of the tendons is different from what is shown on the plans the contractor shall submit design and details of appropriate reinforcement and concrete dimensions to accommodate the flare .
along with the shop drawing details six copies of computations for friction losses calculated measurable elongations the maximum offset between the center of force and center of duct for each unique tendon and the stressing sequence shall be submitted for review .
the friction losses shall be determined in accordance with the plans and as provided for in the currentaashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
d for combination tensioned members refer to subsections num b and c. notification of fabrication for pretensioned and combination tensioned members .
a start of work .
prior to beginning the work the contractor shall provide notice to the engineer and the quality assurance qa representative as defined in subsection numa so that qa services may be provided .
the notice shall be at least seven days before fabrication begins .
num num the anticipated production schedule including the start of work phase work and shipment dates shall be submitted in writing to the qa representative before any work begins .
fabrication shall not be started until the shop drawings have been returned with the engineers review stamp indicating reviewed no exception taken or reviewed revise as noted or resubmit revise as noted in accordance with subsection num and delivered to the contractors site of fabrication .
b production schedule changes .
accelerated changes to the proposed production schedule including start of work phase work and shipment dates shall require advance written notification be provided to the engineer and the qa representative .
the written notice of change shall be received at least num hours before fabrication begins unless otherwise approved in writing by the engineer or the qa representative .
c notice of shipment .
the qa representative shall be notified in writing at least num hours before shipment of prestressed members to the job site .
d notification .
failure to notify the engineer or the designated qa representative as described in this section may be cause for rejection .
inspection of pretensioned posttensioned and combination tensioned members .
a process control and quality assurance .
process control pc of prestressed concrete fabrication is the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall designate a pc manager who shall be responsible for product quality requirements as defined in the specifications and the contractors approved pc plan pcp .
the pc manager shall possess and maintain certification at level ii minimum from the prestressed concrete institute pci or be a licensed professional engineer in the state of colorado and shall have one year minimum of construction related experience .
the pc manager shall not be supervised by the contractors production section .
if grouting for post tensioning ducts of combination tensioned members is done by the precast girder fabricator the pc manager shall possess and maintain an american segmental bridge institute asbi certified grouting technician certificate .
if prestressing duct and anchorage installationinspection of duct and anchorage stressing of tendons air testing of ducts or grouting of ducts of multistrand bonded tendons of the posttensioning system for combination tensioned members is done by the precast girder fabricator the pc manager shall possess a pti level i bonded tendon training certificate .
quality assurance qa and product acceptance are the prerogatives of the engineer .
the qa representative acts for and in behalf of the engineer on all matters within the scope of the contract documents as delegated by the engineer .
qa administration will be performed to the extent necessary to assure contract compliance .
the qa representative shall possess the american segmental bridge institute grouting certification training .
num num repeated out of tolerance work including dimensional nonconformance shall be considered as recurring deficiencies .
recurring deficiencies shall be considered as evidence that required pc is not being provided .
when the qa representative determines that fabrication operations are producing recurring defects that do not conform to the contract and the pcp requirements the contractor will be notified that the present work is unacceptable .
work shall not continue until the pc manager has submitted a written proposal addressing corrective procedures that the contractor will take to prevent recurrence of the nonconforming work .
fabrication shall not resume until the proposal has been reviewed and accepted in writing by the qa representative .
b process control plan pcp .
the contractor shall submit a written pcp to the qa representative prior to the beginning of fabrication .
the pcp shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the contractors pc manager .
the pcp shall list all methods utilized by the contractor to ensure that the work conforms to contract requirements .
the pc section is responsible for establishing the pcp as well as conformance to the pcp .
fabrication shall not begin until the pcp has been reviewed and accepted in writing by the qa representative .
if work methods for a specific project or product are not listed in the original pcp the contractor shall submit written addenda addressing the proposed methods that are necessary to meet contract requirements .
fabrication shall not begin until the addenda have been reviewed and accepted in writing by the qa representative .
the pcp shall address the following num names and qualifications of the pc manager and personnel conducting inspection and testing .
this list shall be updated when changes in personnel occur .
num list of material suppliers posttensioning system supplier post tensioning grout supplier and certified testing agencies used the list shall be updated when vendors change .
num materials sampling and testing schedule showing testing methods and frequencies .
num pc inspection methods and procedures for all stages of fabrication operations .
num methods for curing products and test specimens .
num method and sequence for tensioning strands including methods used for verifying equal distribution of jacking forces .
num method and sequence of detensioning strands and procedure .
num num num posttensioning system .
duct and anchorage inspection schedule duct splices at closure pour inspection schedule and onsite duct air pressure testing schedule including names of the responsible representatives who will conduct inspections and testing .
the responsible representatives shallpossess an american segmental bridge institute asbi certified grouting technician certificate and a pti level num bonded tendon training certificate .
num written report format for materials sampling testing and inspection for all phases of the work .
num copies of all concrete mix designs to be used including mix design computations and test data .
num provisions for fabrication operations during cold windy or hot weather conditions .
num procedures for patching small production holes and holes left by strand holddown devices .
num procedures for identifying evaluating and reporting defects including dimensional nonconformance discovered during pcqa inspections and testing .
num procedures for notifying the qa representative of structural defects and submittal of written proposal for repairs .
num provisions for contingency operation when concrete delivery is interrupted due to malfunction of equipment during fabrication .
c frequency .
pc inspection and testing at all intervals of duct and anchorage placement duct splices at closure pours onsite duct air pressure tests and forming tensioning steel and concrete placement curing and storage operations shall be performed in accordance with the accepted pcp .
the pcp shall contain provisions for increased frequencies of inspection and testing when operations or products do not conform to the contract .
d written records and reports .
the pc manager shall review and submit the following completed records and reports to the qa representative before the product receives acceptance by the pc section num .
prestressing steel tensioning reports for each setup showing the jacking force calculations initial and final jacking force used calculated and final net measured elongation applicable stressing corrections for seating slippage shortening rotation movement and temperature certified mill test reports for prestressing steel used jack identification number and date and time of stressing .
num .
concrete a daily report of each mix design used showing the fresh concrete slump temperature unit weight and air content if specified .
the daily report shall also include the following data num num num date and time of casting .
num bed and setup location .
num ambient conditions .
num total cubic yards placed .
num girder mark and unique submark identifications .
num actual product curing temperature charts or graphs .
num actual curing enclosure humidity charts or graphs .
num average release strength in psi .
num date and time of release strength .
num copies of individual batch tickets when requested by the qa representative .
num .
prepour inspection records shall include the items to be checked as listed in the pcp .
num .
postpour inspection records shall include the items to be checked as listed in the pcp .
these records shall include all discovered variances from product dimensional tolerances .
num .
report of minor repairs made to each individual product .
num .
the following written records shall be submitted to the qa representative before product shipment num elastomeric bearing pads product manufacturers certification and suppliers letter of compliance .
num length measurement of beams within three days prior to shipping .
num product camber measurement within seven days prior to shipping .
num .
steel and metal .
for reinforcing bars welded wire reinforcement plate steel and miscellaneous steel and metal products incorporated into the work the pc manager shall review and maintain all certified mill test reports cmtrs .
the pc manager shall certify in writing that all steel and metal products comply with the contract .
when requested pc manager shall furnish copies of cmtrs to the qa representative .
num .
posttensioning ducts .
the responsible representative meeting the requirements of subsection num bnum shall submit to the qa representative a letter certifying that the ducts duct splices and num num anchorages are installed according to the contract and that they have been inspected by the responsible representative of the posttensioning system supplier and adequately held an air pressure after stressing and before grouting .
after stressing and before grouting the contractor shall install all grout caps inlets and outlets and test the duct with compressed air to determine if duct connections require repair .
in the presence of the engineer the contractor shall pressurize the duct to num psi and lockoff the outside air source .
pressure loss shall be recorded for one minute .
a pressure loss of num psi is acceptable for ducts having a length equal to or less than num feet and a pressure loss of num psi is acceptable for ducts longer than num feet .
if the pressure loss exceeds the allowable the contracotr shall repair leaking locations using methods approved by the engineer and retest pressure loss ..
fabrication .
a pretensioning general .
prestressing shall be done with calibrated jacking equipment that conforms to the requirements of subsection num .
strands shall be tensioned in accordance with the approved sequence as indicated in the pcp .
all indicating dials shall be at least num inches in diameter calibrated digital display equipment is also acceptable .
the stressing sheet shall show the measurements factors and computations for tension and elongation including all stressing corrections if these factors are not shown on the stressing sheet they must be submitted with the shop drawing and calculation index .
the applicable stressing corrections shall be applied at the time of final stressing .
before using any stressing correction for friction the need for corrections shall be proven by load cell or dynamometer checks at both ends of the setup .
temporary overstressing shall not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
tensioned strands shall not be seated during temporary overstressing .
tensioned strands shall maintain vertical and horizontal position within allowable tolerances as specified in subsection numb throughout the entire length of the member intermediate strand supports shall be used if the tolerances can not be maintained .
tensioned strands shall not be entangled or intertwined with other strands except for draped strands in the bundled area between hold down devices .
a pc employee shall witness and verify final tensioning operations and record the jacking forces and the net measured elongations .
jacking force shall be recorded to the nearest num pound increment used .
net elongation shall be measured to the nearest  inch .
tensioning operations shall also meet the following requirements num .
initial tensioning shall not exceed num percent of the jacking force .
num .
tension load readings shall be taken from pressure gages dynamometers num num or load cells .
if pressure gages or dynamometers are used the applied load shall register between num and num percent of the total reading capacity of the system .
if load cells are used the applied load shall register between num and num percent of the total load cell capacity .
if a master gage system is used a current certified calibrated graph or table correlating actual loads with the master gage readings shall be given to the qa representative .
num .
the jacking force applied shall be within plus or minus num percent of the design jacking force .
the net measured elongation shall be within plus or minus num percent of the calculated elongation if net measured elongation is not within tolerance the strand shall be stressed from both ends .
the algebraic comparison of the variation between the jacking force and the net measured elongation shall agree within plus or minus num percent .
if these three tolerances are not achieved tensioning operations shall cease all stressing deficiencies shall be corrected before regular tensioning operations resume .
num .
if any wire or wires in a numwire strand breaks whether or not that strand shall be removed and replaced shall be determined based on whether forces are within tolerances as specified in subsection numanum and by referring to pci mnl num num .
num .
strand or spliced strand that exhibits unraveling after stressing shall be removed and replaced with a sound strand .
strand splices shall not fall within the member to be cast .
num .
strands that have received final tensioning shall be protected from temperature fluctuations greater than num f until the time of concrete placement .
the contractor may apply stress corrections at the rate of num percent per num f for temperature variation between final tensioning and concrete placement .
this requirement does not apply to selfstressing bed setups .
the total stressing force applied shall not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
num .
tensioned prestressing steel shall be free from dirt mud ice snow build up oil grease paint loose rust and all other bond inhibiting substances prior to concrete placement .
visibly pitted strand shall not be used .
num .
draped strand final stressing shall be accomplished by any of the methods described below a. jacking in draped position .
final stressing shall begin at one end of the bed .
strands that do not meet the tension vs. elongation tolerances shall be jacked from the other end so that all tolerances are achieved .
if all draped strands conform to tolerances after jacking at one end the jacking force shall be verified on at least two strands at the opposite end .
num num b .
partial stressing and subsequent strain .
initial and partial stress may be induced from either end of the bed .
final stress shall be attained by lifting or depressing the strands to the design location .
final stress and strain shall be applied in such a manner that uniform distribution of jacking force is attained throughout the bed setup and all tension vs. elongation tolerances have been achieved .
the distribution of force shall be verified on at least two strands at the opposite end .
c. stage tensioning .
initial tensioning shall be done from one end .
partial tensioning may then be performed from either end .
when final stressing is completed the sum of the partial elongations shall be used to verify that all tension vs. elongation tolerances have been achieved .
this method may also be used for tensioning of straight strands .
num .
holddown devices shall be placed within a num inch horizontal tolerance from the locations shown on the plans if placement is moved toward the center of girder and within a num inch horizontal tolerance from the locations shown on the plans if placement is moved toward the girder ends .
if minimum or maximum placement locations are shown on the plans the placement tolerances shall not encroach beyond those locations .
the holddown device shall not encumber or displace adjacent straight strands out of tolerance and shall not produce nicking of any drape or bundled strands .
the device shall secure the draped or bundled stands in the positions shown on the shop drawings within all tolerances required by subsection numb .
b combination tensioned members .
pretensioning of combination members shall be performed in accordance with subsection numa .
all post tensioning operations shall conform to subsection numc c posttensioning method .
num .
bonded posttensioning and grouting systems review .
upon review of the shop drawings the engineer will schedule a meeting with the contractor to review the posttensioning and grouting procedures to be used on the project .
the following individuals shall be in attendance at this meeting num the engineer and qa representative .
num the contractors superintendent .
num the posttensioning system supplier .
this individual shall have the following qualifications i be a professional engineer registered in the state of colorado num num ii be knowledgeable in the analysis of posttensioned structures the design required for shop drawing development field calculations for revising tendon elongations from the assumed parameters to the actual strand area and modulus used on the project as determined by tests conducted on the strand by cdot and stressing of tendons .
iii be a holder of a current certified grout technician certificate from the american segmental bridge institute asbi .
iv be able to be present during all tendon stressing and grouting to keep written records of these operations for submittal to the engineer for review .
num a grout manufacturers field representative who is a fulltime employee of the grout manufacturer .
this representative shall provide technical product assistance to the grouting crew and shall be present during startup of grouting operations .
this representative shall be able to be present at the request of the engineer should problems with the grout occur .
num the contractors designee who will be in direct charge of the post tensioning and grouting crews .
this individual shall have the following qualifications i be skilled in the use of the posttensioning and grouting equipment .
ii have at least three years experience on previous projects supervising the posttensioning and grouting of structures of similar type and magnitude .
iii be present on the project during the installation of the post tensioning system stressing operations and grouting operations .
num contractors pc manager .
num other individuals as deemed necessary by the contractor or engineer .
ten days prior to the posttensioning and grouting system review meeting the contractor shall submit a written plan for grouting the ducts .
grouting shall not begin until the engineer has provided written approval of the grouting plan .
the grouting plan shall provide at least the following information num the name training and experience record of the person supervising the grouting operations .
num other individuals as deemed necessary by the contractor or engineer .
num num num name of the grout material and the required certifications and test results .
num manufacturer and type of grout mixer and pump to be used including provisions for backup equipment and spare parts .
num grouting procedure and the role of each person on the crew .
num theoretical grout volume calculations .
num method for closing all duct orifices as grouting progresses .
num air testing of ducts .
num grout mixing and pumping procedures .
num location of grout inlet and direction of pumping .
num procedures for handling blockages procedures and equipment required for flushing ducts of grout if necessary and how and when it will be decided whether or not to flush ducts .
num methods to inspect behind anchorages grout inlets and outlets and vents for voids .
num list of production testing along with acceptable values according to table num .
num acceptable specific gravities for mud balance test provided by the grout manufacturer .
num procedures for post grouting repair of all grout voids detected .
num procedure for installing corrosion inhibitor inside tendons if necessary .
num .
alternative posttensioning systems .
the contractor may choose to supply the design and details of the prestressing system shown on the plans or submit an alternative for approval .
the following alternatives may be presented to the engineer for his review and approval num alternative anchorage systems .
alternative anchorage systems including all associated anchor zone reinforcing steel associated with the alternative anchorage system and all details of the alternative anchorage system shall be shown on approved shop drawings and stamped by a professional engineer who is registered in the state of colorado and who is an employee of the posttensioning system supplier or anchorage supplier .
num alternative number or sizes of ducts .
the duct pattern must conform to an acceptable pattern as indicated on the plans .
num num num alternative jacking ends .
num alternative number of strands provided the minimum area of steel and the center of force matches that indicated on the plans .
num alternative duct type friction coefficients or anchor set .
the stressing sequence details or procedures shall not differ from what is called for on the plans such that it would cause a change in the jacking force times initial stress ratios at the critical points identified on the plans beyond an acceptable tolerance of num to num percent .
if the contractor elects to submit alternative details the alternative details shall conform to the following num the final center of force shall match that as indicated on the plans .
num if the plans call for a tendon to be composed of a certain number of strands the contractors alternative shall have that same tendon composed of the same number of strands .
num if the plans call for a tendon to be composed of bars the contractors alternative shall have that same tendon composed of bars .
num if the plans call for ducts and tendons internal to the member the contractors alternative shall also have internal ducts .
similarly if the plans call for ducts and tendons external to the member then the contractors alternative shall also have external ducts .
num the alternative shall include details or calculations supporting the adequacy of the contractors alternative as specified in the shop drawing and calculation requirements of this specification .
num bridge crosssectional geometries dimensions and clearances shall match those indicated on the plans with the exception of girder flares near anchorages .
num .
duct fabrication and placement .
duct enclosures for prestressing steel shall be either rigid corrugated plastic or galvanized corrugated rigid ferrous metal .
metal ducts shall be fabricated with either welded or interlocked seams .
galvanizing of the welded seams for metal ducts will not be required .
the ducts shall be mortar tight and accurately placed within  inch of the positions shown on the approved shop drawings .
ducts shall be securely fastened to maintain their correct alignment during placing of concrete .
joints between sections of duct shall be positive rigid connections which do not result in angle changes at the joints .
waterproof tape shall be used at the connections .
ducts shall be bent without crimping or flattening .
transition couplings connecting ducts to anchoring devices need not be num num galvanized .
ducts shall be free of kinks .
all changes of direction shall have a radius of num feet unless otherwise shown on the plans .
shrink sleeves at duct splices at closure pours shall be used .
the duct area shall be at least twice the net area of the prestressing steel for tendons composed of multiple wires bars or strands .
the duct diameter shall be at least  inch larger than the nominal diameter of the wire bar or strand for tendons made up of a single wire bar or strand .
all ducts shall have grout openings at each end .
grout vents shall be provided at all high points and low points of draped tendons .
in addition at draped tendon high points secondary high point gout vents shall be located three feet beyond all high points in the direction that the grout will be pumped .
grout openings and vents shall be securely fastened to the ducts and forms or reinforcing steel to prevent displacement while placing concrete .
the vents shall be mortar tight taped as necessary and shall provide means for injection of grout .
ends of grout vents shall be removed to num inch inside the face of concrete surface after the grouting has been completed and the holes filled with an approved epoxy or nonshrink grout and finished smooth .
prior to installation of the prestressing steel the contractor shall show that the ducts are free from debris and water .
for ducts which are internal to the member the contractor shall show that the ducts are free from any blockage or damage from the concrete placing operations .
the contractor shall do this immediately after the concrete encasing the duct has achieved initial set .
the precast fabricator shall be responsible for the condition of the ducts during fabrication if the member is precast .
the precast fabricator shall demonstrate to the qa representative that the ducts are free and clear of any obstructions or damage and are able to accept the intended posttensioning tendons by passing a torpedo through the ducts .
a torpedo that has the same crosssectional shape as the duct and that is num inch smaller all around than the clear nominal inside dimension of the duct shall be used .
no deductions shall be made to the torpedo section dimensions allowed in the manufacture or fixing of the ducts .
for curved ducts the length shall be determined so that when both ends of the torpedo touch the outermost wall of the duct the torpedo is num inch clear of the innermost wall .
acceptance shall be based on the torpedo passing through the duct easily .
nonconformance is when the torpedo does not pass through the ducts easily and shall be addressed in accordance with num .
once installed the ducts including the ends of the ducts at the anchorages grout ports and duct vents shall be sealed immediately to num num prevent the entry of water or other debris until the tendons are grouted .
the use of water soluble oil in the ducts and flushing the ducts with water will not be allowed .
num .
posttensioning equipment and procedure .
a .
installing tendons .
excess water in ducts shall be removed by blowing oilfree compressed air through the ducts .
posttensioning strands used to make up the tendon shall be pushed or pulled through the ducts using methods which will not snag the strands on any lips or joints in the ducts .
the ends of strands which are pushed through the duct shall be rounded off or fitted with a smooth protective cap .
strand that is pushed shall not be intentionally rotated by any mechanical device during the installation of the posttensioning into the duct .
the ends of strands which are pulled through the duct shall be assembled to form the tendon and pulled using a special steel wire sock chinese finger or other device attached to the end .
the ends of the strands may be electric arc welded together for this purpose as long as at least num foot to num ft of the strands from the welded end depending on size of tendon is removed after installation .
the ends of strands of the preassembled tendon shall be rounded to facilitate smooth passage through the duct .
strands shall be cut using an abrasive saw or equal .
flame cutting or plasma cutting of strands is allowed only with permission from the engineer .
the responsible representative identified in item num under subsection numb shall be present at all times during stressing of bonded posttensioned members .
b. tensioning .
tensioning shall be done with approved jacking equipment .
hydraulic jacks shall be equipped with accurate pressure gauges at least num inches in diameter .
the combination of jack and gauge shall have been calibrated within the last num months in accordance with subsection numa .
a certified calibration chart graph or table showing this calibration of the jack and gauge combination shall be furnished to the engineer .
the range of calibrations shall encompass the range of required forces indicated on the shop plans .
the jacking equipment shall be capable of simultaneously stressing all wires strands or bars for each individual tendon .
tendons shall be stressed in accordance with the sequence as indicated on the approved shop drawings .
if the contractor chooses num num to deviate from the sequence the contractor shall resubmit the shop drawings for approval .
the sequence shall not cause stresses in excess of the maximum allowable stresses shown on the plans .
tendons shall be preloaded to num percent of their total jacking force before measuring elongations .
measured elongations shall be within num percent of the calculated values unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
a broken or damaged strand is cause for rejection of the tendon .
if a strand is rejected the remaining strands in the tendon will be evaluated by the engineer for reuse .
where dead end anchorages and tendons are accessible the anchorage system and length of projecting prestressing steel shall permit jacking with the same jacking equipment that was used on the live end .
tendon projections at the live end and accessible dead ends shall not be cut off until all posttensioning is completed and accepted .
the representative of the posttensioning system supplier shall keep a record of the following items for each tendon installed and provide a copy to the engineer the day stressing is completed num project name and number .
num contractor and subcontractor .
num tendon location strand diameter and number of strands .
num date strand was first installed in the ducts .
num heat number of the strands .
num assumed and actual strand crosssectional area and modulus of elasticity .
num date stressed .
num date of calibration of the jack and pressure gauge combination with their identification numbers .
num required initial and final jacking force and the gauge pressure .
num anticipated and actual elongations and anchor set .
num all deviations from the plans specifications and approved shop drawings shall be brought to the attention of the engineer for immediate resolution .
num num posttensioning anchorages and distribution .
prestressing steel shall be secured at the ends by means of approved permanent type anchoring devices .
anchorages and couplers shall develop at least num percent of the minimum specified ultimate strength of the prestressing steel .
the coupling of tendons shall not reduce the elongation at rupture below the requirements of the tendon itself .
couplers and coupler components shall be enclosed in housings long enough to permit necessary movements .
couplers for tendons shall be used only at locations specifically indicated or approved by the engineer .
couplers shall not be used at points of sharp tendon curvature .
permanent anchorage grout caps are required and shall be installed before grouting begins .
anchorage devices shall have a minimum clear concrete or grout coverage of num inches in every direction .
alternative corrosion protection methods for anchorages shall be shown on the shop drawings submitted by the contractor .
the prestressing force shall be effectively distributed to the concrete by means of an approved anchoring device .
such devices shall conform to the following requirements num the average concrete bearing stresses on the concretecreated anchorage distribution plates shall not exceed the values allowed by the following equations during jacking ci b b ci cp f a a f f .num num num num after jacking c b b ci cp f a a f f .num num num num where fcp permissible compressive concrete stress f ci compressive strength of concrete at time of jacking f c compressive strength of concrete ab maximum area of the portion of the concrete anchorage surface that is geometrically similar to and concentric with the area of the anchorage ab bearing of the anchorage num num if bursting steel is not used the peak bearing pressure on the concrete at the time of jacking from the distribution plate shall not exceed numfc i .
if the distribution plate or anchorage device is within num inches of any concrete edge or corner or another distribution plate or anchorage device the pressure on the concrete shall not exceed numfc i .
construction joints shall not pass under distribution plates or anchors.another distribution plate or anchorage device the pressure on the concrete shall not exceed numfc i .
construction joints shall not pass under distribution plates or anchors .
num bending moments in the plates or assemblies induced by the pull of the prestressing steel shall not exceed the plastic strength of the material or cause visible distortion of the distribution plate when num percent of the ultimate prestress load is applied as determined by the engineer .
num distribution plates may be omitted if the anchorage device distributes the stresses in the concrete consistent with these specifications and provided that this anchorage device is used in conjunction with embedded bursting and splitting reinforcement .
bonding and grouting .
a general .
posttensioned prestressing steel shall be bonded by completely filling the void space within a duct with grout .
prestressing steel to be bonded shall be free of dirt loose rust or other deleterious substances .
the ducts shall be kept free of water dirt or other deleterious foreign materials that will inhibit bond until the tendons are grouted .
time from installing the prestressing steel in the ducts in an unstressed condition to grouting after stressing shall not exceed thirty days .
if a corrosion inhibitor as specified below is used on the strands in the ducts the time limit shall not exceed sixty days .
grouting shall proceed as soon as possible after stressing of the prestressing steel in the ducts .
if a corrosion inhibitor is used on the strands in the ducts it shall be applied after posttensioning is completed and accepted and grouting accessories are installed so that tendons are sealed .
the post tensioning system installer shall submit an installation log .
a copy of the log that documents the day the strands were installed within the duct and the corrosion inhibitor applied to the strands in the duct with the duct given an identification easily referenced to the plans shall be provided to the engineer .
all pertinent product numbers and the the corrosion inhibitor brand and type shall be documented in the log .
verfication shall be made weekly that the tendons remain sealed and grout vents drains and caps have not been damaged .
b grout .
grout shall be prepackaged in bags .
the following information shall be printed on the grout bags product name name of the producer date of packaging lot number and mixing instructions .
grout shall not contain any lumps or other evidence of hydration .
num num the grout shall not contain aluminum powder or compounds which will produce hydrogen gas carbon dioxide or oxygen .
in addition the grout shall not contain fluorides sulphites nitrates or acidsoluble chloride ions which exceed num percent by weight of the cementitious materials .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with written certification from the grout manufacturer that the grout does not contain or produce these elements or compounds with the grouting plan .
the grout shall conform to the following standard and modified astm tests in table num when mixed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions num num table num property test value test method total chloride ions max .
num by weight of cementitious material astm cnum fine aggregate if utilized max .
size num m no .
num sieve astm cnum volume change at num hours and num days num to num astm cnum num expansion numminimum nummaximum for up to num hours astm cnum compressive strength at num days average of num cubes num psi minimum astm cnum initial set of the grout num hours minimum num hours maximum astm cnum bleeding at num hours maximum num astm cnum num permeability at num days maximum num coulombs at num volts for num hours astm cnum fluidity testnum efflux time from flow cone astm method a immediately after mixing num seconds minimum num seconds maximum astm cnum or num seconds minimum num seconds maximum astm cnum num b num minutes after mixing with remixing for num seconds num seconds maximum astm cnum or num seconds maximum astm c num num table num and footnotes continued on next page .
num num table num continued footnotes for table num num astm cnum shall be modified to include verification at both num hours and num days .
num adjustments to flow rates shall be achieved by strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num grout fluidity shall meet either the standard astm cnum flow cone test or the modified test described herein .
modify the astm cnum test by filling the cone to the top instead of to the standard level .
the efflux time is the time to fill a one liter container placed directly under the flow cone .
num astm cnum shall be modified to conform with the wick induced bleed test as follows i use a wick made of a num inch length of astm anum seven wire num inch diameter strand .
wrap the strand with two inch wide duct or electrical tape at each end prior to cutting to avoid splaying to the wires when it is cut .
degrease with acetone or hexane solvent and wire brush to remove any surface rust on the strand before temperature conditioning .
ii condition the dry ingredients mixing water prestressing strand and test apparatus overnight to num to num f. iii mix the conditioned dry ingredients with the conditioned mixing water and place num ml of the resulting grout into the num ml cylinder .
measure and record the level of the top of the grout .
iv completely insert the strand into the graduated cylinder .
center and fasten the strand so it remains essentially parallel to the vertical axis of the cylinder .
measure and record the level of the top of the grout .
v store the mixed grout at the temperature range listed in ii .
vi measure the level of the bleed water every num minutes for the first hour and hourly for two successive readings thereafter .
vii calculate the bleed water if any at the end of the three hour test period and the resulting expansion in accordance with the procedures outlined in astm cnum with the quantity of bleed water expressed as a percent of the initial grout volume .
note if the bleed water remains above or below the top of the original grout height .
note if any bleed water is absorbed into the specimen during the test .
grout used on the project shall have been sampled and tested within the last twelve months in accordance with the above referenced test procedures .
the contractor shall provide certified test reports for the grout used on the project from an independent aashto accredited laboratory and a sample of the grout for evaluation by the department with the plan for grouting the ducts .
the grout sample submitted to the project shall be at least num grams in a sealed container .
grout which does not meet the above requirements shall not be used .
num num each lot of grout used on the project shall have been sampled and tested within the last six months in accordance with the above referenced test procedures .
the contractor shall provide certified test reports for each lot of grout from an independently certified cement concrete research laboratory for a listing of facilities contact nist gaithersburg maryland num with the plan for grouting the ducts .
lots which do not meet the above requirements will be rejected .
c mixing of grout .
all grout shall be mixed with a high speed shear colloidal mixer .
d grouting .
all grouting operations shall be performed under the immediate control of a person who has completed the american segmental bridge institute asbi grouting certification training program .
the contractor shall perform the following tests and report the results to the engineer num one pressure bleed test per day per lot in accordance with the requirements of appendix c of the specification for grouting of post tensioned structures by the posttensioning institute .
the gelman filtration funnel shall be pressurized to num psi and the maximum percent bleed shall be zero .
num two mud balance tests per day or when there is a visual or apparent change in the characteristics of the grout in accordance with the api recommended practice numbnum standard procedure for field testing waterbased drilling fluids .
num minimum of one strength test per day per lot in accordance with astm cnum and the minimum num day compressive strength shall be num psi .
num minimum of two fluidity tests flow cone one at the mixer and one at the duct outlet in accordance with astm cnum standard tests method for flow of grout for preplacedaggregate concrete flow cone method .
the efflux time shall be between num and num seconds .
grout shall be injected from the lowest end of a tendon to the highest end in an uphill direction .
a continuous oneway flow of grout shall be maintained for each duct .
all grout vent openings shall be open when grouting starts .
grout shall be allowed to flow to the first vent from the inlet pipe until residual slugs of water or entrapped air have been eliminated and the grout has the same consistency as that of the grout being injected .
the vent shall then be capped or otherwise closed .
remaining vents shall be capped or closed in sequence in the same manner except that at draped tendon high points the secondary vents placed a short distance downstream from the high point vent shall be closed before the highpoint vent .
num num the contractor shall inspect the interiors of box girders during grouting operations for grout leakage .
leaks shall be sealed before grouting is continued .
grout shall be pumped through the duct and continuously wasted at the outlet pipe until all visible slugs of water or air are ejected .
to insure that the tendon remains filled with grout the outlet shall be closed and the pumping pressure allowed to build to a minimum of num psi and held for one minute before the inlet vent is closed .
for all vertical tendons that are num feet and taller a standpipe shall be provided at the upper end of the tendon to collect bleed water and allow it to be removed from the grout .
this device shall be designed with commercial steel plumbing fittings so that the grout level will not drop below the elevation at the highest point in the upper anchorage device due to bleeding .
if the level of the grout drops below the highest point in the upper anchorage device additional grout shall immediately be added to the standpipe .
after the grout has hardened the standpipe shall be removed .
for vertical internal tendons if the grouting pressure exceeds the maximum recommended pumping pressure the grout shall be injected at increasingly higher outlets which become inlets that have been or are ready to be closed as long as oneway flow of grout is maintained .
grout shall be allowed to flow from each outlet until all slugs of air and water have been purged prior to using that outlet for injection .
plugs caps and valves thus required shall not be removed or opened until the grout has set .
the contractor shall monitor all anchorages grout ports and vents periodically until the grout sets .
the engineer shall be notified if bleed water is dripping from these locations .
bleed water may be an indication of voids and will require investigation by the contractor after the grout sets .
after the grout has set the grout port and vent plugs shall be removed .
the contractor shall inspect the tendon anchorages grout ports and vents for voids or other evidence of incomplete grouting .
if evidence is found of voids in these areas the contractor shall submit a plan for regrouting the voids to the engineer for approval .
all costs for remedial grouting will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
e temperature considerations .
the temperature of the concrete adjacent to the ducts shall be num f or higher from the time of grouting until site cured numinch grout cubes tested in accordance with aashto t num reach a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
grout shall be between num and num f during mixing and pumping .
if necessary the mixing water shall be heated or cooled .
num num equipment .
equipment used for fabrication of pretensioned and combination tensioned members shall conform to the following requirements a jacking equipment and load cells .
all equipment shall be calibrated as a system that represents actual use .
jacks gauge and pump systems and load cells shall be calibrated at intervals not longer than num months or whenever the tensioning system yields erratic results .
master gage systems shall be calibrated at intervals not longer than six months or whenever the tensioning system yields erratic results .
if load sensor or indicator components are replaced or repaired the system shall be recalibrated before resuming jacking operations .
system error shall not exceed plus or minus num percent of the applied loads .
calibration shall be performed by an agency or service that uses equipment certified by the national institute for standards and technology nist .
accuracy of the calibration equipment shall be traceable to the nist records .
the calibration procedures used shall conform to astm standard practices e num and e num .
each time that calibration verification is performed a copy of the certified test report shall be furnished to the qa representative or the engineer .
b concrete batching equipment .
the weighing system shall be calibrated at intervals no longer than num months .
if disassembly replacement damage or repair of scales or balance indicators should occur the weighing system shall be recalibrated before resumption of mix operations .
scale calibrations shall be performed in conformance with the state of colorado department of agriculture requirements .
current calibration labels shall be visibly displayed on the equipment .
the batching system shall record the weights of all concrete mix ingredients for each batch .
ingredient weights shall meet the requirements of astm cnum section num measuring materials .
the batching system shall be equipped with a flow meter which measures the weight or volume of the added mixing water within plus or minus num percent of the total water added to each batch .
c concrete load testing machine .
the test machine shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
d concrete cylinder molds .
molds shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
e forms .
forms shall be sufficiently mortar tight to minimize fresh mortar paste leakage and sufficiently rigid to prevent product distortion due to concrete pressure or consolidation operations .
form joints shall be kept clean smooth and adjusted to minimize form finish irregularities .
forms shall be constructed and erected to produce units that conform to the product dimensional tolerances required by subsection numb the forms shall also meet smoothness tolerances required by this subsection .
num num forms shall be treated with a form release agent that does not adhere to or significantly discolor the final concrete product .
forms that have known deviations from the typical sections shown on the plans shall be approved by the engineer before use .
the deviations shall be submitted on working or shop drawings .
f miscellaneous test equipment .
all miscellaneous test equipment used during fabrication shall be kept in a condition such that accurate test results are obtained .
proper equipment maintenance and calibration shall be the responsibility of the contractors pc section .
concrete for pretensioned and combination tensioned products .
the contractor shall furnish and place concrete according to this subsection .
a classification .
concrete shall be designated as class ps .
the contractor shall be responsible for the actual mix proportions and adjustments necessary to produce the specified strength .
the specified strengths and air content shall be as stated on the plans .
fly ash may be substituted for hydraulic cement up to a maximum of num percent by weight .
if fly ash is used in the mix the weight of the total cementitious material content shall be the sum of the weights of the hydraulic cement and fly ash .
when voluntary use of fly ash by the contractor results in delays changes in mix quantities or materials sources or unsatisfactory work the costs of such delays changes or corrective actions shall be borne by the contractor .
b concrete mix components .
materials sources shall be listed in the contractors pcp .
the pc manager must notify the qa representative in writing before changing the sources as listed in the pcp .
for new sources the contractor must submit certified data for review and acceptance by the engineer at least num days before the sources may be used for production .
materials shall conform to the requirements of subsection numc .
c proportioning .
the minimum total cementitious material content shall be num pounds per cubic yard of concrete .
fine aggregates shall not exceed num percent of the total aggregate volume .
aggregates from different sources and of different gradings shall not be stockpiled together .
d batching and mixing .
concrete shall be batched and mixed according to astm cnum .
e placing concrete .
forms shall be free of dirt mortar debris and foreign substances before depositing the fresh concrete .
rust areas shall be cleaned to prevent rust staining of the finished products .
the concrete shall be consolidated with suitable mechanical vibrating equipment .
vibration time shall be of sufficient duration to accomplish adequate consolidation throughout the entire product but shall not be prolonged to the point that segregation of the fresh concrete occurs .
num num the contractor shall use the procedures listed in the pcp to protect the freshly deposited concrete from rapid drying and surface moisture loss due to extreme ambient or climatic conditions .
temperature limitations are as follows num .
the temperature of the plastic concrete during placement operations shall not be lower than num f. num .
mixed concrete that has a temperature in excess of num f shall not be placed .
num .
unless a suitable retarder is used the concrete shall be deposited in place within num minutes after batching any load or portion of a load shall not be placed after the num minute limit .
num .
inner form temperature shall be within num f of the fresh concrete temperature at time of concrete placement .
num .
minimum inner form temperature shall be num f at the time of concrete placement .
num .
maximum inner form temperature shall be num f at the time of concrete placement .
f finishing fresh concrete .
open surfaces of fresh concrete shall be as little as possible to obtain the finish shown on the plans .
water shall not be added to the surfaces to ease finishing .
excessive water or laitance brought to the surface through vibration shall be removed before the surface is final finished .
all hand finishing required for precast members that have surfaces that become part of the final bridge deck surface shall be performed in conformance with subsection numa .
monomolecular film coatings or fogging systems as approved by the qa representative may be used to retard evaporation during extreme ambient conditions .
application methods shall deposit a fine mist spray over the concrete surface .
streaming puddling or droplet application of coatings shall not be permitted .
the concrete surfaces shall not be reworked after application of mist .
g concrete testing .
the contractors pc section shall make representative cylinder test specimens for pcqa testing .
the contractor shall forward test cylinders to the qa representative for numday strength tests and for shipping strength tests as required by subsection num .
concrete tests shall be performed in accordance with the following requirements num .
test cylinder specimens shall be made in accordance with astm c num .
vibration consolidation shall not be allowed unless the slump is less than num inch .
specimens shall be cured as listed in the accepted pcp .
num num num .
cylinders shall be tested in accordance with astm cnum .
the average strength of at least two test cylinders shall be greater than the minimum required strength .
no individual strength test shall be more than num percent below the minimum required strength .
num .
cylinder test specimens shall be made to verify stress transfer strength and to verify numday design strength .
if the products will be shipped prior to numday testing additional test specimens shall be available to verify product strength prior to shipment .
num .
representative cylinders shall be molded for each num cubic yards or portion thereof for each different concrete mix design used per day per product line .
num .
air content when specified shall be determined in accordance with either astm cnum or astm cnum .
air entrained mixes shall be tested a minimum of once per day to assure specified air entrainment .
num .
slump of fresh concrete shall be determined in accordance with astm cnum .
the slump shall be tested whenever test cylinder sets are made .
num .
unit weight of fresh concrete shall be determined in accordance with astm c num .
unit weight shall be tested a minimum of once per day for each different concrete mix design used .
num .
temperature of fresh concrete shall be taken as needed to assure compliance with the temperature requirements .
curing .
a pretensioned and combination tensioned members .
members shall be uniformly cured from the time of concrete placement until at least two representative product test specimens achieve an average strength that meets or exceeds num f c or the specified release strength f ci whichever is higher .
where fc num day compressive strength of concrete fc i required concrete strength at release of prestress force additional curing requirements shall be maintained until the above strength requirements are achieved and are as follows num .
exposed concrete surfaces shall be kept moist from the time of concrete placement until the freshly finished concrete is covered with an enclosure that retains heat and moisture .
after enclosure moist curing shall be maintained at a minimum num percent relative humidity .
num num the contractor shall monitor the temperature and humidity conditions from the initial curing period through the end of the accelerated curing stage .
num .
temperature of the concrete shall be maintained above num f. num .
the internal and surface temperature of the concrete shall not exceed num f. num .
concrete shall attain initial set prior to application of the accelerated curing cycle .
if initial set was not determined in accordance with astm cnum accelerated curing shall not be induced for num hours or num hours if retarding admixtures are used .
while waiting for the initial set period low cycle heat may be applied to maintain the curing chamber temperature however the temperature rise shall not exceed num f per hour during the waiting period .
num .
the rise in temperature in the curing chamber during accelerated curing cycle shall not exceed num f per hour .
b castinplace members .
the curing of castinplace members shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
the concrete shall not be exposed to temperatures below freezing for six days after casting or until it has reached the strength required for applying the prestressing force .
the minimum strength of the concrete shall be at least num psi for posttensioned members or as given on the plans whichever is greater before prestressing .
c other precast members .
precast members that do not contain pretensioned steel shall meet curing requirements as follows num .
exposed surfaces of freshly finished concrete shall be covered with moisture retaining material or shall be treated with a concrete curing compound approved by the qa representative .
num .
temperature of the concrete shall be maintained above num f from the time of concrete placement until the curing is complete .
num .
uniform curing shall continue until at least two representative product test specimens achieve an average strength that meets or exceeds num fc or the specified release strength fc i whichever is higher .
num .
the internal and surface temperature of the concrete shall not exceed num f. repairs of pretensioned and combination tensioned members .
repairable product defects discovered during pc or qa inspection shall be corrected at the contractors expense prior to shipping .
damage incurred during handling storage shipment and erection shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
num num defects shall be categorized as minor structural or rejectable .
the pc section shall examine and record all defects .
the pc section shall submit a written proposal for minor repairs to the qa representative for review and acceptance prior to correcting the minor defects .
the proposal shall also address the measures the contractor will take to prevent recurring defects in future members .
the qa representative will approve or reject the finished repair work in writing .
small production holes that are less than  inch in depth and less than num square inch in surface area shall not be considered defects .
larger production holes shall be repaired according to the procedures listed in the pcp .
structural and rejectable defects shall be examined by the contractors engineer .
a written proposal for repair of structural or rejectable defects shall be submitted to the qa representative for review and acceptance prior to correcting any defects .
the proposal shall include a detailed description and sketch of the defects detailed repair procedures description of repair materials and the methods the contractor will use to evaluate the finished repair work .
the proposal shall also include the measures the contractor will take to prevent recurring defects in future members .
completed repairs shall be cured as needed to ensure soundness of the reworked area .
the defect categories and repair requirements are defined as follows a minor defects .
minor defects are those which do not affect the ability of the product to withstand service or construction loads .
minor defects include superficial discontinuities such as cracks small spalls voids and honeycombed areas and defects that do not extend beyond the centerline of any reinforcing steel or into any elements of the tensioning system .
minor defects of other types may also be designated by the qa representative .
repair methods shall not affect the structural integrity of the product .
the finished repair work shall meet the approval of the qa representative and the engineer .
b structural defects .
structural defects as determined by the qa representative or the engineer include defects which may impair the ability of the product to adequately withstand construction or service loads .
defects that extend beyond the centerline of any reinforcing steel or into any element of the tensioning system are classified as structural defects .
such defects also include cracks spalls honeycombed areas voided areas significant concrete breakage areas cold joints and segregated concrete areas .
structural defects of other types may also be designated by the qa representative or the engineer .
repair methods shall adequately restore structural integrity of the product .
when repairs have been completed the contractors engineer shall examine and analyze the product for construction and service load ability and certify in writing that the repair work is structurally adequate .
evaluation and test data num num shall be submitted along with the written certification .
the finished repair work including aesthetic acceptability shall meet the approval of the engineer .
c rejectable defects .
rejectable defects or damages as determined by the qa representative or the engineer are those which impair the ability of the product to adequately withstand construction or service loads and which can not be successfully repaired to structural and architectural acceptability .
structurally defective or rejected products shall not be incorporated into the work but shall be replaced with acceptable products supplied at the contractors expense .
damaged and defective products will also be rejected by the qa representative for the following reasons num .
failure by the contractors engineer to approve and submit proposed repair procedures in writing before repair work begins .
num .
failure by the contractor to execute the repair work according to qa approved procedures .
num .
failure by the contractor to provide written certification of acceptable structural repair along with submittal of evaluation and test data if applicable .
num .
failure by the contractor to correct recurring defects .
num .
determination by the qa representative that the work or materials used in the work does not meet all contract requirements .
other fabrication requirements for pretensioned and combination tensioned members .
a finishing hardened concrete products .
finished and repaired areas shall reasonably match the coloration and profile characteristics of the adjacent concrete .
loose concretious laitance shall be removed from the product before storage .
each finished product shall clearly display legible identification markings that show the cast date piece mark and unique submark .
the marking shall also identify the setup location where the product was cast .
finishing operations shall also conform to the following requirements num .
excessive laitance and unsound rubble shall be removed from surfaces to be bonded .
num .
fins and irregular projections shall be removed from the formed surfaces .
num .
bulges or offsets on the formed surfaces greater than  inch shall be smoothed by stoning sawing or grinding .
num num num .
dented and inset surfaces greater than num square inches in area and deeper than  inch shall require a written repair proposal before repair or finish work begins .
num .
patches in areas of exposed steel or prestressing strand shall be bonded with an approved bonding agent and patched with an approved non shrink grout .
num .
if liquid membrane curing compounds are used on the concrete surfaces which are to be bonded they shall be removed by sandblasting prior to shipping the product .
b product dimensional tolerances .
tolerances for prestressed concrete products shall meet the unit tabulations listed in the pci manual mnlnum unless otherwise stated in the contract .
the pci tolerance figures and tabulations shall be specification requirements .
outofdimensionaltolerance variations shall be considered defects and shall be examined and evaluated by the contractors engineer .
the evaluation shall be submitted to the qa representative in writing and shall contain written opinion of structural adequacy as determined by the contractors engineer .
the submittal shall meet the approval of the engineer .
failure to submit the written evaluation and opinion will be cause for rejection .
the following work or products shall meet the specific pci tolerance requirements described as follows unless otherwise specified in the plans num bulbtee sections shall conform to division vi ibeams .
num gseries sections shall conform to division vi ibeams .
num box girders and ugirders shall conform to division vi box beams .
num deck panels shall conform to the dimensional tolerances as listed in the pci special report jrnum chapter num or the updated published edition thereof .
c handling storage shipment and erection .
the contractor shall handle the product in such a manner as to prevent cracking or damage .
cracked or damaged products shall be inspected by the pc section and repaired in accordance with subsection num or replaced at the contractors expense .
braces trusses chains cables or other metal devices used for handling storing shipping or erecting shall be adequately padded at points in contact with the concrete to prevent chipping of the finished product .
beam sections shall be handled stored shipped and erected with supports and devices that maintain the product in an upright position .
deck panels shall be lifted as directed in the contract unless alternative lifting methods are allowed by the engineer .
lifting of more than one panel at a time shall not num num cause panel cracking .
methods for multiple lifting of panels shall be shown on the working or shop drawings .
panel products shall be stacked in such a manner that damage does not occur .
precast concrete members shall be erected to prevent damage to all elements of the structure and in a safe manner .
precast concrete members to which the erection specification applies are those members that bear on the substructure of a bridge .
the primary members such as beams and girders shall be temporarily anchored and braced as they are erected to preclude detrimental movement in any direction and to prevent overturning and buckling .
struts bracing tie cables and other devices used for temporary restraint shall be considered falsework and shall be designed to resist all loads imposed during each stage of construction until the deck concrete has attained the field compressive strength shown in table num .
at least one week prior to the preerection conference the contractor shall approve sign and submit an erection plan to the engineer for record purposes only .
the erection plan shall be stamped approved for construction and signed by the contractor .
the erection plan will not be approved by the engineer .
if falsework is required falsework drawings shall conform to and be submitted in accordance with subsection num .
the erection plan and procedure shall provide complete details of the erection process with dimension tolerances including num falsework struts bracing tie cables and other devices material properties and specifications for temporary works bolt torque requirements prior to releasing girders from the cranes if required connection details and attachments to other structure components or objects num procedure and sequence of operations including a detailed schedule with completion times for work items that complies with the working hour limitations num minimum load chart lift capacity outrigger size and reactions for each crane num assumed loads and girder weights lift points lifting devices spreaders and angle of lifting cables .
num girder stresses at critical points along the girder length during progressive stages of erection shall be investigated to assure that the structural integrity and stability of the girders is maintained .
stresses at lift points induced as a result of lifting shall be investigated and adequate bracing provided as indicated by the analysis .
num locations of cranes trucks delivering girders and the location of cranes and outriggers relative to other structures including retaining walls wingwalls and utilities .
num num num drawings notes catalog data showing the manufacturers recommendations or performance tests and calculations clearly showing the above listed details assumptions and dimensions .
num contingency plans detailing what measures the contractor will take in case of inclement weather forecast or actual equipment failure delivery interruption and slower than planned production .
a preerection conference will be held at least one week prior to the beginning of erection .
the engineer contractor erection subcontractor and the contractors engineer shall attend the meeting .
the erection subcontractor shall demonstrate his knowledge and familiarity of where the piece marks are located on the components to be erected their orientation in the erected structure and the shop drawing piece mark convention used by the girder fabricator at the preerection conference .
the girder fabricator shall either attend the meeting or participate in the conference by way of speaker telephone .
participation is required during that portion in which the piece marks are discussed .
the girder fabricator shall state whether the erection subcontractor has demonstrated a correct understanding of the piece marks and if not correct any misunderstanding .
additional preerection conferences may be required for subsequent phases of construction or for phases that differ from the original construction plan as directed by the engineer .
additional conferences may also be requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall submit a final erection plan to the engineer prior to girder erection for record purposes only .
the contractors engineer shall sign and seal num num and num listed above in the final erection plan .
the final erection plan shall be stamped approved for construction and signed by the contractor .
the final erection plan will not be approved by the engineer .
when a bridge spans traffic of any kind except for construction traffic and the contractors employees the contractors engineer shall inspect and provide written approval of the erected girders prior to opening the area beneath the girders to traffic .
for this specification traffic is defined as the vehicles railroad pedestrians and watercraft moving along a route .
the contractor shall perform daily inspections of the erected girders and other permanent and temporary bridge elements until the deck concrete has attained the field compressive strength .
the contractors engineer shall provide an inspection form to the engineer and the contractor that lists the items the contractor will document during the daily inspection of the erected girders .
the inspection form shall include inspection items specific to each bridge being constructed .
the contractor shall provide the engineer and the contractors engineer with written documentation of these inspections within num hours of each inspection .
all temporary struts bracing tie cables other devices and extra material required shall be removed upon completion of the structure .
num num falsework shall conform to subsection num .
product shipping strength for pretensioned and combination tensioned members .
products shall not be shipped before concrete strength meets or exceeds num f c. the average of at least two representative test specimens shall meet or exceed num f c. no individual specimen strength shall be more than num percent below num f c. the shipping strength test specimens shall be cured in the same environment as the actual product until the time of testing .
the qc section shall test the specimens for actual shipping strength .
the qa representative may independently verify any shipping strength tests .
the contractor may elect to take concrete cores from the actual product in lieu of curing cylinder test specimens with the product .
if the contractor chooses this test option the qc manager shall submit written request to the qa representative .
core extraction shall not begin until the request has been accepted in writing by the qa representative .
the written request shall include the proposed location and time schedule for core extraction and testing .
the cores shall be delivered in a wrapped and moist condition to the certified test laboratory as listed in the qcp .
the qa representative may witness any or all stages of the core testing operations .
the test laboratory shall provide a copy of the formal test report to the qa representative .
the contractor shall bear all expenses associated with the optional core testing requirements .
sampling and testing of the concrete core specimens shall conform to astm c num with the following addenda num samples may be removed at any age at the contractors sole risk of damage .
num test cores shall not contain embedded reinforcement .
num a minimum of three core samples shall be taken from the product casting in question .
three specimens shall be tested for compressive strength .
the average compressive strength of the three tests shall meet or exceed product fc .
if the compressive test result of any specimen differs from the average strength by more than num percent those results shall be disregarded and the compressive strength shall be determined from at least two remaining valid test results .
num if end capping of test specimens is necessary the capping shall be done with sulfur mortar in accordance with astm c num .
specimens shall be kept moist until end capping preparation begins .
ends shall be trimmed or prepped as required wiped with absorbent cloth and airdried or fandried to prepare for end capping .
the drying period shall not exceed num minutes before capping is completed .
specimens shall be airdried for num to num minutes after capping then wrapped with a double layer of wet thick cloth or burlap .
compressive testing shall not be started for at least one hour after wetwrapping .
the wrapped specimens shall be kept moist until compressive testing begins .
num num the contractor shall submit a written repair proposal to the qa representative for patching the core holes .
repair work shall not begin until the proposal is accepted in writing by the engineer .
method of measurement prestressed units will be measured by one of the following methods as indicated in the contract .
num prestressed girders will be measured by the linear foot from end to end or by the square foot based on the plan length multiplied by the plan width whichever is specified on the plans .
num prestressed concrete box girders and prestressed concrete slabs will be measured by the square foot based on the plan length multiplied by the plan width .
num when measured by component materials concrete and reinforcing steel will be measured and paid for in accordance with sections num and num respectively .
the quantities of prestressing steel will not be measured but shall be the quantities shown on the plans completed and accepted .
mkft equals the jacking force in thousands of kips times the length in feet .
precast panel deck forms that are required by the plans will be measured by the square foot .
the quantity will not be remeasured but will be the quantity shown on the plans except when a plan change is ordered or when it is determined that there are discrepancies in an amount of plus or minus two percent of the plan quantity .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of prestressed units and prestressing steel will be paid for at the contract unit price per unit of measurement for each of the pay items listed below that is included in the bid schedule .
precast panel deck forms required by the plans will be paid for at the contract unit price for the area shown on the plans .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit prestressing steel bar pound or mkft prestressing steel strand pound or mkft prestressed concrete ___ ___ linear foot or square foot prestressed concrete box ___ square foot prestressed concrete slab depth _______ square foot payment will be full compensation for all work necessary to complete the designated pay item .
num num prestressing steel bar and prestressing steel strand shall include but not be limited to all anchorage devices prestressing steel ducts grout and miscellaneous hardware .
elastomeric leveling pads and galvanized steel diaphragms and connectors will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
concrete and reinforcing steel not shown on the plans but required by the contractors alternative will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
all required testing will not be paid separately but shall be included in the work .
concrete quantities will not be reduced for the volume occupied by the ducts prestressing steel anchorages blockouts for tensioning etc .
and will not include web flares projections warts etc .
required to accommodate the prestressing system used .
all costs associated with the preparation and implementation of the erection plan will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
concrete reinforcing steel and prestressing steel for permanent steel bridge deck forms will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num water lines description this work consists of the construction of water lines in accordance with these specifications the latest revision of the american water works association standards and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
this work also includes furnishing welded steel pipe and installing it by jacking it into place at the location and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans .
materials materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections cast iron pipe num welded steel pipe num galvanized pipe num copper pipe num plastic pipe num valves and valve boxes num specific type of material when required will be shown on the plans or as designated .
the maximum working water pressure will be shown on the plans .
welded steel pipe when used as a casing and not as a carrier pipe will not require full depth welds or welds from both sides and will not require coatings .
sections of the casing shall be welded firmly together on the inside to prevent separation .
certification of the welderoperator will not be required .
construction requirements trench shall be excavated to a width sufficient to allow for proper jointing of the water line and thorough compaction of the backfill material in accordance with section num .
where ground water occurs the bottom of the trench shall be kept free of water during pipe laying and until backfilled .
backfilling shall consist of suitable materials uniformly distributed in layers of not more than num inches .
each layer shall be thoroughly compacted as required .
all joints connections valves and fittings shall be watertight .
num num a jacked pipe .
the term jacking as used herein shall mean jacking boring or other approved construction methods .
method of installing pipe other than jacking may be used only with written approval from the engineer .
trenching jetting or any other method that may cause damage to the embankment or highway area or be hazardous to the traveling public will not be permitted .
when jacking is specified the pipe must be jacked without disrupting highway traffic .
the sides of the jacking pit shall be supported in such a manner as to prevent any movement or slippage of the earth during the jacking operations .
a jacking frame shall be constructed of guide timbers or rails to the exact line and grade of the casing and shall be capable of maintaining the desired alignment and gradient throughout the jacking operation .
depending upon the soil conditions the excavation operation inside the pipe shall proceed approximately num foot ahead of the lead pipe .
the excavation around the pipe shall be cut accurately to line and grade and as reasonably close to the outside diameter of the pipe as possible .
each section of pipe in its final position shall be straight and true in alignment and grade .
deviation in alignment and grade from beginning to end of the jacked pipe shall not exceed plus or minus num foot per num feet of length .
b reserved method of measurement water lines of the various types and sizes will be measured by the linear foot in place and shall include all fittings .
valves including valve boxes will be measured by the actual number of the specified type and size used in the completed water lines and accepted .
the quantity of jacked pipe will be measured by the linear foot complete in place and accepted .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of water line will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit ______ inch cast iron pipe linear foot ______ inch welded steel pipe linear foot ______ inch galvanized pipe linear foot ______ inch copper pipe linear foot num num ______ inch plastic pipe linear foot ______ inch type valve and valve box each ______ inch welded steel pipe jacked linear foot structure excavation and structure backfill for lines num inch and less will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
structure excavation and structure backfill for lines larger than num inch will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
all work incidental to installing jacked pipe will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num field facilities description the contractor shall furnish field offices sanitary facilities and field laboratories when called for on the plans or as directed .
these units are to be maintained by the contractor and shall be removed when the project is completed unless released earlier by the engineer .
materials field offices .
field offices either class num or class num as designated on the plans shall substantially conform to the details shown on the plans and to the requirements of this section .
the field office shall be equipped with a facsimile machine copy machine and telephone service that conform to the following num facsimile machine .
the facsimile machine shall print on plain paper and shall be capable of sending num  x num inch and num  x num inch documents .
the contractor shall install and maintain the fax machine in the engineers field office .
should the fax require repair and be out of service for more than num hours a replacement machine shall be supplied within num hours .
the contractor shall supply all necessary supplies except paper and a rollaround stand .
paper will be provided by the department .
num copy machine .
the contractor shall provide a self feeding plain paper photo copying machine which is capable of making at least eight copies per minute .
copier shall also be capable of reproducing copies at standard sizes up to and including num x num inches .
the copier shall be capable of reducing num x num plan sheets to num x num legal size and to num x num letter size .
the contractor shall supply all necessary supplies except paper and a rollaround stand .
paper will be provided by the department .
the contractor shall maintain all furnished equipment in good working condition and shall provide replacement equipment due to breakage damage or theft within five working days .
num telephone service .
the contractor shall provide telephone service as required by standard plans .
this service shall include a long distance carrier .
the department will be responsible for actual long distance toll charges .
field laboratories .
field laboratories either class num or class num as designated on the plans shall substantially conform to the details shown on the plans and to the requirements of this section .
each laboratory shall be qualified in accordance with cp num .
commercial plant laboratory .
the plant laboratory at the site of the commercial hot mix plant shall consist of weatherproof insulated mobile house num num type trailer or other approved structure having equipment meeting the following minimum requirements .
each laboratory shall be qualified in accordance with cp num .
num outside dimensions num feet long x num feet wide if a separate facility is provided or inside area of num square feet with a minimum width of num feet when not a separate facility num drinking water supply dispensed from an acceptable water cooling device num testing water supply num gallons insulated and pressurized by pump minimum num psi delivery pressure num shelving num linear feet num sink one with faucet num fire extinguisher one nontoxic dry chemical meeting underwriters laboratories inc. approval for num pound class abc with num bc rating num work bench num feet x num inches x num inches high num lighting adequate fluorescent lighting directly over all work bench and desk areas num range one num inch free standing oven with reinforced racks and four surface burners num forced air convection oven rated at least num watts num sieve shaker one motordriven standard portable capable of handling a set of num inch or num inch us standard sieves mounted num inches above floor in a soundproof insulated enclosure having hinged openings num heating furnace num btu per square foot minimum forced air type num telephone minimum flat rate service from nearest exchange num air conditioner adequate for laboratory size num furniture desk with at least one drawer .
one desk chair with rollers .
one stool with height compatible with work bench num electronic balance balance complying with aashto m num capable of weighing at least num pounds to an accuracy of num gram num recording thermometer electrical or mechanical thermometer for curing tanks num microwave oven one num cubic foot with at least five power levels and revolving floor or rotating power source sanitary facilities .
sanitary facilities shall consist of a portable chemical toilet fabricated from steel fiberglass or wood meeting the following minimum requirements each facility shall be well ventilated shall conform to state law shall have a vented chemical tank and a separate urinal .
num num construction requirements the contractor shall furnish a suitable site for field facilities .
the site may be located within the right of way with approval of the engineer .
if located within the right of way the contractor shall be responsible for restoring the area .
facilities shall be on the project leveled and ready for use prior to the start of any operations .
facilities shall be for the exclusive use of department personnel .
sanitary facilities shall be placed at least num feet from the nearest state water in locations accessible for servicing and not in low lying areas subject to ponding .
they shall be anchored to prevent movement or overturning .
the contractor shall provide replacement equipment due to breakdown damage or theft within five working days .
maintenance service and utilities .
the contractor shall furnish the following fuel adequate supply for heating and testing operations .
electricity a num watt num volt ac facility for each field office and field laboratory .
independent generators shall be provided where commercial power is not available .
telephone minimum flat rate service from nearest exchange for each field office and field laboratory as directed .
sanitary sanitary facilities shall be serviced and maintained in a sanitary condition .
trash the contractor shall provide and maintain suitable containers and shall haul away as necessary .
method of measurement and basis of payment the various facilities complete with utilities will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit field office class______ each sanitary facility each field laboratory class______ each payment will be full compensation for field laboratory classnum or class num including all appurtenant items specified in the contract .
restoration of the field facility areas will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the cost of the item .
num num section num rest areas and buildings description this work consists of the construction of various facilities in rest areas and other areas in accordance with these specifications and in conformity to the lines grades dimensions and details shown on the plans or established .
when information shown on the plans are of general arrangements only the engineer will establish exact locations measurements levels etc .
at the site to adapt the work to suit actual conditions .
materials all materials used in the construction shall conform to the requirements of section num and to the details shown on the plans or established .
shop drawings and descriptive brochures .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the department five copies of shop drawings or descriptive brochures for all materials and equipment to be incorporated in the work for review by the engineer .
all work for which shop drawings or descriptive brochures are required must be performed in accordance with such drawings and work on the item shall not be started until review of said drawings .
all shop drawings or descriptive brochures must be complete in every respect numbered consecutively have the name of the project printed thereon and each transmittal must be accompanied by a letter directing the engineers attention to any changes from the plans .
after shop drawings and descriptive brochures have been reviewed any portion of the work covered by the shop drawings which modify the plans shall be rejected as soon as such modification is discovered unless said modification has been specifically pointed out to the engineer review .
the review of such shop drawings and descriptive brochures will be general in character and shall not relieve the contractor from responsibility for their accuracy or for proper fitting and construction of the work or from the necessity of furnishing any materials and workmanship required by the contract which may not be indicated on shop drawings when reviewed .
construction material .
structure excavation and structure backfill shall conform to the requirements of section num .
treated timber shall conform to the requirements of section num .
concrete shall be class b and conform to the requirements of section num .
reinforcing steel and fabric shall conform to the requirements of section num .
num num construction requirements services of factory representative .
it is important that the department be protected as far as possible against the discontinuance of the make of equipment to be purchased and that repair parts and the services of expert factory representatives be available if desired .
under these conditions the contractor shall not furnish equipment made by firms in the hands of receivers .
maintenance manuals .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer five copies of instructions for the operation lubrication and maintenance for all major items of equipment .
the contractor shall assemble all literature into five coordinated manuals with additional information describing the combined operation of field assembled units including asbuilt wiring diagrams .
manuals shall also contain the names addresses of the manufacturer and the local representative who stocks or furnishes repair parts for all items of equipment .
all five manuals shall be turned over to the engineer for review and distribution to the department .
manuals shall include but not be limited to the above information for the following equipment furnace water heater well pump exhaust fan incinerators timer septic tank emergency battery charger and area luminaires .
temporary heat .
all heating and electrical service required during construction for the satisfactory prosecution of the work shall be furnished by the contractor .
heating units must be of approved types and equipment and surroundings shall be kept in a clean and safe condition .
open fires will not be permitted .
temporary utilities .
a water for construction purposes .
the contractor may use water pumped by the permanent well pump and equipment if approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide potable water for construction purposes at his expense .
if temporary pumps are approved all sanitary precautions necessary to prevent contamination of the well shall be taken .
b electrical .
the contractor shall furnish at his expense all electrical power required for construction .
barricades .
when required the contractor shall barricade the entrance ramp to the rest area during construction with standard barricades .
the barricades will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
masonry work .
a installation of masonry .
concrete masonry units shall be placed in face shell mortar bedding with complete coverage of face shells .
extruded mortar shall be struck .
after the mortar has stiffened somewhat all joints shall be tooled with a rounded tool having a diameter slightly larger than the thickness of the joint .
mortar joints shall average  inch in thickness .
blocks shall be placed in accordance with local standard masonry practice .
reinforcement and wall ties shall be installed as indicated on the plans .
num num standard shapes of concrete masonry units such as radius corner jamb blocks control joint blocks bond course units and square end blocks shall be furnished as required by the contract .
structural glazed tile in toilets shall be placed with white mortar .
mortar joints shall not exceed  inch in thickness .
all joints shall be tooled .
the contractor shall furnish cap courses base courses covings bullnosed corners and any special units which are necessary to complete a first class job .
special shapes of tile required are shown on the plans .
when cutting of tile is necessary it shall be done with a special saw as recommended by the manufacturer .
chipped warped or defective tiles will be rejected .
all face brick shall be placed with joints about  inch thick .
joints shall be concave tooled joints .
brick will be rejected if the edges and corners of finished faces have chippage exceeding the following maximum sizes edges num inch measured in from edge and corners  inch measured in from edge or for any other structural or color defect .
each brick shall be placed in a full bed of mortar and shall be shoved in place .
the engineer may remove brick already placed to assure himself that all joints are full .
if he finds joints that are not completely filled he can order brick removed until he is assured that the joints of all remaining brick are completely filled .
all face surfaces of the face brick work shall be kept clean .
after joints are struck the surface shall be carefully cleaned .
the faces and angles of all walls shall be carefully plumbed and all work carried up true and even laying all walls to lines .
b precautions and protection .
all work and materials shall be protected from the weather .
stored masonry units shall be stockpiled on planks to prevent contact with the ground .
c masonry work in cold weather .
masonry shall not be placed when the surrounding air temperature is num f or less except when the masonry work is housed in a temporary manner suitable to the engineer and the inside air temperature is kept within num f to num f for a period of num hours after the masonry is placed .
mortar for masonry work during cold weather shall have a minimum temperature of num f and a maximum temperature of num f at the time it is applied to the masonry .
this temperature shall be provided by heating the mixing water or the aggregate or both if necessary .
masonry materials shall also be heated if necessary to provide at least a minimum temperature of num f at the time they are placed .
num num d cleaning .
after completion all masonry units shall be thoroughly cleaned according to the masonry manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall protect adjacent work from damage during the cleaning operations .
cleaning shall start at the top and be continued down until such work is completed .
all pointing will be inspected and the contractor shall completely point up all voids .
metal specialties .
metal stalls or compartments for toilet rooms and mirrors shall be of the type and style specified and shall be installed as shown on the plans .
sanitary napkin disposal .
sanitary napkin dispenser and disposal for womens rest rooms shall be installed as shown on the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
comfort station and sanitary station signs .
comfort station and sanitary station signs shall be installed in the size and location shown on the plans .
doors frames and windows .
doors frames windows and door hardware shall be installed as shown on plans .
all door frames shall have floor anchors installed to set flush with the finished floors .
two rubber door silencers shall be installed for strike jambs of each door .
at least three masonry t anchors shall be installed at each jamb that is adjacent to masonry work .
ceramic tile .
a general .
the work required under this heading shall include all labor material equipment and services necessary for the furnishing and setting of all tile as shown on the plans and as specified herein .
the floor slab shall be clean and free of oily or waxy films .
b installation of ceramic floor tile .
num .
mortar setting bed .
a mortar setting bed shall be applied over the floor slab to give a true and even setting bed .
this mortar shall be composed of one part portland cement six parts sand .
num .
setting floor tile .
floor tile shall be set by troweling a skim coat of neat portland cement mortar on the setting bed and immediately floating the tile into place .
joint width shall not exceed num inch .
num .
grouting .
all joints in ceramic floor tile shall be grouted full with a grout mixture and application as recommended by the tile manufacturer immediately after a suitable area of tile has been set .
a  inch bronze edging strip shall be provided under the metal thresholds where the ceramic floor tile terminates at the door .
num num num .
defective tiles .
all tiles chipped broken stained or otherwise imperfect shall be considered defective and shall not be set any such defective tiles set shall be removed and replaced with approved tiles at the contractors expense .
num .
cleaning .
upon completion of the work all tile shall be thoroughly cleaned and left free from stains scum discoloration and in an acceptable condition .
roofing flashing and roof insulation .
the work required under this heading shall include all labor material equipment and services necessary for the proper furnishing and installing of all roofing flashing and insulation materials as shown on the plans .
a flashing at flues breather vents vents roof drains and emergency light conduit .
flashings at sewer vent and roof drain shall be at least num feet square lead flanges soldered to lead sleeves of sufficient diameter to fit the pipe involved placed over the last layer of felt and sealed in place with two plies of felt hot mopped in place .
the specified roofing shall be applied over this .
at the vent the lead sleeve shall be folded over the top of the num inch soil pipe .
at the roof drain the lead sleeve or flange shall be securely clamped in place to make a watertight joint .
other means of flashing may be used if approved .
flashing at emergency light and breather vents shall be as detailed on the plans or directed .
all flashing shall be installed before roofing operations begin .
b roofing construction shingle roofing .
shingles as shown on the plans shall be applied over two layers of num pound asphalt felt in straight courses .
shingles shall be doubled at all eaves and butts of firstcourse shingles shall project num inch beyond the first sheathing board .
spacing between adjacent shingles joints shall be  inch .
joints in any one course shall be separated at least num inches from joints in adjacent courses and joints in alternate courses shall not be in direct alignment .
exposure of shingles shall be num inches for num inch shingle num inches for num inch shingle and num inches for num inch shingle .
c roofing construction membrane roofing .
membrane roofing shall be installed as follows starting at one side of the roof install one layer of num pound per num square feet base sheet side lapped num inches and end lapped num inches .
nail and tin cap the base sheet to the deck with largeheaded roofing nails through num inch diameter tin disks num inch on centers .
over the base sheet in the same direction install three layers of num pound per num square feet asphalt felt solid mopped to the base sheet with num pound per num square feet of specification asphalt .
felt sheets shall be lapped num inch over preceding sheet and solid mopped full with num pound per num square feet of specification asphalt .
all starter courses shall be enveloped in order to prevent drippage if lowmelting point material is being used .
after flashing has been installed at all vertical num num projections the entire surface shall be given a num pound per num square feet pour coat of specification asphalt into which while asphalt is hot the contractor shall embed num pound per num square feet .
of clean gravel .
damp gravel is permissible .
in cold weather instead of applying roof three ply solid the num pound per num square feet asphalt felts may be installed on a two and one application provided the entire roof is mopped at the end of each days work .
where roofs pond water the asphalt felt shall be coated at the end of the days work .
the bitumen used shall not be heated above num f. in order to get num pound per num square feet between plies a num ounce cotton mop when full and out of the mop bucket should not cover more area than a num foot wide swath num feet long .
d caulking .
this work shall include all labor materials equipment and tools necessary for the proper gun or knife applied caulking wherever indicated and in all following locations num .
exterior joints between all metal and masonry .
num .
joints between roof and aluminum flashing .
num .
interior joints between hollow metal frames and wall tile .
mixing of the caulking shall be in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
working times listed by the manufacturer shall not be exceeded .
sealant application shall be as directed by the manufacturer taking particular care to prepare the joints as directed .
metal surfaces to be sealed shall be bright metal clean before sealing .
window and door frames shall be cleaned before sealing .
it is imperative that paint shall not remain on the surfaces to be sealed .
any joint showing sealant applied over paint will be cause for rejection of that complete joint .
carpentry .
the work under this heading shall include all labor materials equipment and services necessary for the proper completion of all rough and finish carpentry .
a ceiling panel installation .
ceiling panels shall be fastened to gypsum board back up by use of adhesive and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
each and every joint shall be concealed with colored aluminum moldings .
adhesive shall be applied over the entire back surface of each panel .
b preservation treatment .
all wood blocking under gravel stops and wood nailers shall be treated timber .
interior insulation .
this work shall include all labor materials equipment and services necessary for and reasonably incidental to the proper completion of all insulating work .
insulation for cavity walls shall be installed in the cavity after all excess mortar is cleaned from the face of the interior wall .
ties and insulation shall be pressed firmly num num together so that ties hold the insulation in place and insure that the adjacent boards are butted tightly together .
cut ends shall be squared so that all joints will be tight .
asphalt emulsion shall be used if necessary to hold insulation against inner wall .
insulation to be applied to underside of roof shall be secured by using suitable fasteners common to the industry and recommended by the insulation manufacturer .
glass and glazing .
this work shall include the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and services necessary for and reasonably incidental to the proper completion of all glass and glazing work .
a installation .
all glass shall be set in the best possible manner with polished side out and in such a way that there will be an equal bearing the entire width of each pane .
all putty shall be left smooth and free from marks and other defects and shall be painted .
putty shall be an approved type suitable for glazing .
b cleaning and replacing .
glass broken or damaged before completion of the building operations shall be replaced with glass of like kind and quality without cost to the department .
upon completion of all construction work and approval of glazing labels shall be removed and glass shall be cleaned .
trash receptacles .
this work shall include furnishing of all labor materials equipment and services necessary for the proper installation of trash receptacles .
receptacles with anchor shall be installed at locations shown on the plans .
painting and special coating application .
this work shall include the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and services necessary for the proper completion of painting and finishing of all unfinished metal throughout the interior and exterior of the building and the information center .
it also includes the application of special coatings on concrete tables benches and underside and edges of roof .
colors and finishes shall be as specified on the plans .
sample panels to show proposed finish and color shall be prepared by the contractor and approved by the engineer before the painting work or special coating work is begun .
a paint application .
paint shall not be applied to wet surfaces .
exterior surfaces shall not be painted during rain or snow or when temperature is below num f or when conditions are not conducive to acceptable painting .
all joints in plywood shall be sealed before paint is applied .
paint shall be spread evenly and smoothly without runs and sags .
all metal surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned of rust and shall be thoroughly washed with non flammable solvent to remove any dirt or grease before applying paint .
num num before painting or application of special coatings all hardware accessories plates lighting fixtures and similar items shall be removed and protection of such items shall be provided .
only skilled mechanics shall be used for removing and connecting the above items .
b paint and special coating schedule .
num .
interior metal .
this metal is defined as but not limited to all hollow metal frames doors and grills .
ductwork electrical devices and conduit stainless steel items and plumbing fixtures and devices shall not be painted .
a .
one field coat primer omit this coat on previously primed surfaces .
b .
two coats enamel flat finish color to match interior walls .
num .
exterior nongalvanized metal .
this metal is defined as but not limited to all exterior metal including structural steel but not including finish hardware vent stacks and metal soffits .
a .
one field coat primer omit this coat on previously primed surfaces .
b .
two coats house paint flat finish color to match stain used on redwood .
num .
concrete benches tables table supports and table slabs .
two coats of sealant .
application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers directions .
num .
exterior wood .
a .
facing and fascia on buildings and information center shall be stained as scheduled on the plans .
b. plywood soffit on buildings and information center shall have one coat white prime and two coats semigloss white enamel .
c. information display board posts shall be stained the same as facing and fascia and the bulletin board shall have one coat white prime and two coats white paint flat finish .
plumbing and drainage .
this work shall include the furnishing installation and testing of a system of plumbing and drainage as herein described and as shown on the plans including such minor details not specifically mentioned or shown as may be necessary to complete the system for successful operation .
also included in this work is the construction of the sewer line which shall connect the building to the septic tank or treatment facility .
fixtures specified shall be of one make or type throughout the work .
all work materials and manner of placing materials shall be in strict accordance with the latest requirements of the colorado technical plumbing code .
num num a data and measurements .
data contained in these specifications and shown on the plans are of general arrangement only .
the engineer shall determine exact locations measurements levels etc .
at the site and adapt the work to suit actual conditions .
b well pump .
the well pump shall be as shown on plans .
the wells shall be equipped with a well seal and a liquid level control relay to stop the pump if the well water falls below a safe level .
all related fittings piping and electrical work for proper operation of the well is also included in this item .
c drinking fountains .
drinking fountains shall be the style and type called for on the plans .
d plumbing installation .
all fixtures and plumbing items shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations complete with all necessary accessories and trimmings .
all water supply connections shall have stops or shut off valves to facilitate maintenance .
all waste connections shall be trapped and vented .
stops or shut off valves shall be so installed as to be readily accessible in the utility room .
immediately after fixtures are set they shall be covered and this cover shall not be removed until the building is prepared for occupancy .
in addition the contractor shall furnish and install such guards and boxing as may be required to protect fixtures against damage by any other craft .
the contractor shall clean all fixtures with acceptable cleaning compounds before final acceptance of the work .
the contractor shall install all piping in such a manner as to allow complete drainage of the piping system .
this requirement shall be met by pitching all lines to low points where valves or capped nipples in threaded tees shall be installed to drain the lines .
these fittings which are required specifically for draining the various lines are not shown on the plans since the number required and their locations must be determined by the field conditions encountered and are considered subsidiary to the work .
e testing interior drainage and vent system .
the waste drainage and vent system inside the building shall be tested and proved gastight and watertight prior to covering or concealment .
the rough work shall be tested as a whole unit that is as a whole stack or riser .
testing shall be conducted using water as the media under a hydrostatic head of at least num feet above the highest joint being tested .
if the vertical distance is less than num feet to the top of the highest vent above the roof the entire stackriser shall be tested by filling to the top of the highest vent .
other media may be used in lieu of water with the approval of the engineer .
testing shall be continuous for at least num minutes duration for each separate test .
at end of this time interval there shall not be more than  inch drop in water level or not more than num inch drop in mercury level .
num num if lines prove tight concealment of rough work may begin .
if repairs are required retesting shall be conducted as often as necessary until lines are proved gastight and watertight to the satisfaction of the engineer .
f testing water piping system .
upon completion of a section or of the entire hot and cold water piping systems they shall be tested hydrostatically to a pressure of at least num percent in excess of the maximum pressure to which the pipe will ordinarily be subjected but not less than num pounds per square inch .
test shall not be less than two hours .
any leaks or defective pipe disclosed by the tests shall be repaired or replaced and the tests repeated until all piping shows tight .
all water for tests shall be furnished and disposed of by the contractor at his expense .
piping shall not be insulated or concealed until it has been tested to the satisfaction of the engineer .
g fixtures substitution .
when substitutions for specified fixtures are requested the contractor shall submit a portfolio containing illustrations and complete descriptions of the fixtures for approval .
portfolios shall state the make and weight of the proposed fixtures shall clearly indicate the materials of which the fixtures are made and shall otherwise clearly describe in detail the fixtures proposed to be substituted .
h air chambers .
each water supply riser and fixture connection at all flush valves and lavatories shall terminate with an air chamber of diameter equal to the supply pipe and so located as to prevent water hammer .
approved shock absorbers may be substituted for air chambers .
i trenching and backfilling for water lines and sewer lines .
the contractor shall perform all excavation and backfilling in accordance with section num .
trenches shall be only of sufficient width to provide a free working space and shall not be more than the outside diameter of the pipe bells plus num inches .
they shall be dewatered and kept free from standing water until all joints are complete the pipe tested and the trench backfilled .
backfilling around tanks may be puddledin provided the tanks are first filled with water .
j sterilization of water systems .
the completed piping system including the piping from the well shall be sterilized in accordance with the regulations of the department of public health and environment state of colorado and as follows prior to final acceptance the entire water system shall be thoroughly flushed .
after flushing chlorine or chlorine compound shall be introduced into the system .
the dosage shall be sufficient to give an initial residual chlorine mass fraction of num ppm .
samples shall be collected from various taps and fixtures throughout the systems during the introduction of the chlorine to assure uniform distribution .
after a numhour contact period all traces of the heavily chlorinated water shall be flushed from the systems .
after flushing is complete the contractor shall at his expense provide evidence of the effectiveness of the disinfection by filing with the engineer laboratory num num reports of bacteriological tests on samples taken from the system .
the number and the locations for taking samples shall be as specified by the engineer .
should other than satisfactory results be obtained the above disinfection process shall be repeated until satisfactory tests are obtained .
k cleaning and adjusting .
at the completion of the work and prior to final acceptance all parts of the work installed under this specification all equipment fixtures pipe valves and fittings shall be thoroughly cleaned of grease oils metal cuttings sludge etc .
which may have accumulated by operation of installing these systems of testing or from other causes .
stoppage or discoloration or other damage to parts of the building its finish or furnishing due to failure of the contractor performing the plumbing work to properly clean the piping system shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
heating and ventilation .
this work shall include furnishing and installing all units and duct work as set forth in the heating plans and installing the minor items necessary to complete the work outlined below the contractor shall provide and install all other items such as wiring thermostats sheet metal work etc .
that are necessary for a complete and operating system .
a general .
all exhaust fans duct work outlets inlets thermostats grills vents electrical wiring plumbing etc .
shall be new .
standard products of manufacturers regularly engaged in production of such equipment shall be as shown in the manufacturers latest catalogue .
b wall heater exhaust fans furnace and duct installation .
wall heaters exhaust fans furnace and duct work shall be installed as shown on the mechanical plans .
the fresh air duct shall be provided with a close fitting damper to vary the volume or completely shut off the fresh air supply .
for normal operation the fresh air damper should be adjusted to take in a maximum of num percent fresh air with the remainder being recirculated to the furnace through the return air grills .
the fresh air duct shall run between the joists from the intake grill to above the furnace and down to the return air plenum .
a return air grill shall be installed in the return air plenum to pass re circulated air to blower .
both fresh air duct and return air grill shall be installed so that all return air will pass through the furnace filters .
the fresh air damper shall be manually operated .
electrical work .
all electrical wiring shall be installed in conformance with the national electrical code and the national electrical safety code .
these specifications and plans cover the furnishing and installation of a system of electric wiring and conduit and box work as hereinafter described and as indicated on the plans of the building and outdoor lighting including such minor details not specifically mentioned or shown as may be necessary to complete the system for a complete turnkey operation .
the contractor shall at the preconstruction conference or within num days after award of contract submit to the engineer a complete list of electrical materials he num num proposes to furnish and install on the contract .
five copies of the list including manufacturer and catalogue numbers of devices and fixtures shall be furnished in accordance with subsection num. a symbols .
items of equipment and materials are indicated on the plans in accordance with the legend of symbols shown on the plans .
b conduit .
all conduit shall be installed in conformance with the national electrical code .
all conduit runs shown are diagrammatic .
exact locations will be determined in the field .
c position of outlets .
outlets shall be located as shown on the plans or as directed .
d conductors .
conductors shall conform to the requirements of the national electrical code .
e thermostat .
a separate thermostat shall control the furnace so that the furnace or wall heaters will operate when the temperature drops to the thermostat setting .
a separate thermostat shall operate the emergency light to signal when the temperature in the building drops to a set temperature .
line voltage wiring complete in conduit shall be provided for this system .
f emergency light .
low voltage wiring not in conduit shall be provided for this circuit to the emergency battery charger .
g emergency battery charger .
the emergency light shall signal power failure andor temperature drop in the building to below a preset temperature .
power failure or temperature drop below set temperature shall cause emergency battery charger to energize the emergency light .
upon correction of the emergency condition the battery charger shall turn off emergency light and keep the batteries charged automatically by use of line current .
h photoelectric control .
photoelectric cells shall be located and mounted as indicated on the plans .
i disconnect switches .
the contractor shall furnish and install disconnect switches for means of disconnecting appliances at the location shown on the plans .
j circuit breakers .
all electrical devices shall be protected by circuit breakers located in the main breaker panel .
the circuit breakers shall be in accordance with the national electrical code .
k grounding .
all equipment and conduit shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical code requirements .
code color shall be adhered to for all ground conductors and ground continuity shall be positive throughout the entire project .
num num l incoming service .
the contractor shall furnish install and connect the incoming service cable from the local utility company service pole to the building .
this cable shall be as specified under conductors and shall be buried at the location shown on the plans .
details of the connections to the local utility company poles are not shown on the plans .
the contractor shall furnish and install all material and equipment required to make these connections in conformance with utility company recommendations .
materials required to make these connections shall be considered subsidiary to the electrical systems .
m installation .
where sizes are not indicated or shown on the plans for junction boxes a num inch square galvanized junction box with blank cover shall be used .
mounting heights above finished floor shall be as indicated below unless otherwise shown on the plans or indicated in these specifications .
all mounting heights shall be verified by the engineer .
switches num inches convenience outlets num inches panel to center num inches lighting fixtures as shown on the plans sanitary sewer septic tank leaching field sewage lift station and sanitary station .
this work shall include all labor materials equipment and services necessary for the installation of a sewer system including septic tank leaching field and associated sewage piping as required for the comfort station trailer pad and the trailer sanitary station as shown on the plans and described as follows a sewage system shall be constructed as shown on the plans or as directed for each building .
a precast septic tank shall be installed for each trailer sanitary station and trailer pad as shown on the plans .
each septic tank shall be vented .
the septic tank required for the building may be castinplace or may be a precast unit or precast units in tandem of the capacity indicated on the plans .
treatment plant and polishing tank or pond required for the building shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed .
sewage lift station and wet well shall be installed as shown on the plans .
leaching fields shall be constructed to the dimensions and details shown on the plans or as directed .
flagpole .
flagpole shall be of the type and style specified and shall be installed as shown on the plans .
num num method of measurement the quantities to be measured under this section will be the actual number of pay units completed and accepted of the various pay items which appear in the bid schedule comprising the rest area or other buildings .
all electrical work for the building including service from meter pole shall be included as part of the building that appears in the bid schedule .
all electrical work for the information center shall be included as part of the information center .
area lighting will be measured and paid for as luminaires light standards and wiring in accordance with section num .
shade shelter item shall include table and benches .
septic tank sewage lift station or treatment plants shall include the related mechanical devices and fittings and the sewer piping from the tank to the leaching field wet well polishing tank or polishing pond .
sewage lift station shall also include the wet well .
sewer piping fittings devices etc .
from the septic tank treatment plant or sewer to the building sanitary stations or trailer pad shall be included as part of the building sanitary station or trailer pad .
sewer piping from sewage lift station to point of discharge will be measured and paid for in accordance with in section num .
polishing tanks or polishing ponds shall include all related pipe and fittings .
sewage leaching field shall include all work associated with the leaching field .
measurement will be based on the square yards of leaching field trench excavated or linear foot of perforated pipe installed .
trailer sanitary station shall include the water tower hatch with cover vacuum breaker related fittings sewer pipe to septic tank and water line connections .
storage tank shall include all controls fittings and piping from the tank to the building and unless otherwise stipulated shall also include all controls fittings and piping from the water source to the storage tank .
trailer pad shall include water service valve and riser electrical pedestal intercom connection and sewer pipe to septic tank .
drinking fountains except for those on or in the buildings will be measured by the units installed and accepted .
well pump shall include the pitless adapter seal electric controls and all related pipe and fittings .
flagpole shall include halyard swivels cleats ornamental ball and base .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for the various items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit information sign board each information center each shade shelter each table each trash receptacles each drinking fountain each trailer pad each well pump each sewage lift station each comfort station each trailer sanitary station each leaching field square yard leaching field linear foot septic tank ____gal .
each storage tank ____gal .
each sewage treatment plant ____gal .
each polishing tank ____gal .
each scale pit and approach slabs each flagpole each _____building each num num section num irrigation system description this work consists of furnishing and constructing an irrigation system in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials general .
all materials and equipment incorporated into the irrigation system shall be new and of recognized standard quality .
in the case of computer software or hard coded instructions the latest available version from the manufacturer is required .
all materials shall be of a standard line from a name brand manufacturer or must be approved .
backflow preventer .
pressure vacuum breakers shall be the pressure type with a bronze body and a machined valve seat .
reduced pressuretype backflow preventers shall include two check valves a relief valve two gate or ball valves and test cocks for field testing .
vacuum breakers and reduced pressuretype backflow preventers shall meet the requirements in the colorado department of health cross connection manual and shall have a nonshock cold water rating of at least num psi .
automatic controllers .
the automatic controller shall be an electro mechanical or microprocessor basedmicroelectronic solid state type capable of operating in an automatic or manual mode .
the controller shall have a minimum of six stations .
each station shall be programmed to operate for num to num minutes or num to num hours .
the controller shall have two independent programs with three automatic starts per day for each program .
each station on the controller shall be assigned to either or both programs .
the controller shall be capable of watering any day or sequence of days on a six or seven day cycle .
the controller shall operate on a minimum of num volts ac power input .
controller electrical output shall be capable of num volts ac at num amps .
the controller shall have a reset circuit breaker num amps holding and num amps break to protect it from power overload .
primary surge protection for num volt lines and valve num volt output surge protection shall be installed to protect the controller .
the automatic controller shall be grounded using two  inch x num foot copper clad grounding rods driven into the soil .
a num awg bare copper wire shall be used to connect the ground rods to the automatic controllers protective grounding circuit .
the resistance of the ground shall not exceed num ohms .
num num the controller enclosure including satellite controllers shall be of a vandal and weatherresistant nature manufactured entirely of metal or steel milltreated with zinc for rust resistance .
the main housing shall have louvers in the upper and lower body to allow for crossflow ventilation .
remote control .
remote control shall consist of an fm am uhf or vhf radio transmitterreceiver pair with a minimum range of one mile in congested areas and shall include battery charger and replacement battery .
the receiver shall plug into a receptacle installed in the enclosure or panel of the automatic controller .
remote control shall be capable of turning onoff any station in any order .
remote control shall comply with all applicable fcc rules and regulations .
control wiring num volt .
connection between automatic controller and automatic control valves flow sensors and moisture sensors shall be made with direct burial copper num volt uf ul approved wire .
minimum wire size shall be num awg .
one wire shall be provided for each valve .
wires shall be color coded according to the basic plant materials irrigated by the lateral .
wire colors shall be wire color plant materials black master power purple spares green turf brown tree yellow perennials red shrubs white common or ground wire sprinkler heads .
the sprinkler head shall be of the popup spray and popup rotor internal drive type .
all sprinkler heads shall be capable of accepting a check valve where head elevation varies more than num feet within a control zone .
a popup sprays .
the popup spray head body stem and screen shall be constructed of heavy duty plastic .
spray heads shall have the following components num a soft pressureactivated wiper seal for cleaning debris from the popup stem as it retracts into the case to prevent stem and nozzle from sticking in the up position .
num a matched precipitation rate brass or plastic nozzle with an adjusting screw capable of regulating the radius and flow .
num a screen to protect it from clogging and a strong stainless steel retract spring for positive popdown .
num a threaded cap that will allow easy removal of the screen and all other internal components from the top without removing the body from the ground .
num num minimum popup height for turf heads shall be num inches .
spray head popup height for turf in roadway medians shall be at least num inches and shrub flower and ground cover spray heads shall be at least num inches .
b rotor heads .
the popup rotor heads shall be an internal drive type with heavy duty plastic housings and noncorrosive internal components .
the rotor head shall have a soft pressureactivated wiper seal for cleaning debris from the popup stem as it retracts into the case to prevent the stem and nozzle from sticking in the up position .
the rotor head shall have a screen to protect it from clogging and a strong stainless steel retracting spring for positive pop down .
minimum popup height for rotor heads shall be num inches .
the rotor head shall have a fully adjustable arc or full circle capabilities and an adjustable breakup pin capable of reducing the radius up to num percent .
flow sensor .
the flow sensor shall be an inline type and shall transmit an electronic pulse through conductors to a compatible automatic controller with interface unit for subsequent transmission to a compatible central computer .
drip emitters .
the drip emitter shall be of the pressure compensating type with flow rates of num num or num gallons per hour plus or minus a num percent deviation at num to num psi .
the emitter shall be constructed of durable plastic with a barbed inlet and the outlet shall be capable of a watertight connection compatible with the polyethylene capillary tubing .
emitters shall be of the selfflushing type and capable of clogfree operation with a num mesh strainer .
emitters shall be multioutlet six outlets and shall be installed on the polyethylene drip lateral line .
the ends of the capillary tubing shall be installed on num inch plastic stakes with debris caps on the end of the tubing .
plastic pipe and fittings .
all pipe shall be identified with the following indelible markings manufacturers name nominal pipe size schedule or class of pipe pressure rating in pounds per square inch date of extrusion and nsf seal of approval .
a mainline pipe .
mainline pipe shall be class num pvc manufactured from virgin polyvinyl chloride pvc compound in accordance with astm dnum and dnum cell classification numb type i grade i .
pipe sizes num inches and smaller shall be of the solvent weld type and sizes larger than num inches shall have rubber gasketed fittings .
fittings shall be standard weight schedule num injection molded pvc conforming to astm dnum and dnum cell classification numb .
threaded nipples shall be schedule num pvc with molded threads conforming to astm dnum .
threaded fittings shall be kept to a minimum .
cement and cleaner for solvent weld pipe and fittings shall conform to astm dnum .
b lateral line pipe .
lateral line pipe shall be num pound nsf polyethylene manufactured from virgin material in conformance with astm dnum and designated as pe num or pe num .
pipe size shall not exceed num inches .
fittings shall be injectedmolded schedule num pvc conforming to astm dnum cell classification numb .
pipe shall be clamped onto the fitting num num using num percent stainless steel screw clamps two clamps on num inch and num inch pipe .
c drip lateral line pipe and capillary tubing .
drip lateral line pipe and capillary tubing shall be made of linear low density uv resistant polyethylene with a pressure rating of num psi .
d swing joint assembly .
swing joints shall be premanufactured with full rotation capacity .
swing joints shall consist of threaded fittings combined with elastomer seals and solvent weld or threaded fittings when attaching to supply line valve or sprinkler head .
the swing joint assembly shall consist of injection molded schedule num pvc conforming to astm dnum and dnum cell classification numb type i grade i. e detectable underground marking tape .
the contractor shall provide utility line marking tape for installation above all mainline pipe which does not have control wire placed in the same trench .
valves .
a automatic control valves .
the automatic control valve shall be a normally closed numvolt ac num cycle solenoid actuated globe or angle pattern diaphragm type valve .
the valve body and bonnet shall be heavy duty glass filled nylon or brass and internal components not including diaphragm and seat disc shall be noncorrosive brass bronze stainless steel or a combination thereof .
control valve diaphragms shall be of a onepiece molded reinforced fabric .
control valve shall have a nonshock cold water rating of at least num psi .
control valves shall function manually without electrical power by means of an internal bleeder device on the bonnet assembly .
control valves num inch or greater shall have manual flow control capacity .
control valves shall be constructed so that the bonnet assembly and all operating parts can be removed without disturbing the valve body .
valve closure time measured in actual seat disc movement time shall be at least num second .
b quickcoupler valves .
the quickcoupler valve shall have a twopiece brass body a nonshock cold water rating of at least num psi and num inch female pipe threads at the base .
the quickcoupler valve shall be designed to permit operation with a special connecting device lug type coupler designed for this purpose .
the quickcoupler shall be provided with a rubberlike vinyl hinged locking cover .
quickcoupler keys and hose swivels shall be compatible with the quickcoupler valves furnished .
hose swivels shall be of all brass construction designed to rotate freely .
c drip pressure reducing valve .
the drip pressure reducing valve shall be of the nonadjustable preset type consisting of a twopiece body molded from sturdy long lasting plastic .
the internal spring shall be of stainless steel .
each pressure reducing valve shall have a minimum flow range of num gallons per num num minute with a regulated outlet pressure of num to num psi with an inlet pressure range of num to num psi .
d mainline pressure reducing valve .
valves num inches or smaller shall be of the diaphragm spring cage construction type with a bronze body renewable stainless steel seat and stainless steel integral strainer .
valves larger than num inches shall be the balanced piston type with a ductileiron or cast iron body .
e manual drain valves .
the manual drain valve shall be constructed of heavy duty cast bronze and machined brass .
the drain valve shall be a rising stem globe valve with a nonshock cold water rating of at least num psi .
the drain valve shall have a reverse flow capability removable bonnet and cast bronze cross handle .
f mainline isolation valves .
mainline isolation valves  inch through num inches shall be full port ball valves with a bronze body and have a stainless steel ball and teflon seat .
the valves shall have a blowout proof stem and be rated at a minimum of num psi wog .
mainline isolation valves larger than num inches in size shall be resilient seated gate valves with a cast iron body and have a num inch square nut operator .
all isolation valves shall be rated at num psi differential pressure .
valve box .
the valve box cover and necessary extensions shall be as shown on the plans and shall be manufactured or molded virgin plastic materials conforming to astm dnum and dnum .
box extensions shall be used as necessary to completely expose the remote control valve and shall seat in place under the valve box .
valve box lids shall be imprinted irrigation control valve .
strainer .
strainer shall be a wye pattern type with a polypropylene body .
the strainer shall contain a num mesh stainless steel screen accessed by removing a threaded noncorrosive cap .
strainer shall be flushed via a ball valve located on the strainer .
construction requirements general .
irrigation systems shall be installed in conformity with applicable local codes .
information on the plans shows general locations only .
the contractor shall establish exact locations of all irrigation equipment to fit field conditions and locations will be approved by the engineer prior to start of construction .
contractor shall maintain and protect the approved staking layout .
prior to purchase of any irrigation equipment the contractor shall submit a list of suppliers and specification sheets for all irrigation components .
this submittal must be approved by the engineer before any equipment purchase is made .
at the submittal stage all changes in equipment shall be brought to the attention of the engineer .
site review .
at least num days prior to the start of irrigation work on the project a preconstruction conference shall be held .
during irrigation installation monthly meetings shall be held .
those in attendance shall be a representative of num num the contractors staff the landscape and irrigation subcontractors the engineer and a cdot landscape architect .
a written description of work methods and time schedules and milestone dates shall be presented .
the contractor shall notify the engineer prior to mainline pressure testing coverage tests and final review .
the contractor shall provide two radio transceivers with necessary personnel or remotecontrol devices to operate automatic controllers during coverage tests and final review .
excavation and backfill .
excavation and backfill shall conform to the requirements of section num and subsection numb class num structure backfill except that compaction of backfill outside of the roadway prism may be done by water flooding with the approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall maintain bottoms of trenches flat to permit all piping to be supported on an even grade .
where lines occur under paved areas dimensions shall be considered to be below the subgrade .
all mainline pipe shall be bedded in sand to allow a minimum of num inches of sand on all sides .
rock larger than num inch shall not be placed in the backfill material .
where it is necessary to excavate adjacent to existing trees or shrubs the contractor shall use all possible care to avoid injury to the plant root system .
pipe installation .
minimum cover for irrigation pipe shall be as follows mainline pipes num inches below finished grade lateral pipes num inches below finished grade pipe under roadways num inches below subgrade finished grade irrigation sleeving num inches below finished grade drip lines num inches below soil grade all pipes under roadways shall be encased in a steel pipe sleeve which shall be jacked or placed in a hole bored under present roadways or in a steel or plastic pipe sleeve placed by trenching on new construction .
at least num inches of clearance shall be provided between lines and at least num feet of clearance between lines of other trades .
parallel pipes shall not be installed directly over any other line .
manual drain valves shall be installed at all low points in the mainline .
minimum grade of pipe to drains shall be num inches per num feet .
plastic threaded fittings shall be assembled using teflon tape applied to male pipe threads only .
threaded fittings shall be kept to a minimum .
the contractor shall tape all open ends of the pipe during installation to prevent entry of any foreign matter into the system .
kick blocks .
concrete kick blocks shall be installed when the following conditions occur on num inch or greater mainline pressure pipe num num degree or greater change in pipe direction .
num change in pipe size .
num dead ends in pipes .
num num wiring .
all numvolt wire to automatic control valves and flow sensor wiring shall be installed at a minimum depth of num inches below finished grade .
power source wire shall conform to subsection num .
wiring shall be installed at the side of and under mainline whenever possible .
when more than one wire is placed in a trench the contractor shall tape wires together with electrical tape at intervals of num feet or less .
a num inch coiled expansion loop shall be provided every num feet along wire run before controller enclosure at each connection and at directional changes .
each automatic controller shall have its own separate ground wire colored green .
wiring between automatic controller and automatic control valves or sensors shall be continuous .
at locations where splicing is approved by the engineer moisture proof splices shall be made in a valve box .
two extra wires shall be installed along the entire mainline pipe from each automatic controller to the last automatic control valve .
wire splices shall be compatible in effectiveness to wire coating .
all wire under roadways shall be encased in a separate steel or plastic conduit .
wires not following the mainline shall be installed using open trench excavation .
wiring shall not be installed using a vibratory plow .
tubing shall be installed to an even grade in an open trench .
flush valve assemblies shall be installed at all ends of the drip lateral lines .
prior to backfilling all capillary drip lines shall be staked with an approved staple num feet on center .
drip systems .
drip lateral lines and capillary tubing shall be installed after num gallon and larger plant materials are in place and finished grade is established .
the contractor shall tape all open ends of pipe during installation to prevent entry of debris into the system .
all pipe shall be cut with a knife or blade type pipe cutter to prevent entry of pipe debris into the system a saw shall not be used .
tubing shall be installed to an even grade in an open trench .
flush valve assemblies shall be installed at all ends of the drip lateral lines .
prior to backfilling all drip lines shall be staked with an approved staple num feet on centers .
valve boxes .
all valve boxes shall be installed flush with the finished grade .
a branding iron type of tool shall be used to imprint the automatic control valve number letters and numbers num inches high on the valve box lid .
valve numbering system shall be as indicated on the plans .
geotextile filter fabric shall be placed under valve box and extend a minimum of num inches beyond bottom rim of valve box .
valves shall be grouped so that three or four valves are located together .
valves shall not be installed in low areas subject to standing water .
system flushing .
after all irrigation pipelines and valves are in place and connected and prior to installation of irrigation sprinklers rotary heads etc .
the contractor shall thoroughly flush all lines with water at system operating pressure .
num num pressure and coverage tests and adjustments .
after installation of valves pipe and fittings mainlines shall be inspected for leaks after a minimum num psi static pressure or pointofconnection static pressure if higher has been maintained for four hours in a hydro static test .
mainline pipes shall not be buried until completion of the test .
if the system does not pass the test the contractor shall detect and correct problems until the system reaches the acceptable test standard .
this test shall be passed prior to payment for the pipe .
gasketed pipe shall be tested using a volumetric make up water test and leak rates supplied by the pipe manufacturer and commonly accepted in the industry .
the contractor shall perform coverage tests in the presence of the engineer after the irrigation system is completed and prior to any planting seeding or sodding to assure that all irrigated areas are watered completely and uniformly .
the contractor shall make all necessary adjustments to provide required coverage as directed .
drip lateral and emitter coverage tests shall be performed after planting and before backfilling of lateral lines and emitters .
inspections .
inspections by the engineer or the engineers representative can be made at any point during construction .
milestone progress dates shall be established at the preconstruction meeting and numhour notice shall be given by the contractor when a milestone event is approaching .
irrigation asbuilt plans .
the contractor shall dimension from two permanent reference points building corners sidewalk corners road intersections or any permanent structures the location of the following items num routing of irrigation mainline .
num all drip and sprinkler automatic control valves .
num quick coupling valves isolation gate valves and manual drain valves .
num other related equipment as directed .
the contractor shall provide an accurately detailed irrigation asbuilt layout of the irrigation system at the same scale as the design plans and on num inch by num inch waterproof medium within num days after installation is complete and before notice of substantial landscape completion as defined in subsection num .
an in progress asbuilt plan shall be kept on the construction site at all times and available for impromptu review by the engineer or the engineers representative .
provision of the final asbuilt plan is a condition for final acceptance and release of retainage .
all changes in the irrigation system layout including lateral layout shall also be indicated on irrigation asbuilt plans .
the contractor shall provide finalized asbuilt plans to the engineer at the time of final landscape acceptance .
num num maintenance manuals and training .
prior to final landscape acceptance the contractor shall provide two individually bound maintenance manuals to the department for the irrigation system and shall train the owners maintenance personnel in the proper operation of all irrigation equipment including winterization procedures .
each manual shall contain the following num index sheet stating irrigation contractors name address telephone number and name of person to contact .
num duration of equipment or component warranty and warranty form .
num equipment list providing the following for each item i manufacturers name ii make and model number iii name and address of manufacturers local authorized distributor iv spare parts list in detail v detailed operating and maintenance instructions for major equipment num descriptions of all installed materials and systems in sufficient detail to permit maintenance personnel to understand operate and maintain the equipment .
a print out of the asbuilt plans shall be provided showing the area covered by that automatic controller .
the area of coverage of each automatic control valve shall be identified using a distinctly different pastel color drawn over the entire area of coverage .
following approval of charts by the engineer they shall be hermetically sealed between two layers of plastic sheet each num mils thick .
warranty .
the contractor shall warranty the irrigation system for the duration of the landscape establishment period specified in subsection num .
to ensure proper operation of the system the contractor shall perform as required warranty activities including but not limited to the following num inspection of the system and correction of system leaks improperly operating valves clogged emitters malfunctioning automatic controllers and other components .
num maintaining optimum sprinkler coverage .
num adjusting sprinkler head elevations relative to finish grade .
in an emergency the contractor shall correct all deficiencies within num hours of notification by the engineer .
the contractor shall perform irrigation system inspections at least once per week and after each mowing .
the contractor shall make corrections as necessary to ensure proper operation .
the contractor shall document each inspection in writing and submit it to the engineer .
num num final landscape acceptance .
before final landscape acceptance is granted the contractor shall perform an overall operation and pressure test and confirm the irrigation system is correctly functioning .
this includes two weeks on flow to be verified by the cdot central computer .
the contractor shall inspect every sprinkler and as necessary raise or lower those sprinklers which are no longer at the proper elevation relative to the finish grade as shown in the plans .
the contractor shall complete spring startup pressurization and repair all damage to the irrigation system .
cleanup .
upon completion of the work the contractor shall restore ground surfaces to required elevations and remove excess materials debris and equipment from the site .
keys and repair components .
three keys shall be furnished for manual operation of valves .
when valves require different kinds of keys three keys of each kind shall be furnished .
keys shall be of adequate length and made of non corrosive metal .
the following sprinkler components shall be furnished for system repair num two automatic control valves .
num two manual drain valves .
num four of each type of sprinkler specified .
num two valve boxes .
num two mainline isolation valves .
num two quick coupler valves .
irrigation scheduling .
the contractor shall submit recommendations for the projects initial irrigation operating schedule for optimum plant establishment to the engineer .
method of measurement automatic controller will be measured by the number of units of each size installed and accepted including concrete pad conduit bolts enclosure ground wire and all other items necessary to complete the work as shown on the plans .
drip emitters will be measured by the number of multioutlet emitters and shall include the capillary tubing tubing stakes enclosure box and debris caps .
each drip emitter shall have six outlets .
emitter valve assemblies will be measured by the number of units of each size installed .
vacuum breakers backflow preventers strainers and all other valves of the various types and sizes including fittings valve boxes copper risers and sleeves will be measured by the number of units installed and accepted .
num num quick couplers sprinkler of the various types and sizes including risers check valves swing joints and fittings will be measured by the number of units installed and accepted .
plastic and copper pipe will be measured by the linear foot installed and will include the cost of the detectable underground marking tape .
power source wire and num volt wire will be measured by the linear foot installed .
water meter pay item includes all appurtenant fittings valves meter pit and related equipment .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for the various items below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit shrubbery spray flood irrigator each _____inch popup spray sprinkler each _____inch popup rotary sprinkler each _____inch above ground rotary sprinkler each _____inch above ground spray each hose swivel each hose bib each _____inch copper pipe linear foot _____inch plastic pipe linear foot _____inch hose linear foot _____inch valve box each _____inch backflow preventer each _____inch pressure reducing valve each _____inch drain valve each _____inch automatic drain valve each _____inch manual control valve each _____inch automatic control valve each power source wire linear foot _____inch quickcoupler valve each _____inch gate valve each _____inch mainline isolation valve each _____inch water meter each _____inch station automatic controller each _____inch station satellite controller each num num control wire num volt linear foot _____inch strainer each automatic controller transmitterreceiver unit each drip emitter each emitter valve assembly each _____inch flush unit each water lines will be paid for as provided in section num .
kick blocks unions fittings filter fabric valve access sleeves valve boxes piping and wire inside boxes keys and aggregate for valves will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
structure excavation and backfill including compaction and water will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
concrete pad bolts enclosure ground wire and all other items necessary to complete the work shall be included in the price of the automatic controller .
capillary tubing tubing stakes enclosure box and debris caps shall be included in the price of the drip emitter .
system flushing and adjustment pressure and coverage tests maintenance manuals and training will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the price of the work .
the backflow preventer enclosure and pad will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
detectable underground marking tape will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
advisor message receiver pagers and hand held twoway radios will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
warranty work will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num drainage pipe description this work consists of furnishing and installing pipe defined by class for culverts cross drains side drains and storm sewers in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall meet the requirements in the contract and in the following subsections .
abbreviation description subsection csp corrugated steel pipe num bit .
co. csp bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe num a.f .
bo .
csp aramid fiber bonded corrugated steel pipe num cap corrugated aluminum pipe num pcsp both sides precoated corrugated steel pipe coated on both sides with num mils minimum num altnum csp aluminized corrugated steel pipe type num num rcp reinforced concrete pipe type i ii or v cement num nrcp nonreinforced concrete pipe type i ii or v cement num plastic polyvinyl chloride pvc polyethylene pe steel reinforced polyethylene srpe and polypropylene pp num all precoated sheet steel for pcsp culvert shall be tested by the manufacturer for coating holidays and certified to be free of defects .
the coating will be visually inspected by the engineer during construction and all damage found shall be repaired in an approved manner .
connecting bands shall receive the same corrosion protection as the pipe with which they are used .
coatings conforming to the requirements of sections num and num will be permitted as applicable .
connecting bands and pipe extensions shall be of similar metal or of nonmetallic material to avoid galvanic corrosion .
num num end sections for concrete or metal pipe shall be the same material as the pipe and meet the requirements for the same class as that specified for the pipe in accordance with table num .
plastic end sections shall not be used .
when plastic pipe is to be installed with end sections steel or concrete end sections meeting the same class as that specified for the pipe in accordance with table num shall be used .
the contractor may furnish any pipe material allowed in table num for the class of pipe specified in the contract except for storm drains .
the contractor may furnish rcp pvc srpe or pp allowed in table num for the class of pipe specified in the contract for storm drains .
the contractor shall state at the preconstruction conference the pipe materials intended to be furnished .
num num table num materials allowed for class of pipe material allowed class of pipe num num num num num num num num num num num csp y n n n n n n n n n n altnum csp y y y y y n n n n n n bit .
co. csp y ynum n n n n n n n n n a.f .
bo .
csp y y y y y y y n n n n cap y ynum ynum ynum ynum y n n n n n pcsp both sides y y y y y y y n n n n pvcnum y y y y y y y y y y y penum y y y y y y y y y y y ppnum y y y y y y y y y y y srpe y y y y y y y y y y y rcp spnum y y n n n n n y n n n rcp spnum y y y n n n n y y n n rcp spnum y y y y y n n y y y n rcp spnum y y y y y y y y y y y as determined by the department in accordance with the cdot pipe selection guide .
determination is based on abrasion and corrosion resistance .
yyes nno .
num coated steel structural plate pipe of equal or greater diameter conforming to section num may be substituted for bit .
co. csp at no additional cost to the project .
num aluminum alloy structural plate pipe of equal or greater diameter conforming to section num may be substituted for cap at no additional cost to the project .
num sp class of sulfate protection required in accordance with subsection num as revised for this project .
rcp shall be manufactured using the cementitious material required to meet the sp class specified .
num for pipe classes num and num the rcp shall be coated in accordance with subsection num when the ph of either the soil or water is less than num .
the contract will specify when rcp is to be coated .
num concrete shall have a compressive strength of num psi or greater .
num in accordance with subsection num .
num num where class of pipe specified allows the use of metal pipe its use will be limited in accordance with the resistivity requirements in table num .
the contract will state whether the resistivity requirements apply .
table num resistivity requirements for metal pipes soil side minimum required gauge thickness for metal pipe material resistivity r ohm cm ph num num num gauge aluminized type num num num num gauge polymer coated the minimum wall thickness for metal pipe shall be the gauge shown on standard plan mnum unless otherwise specified in the contract .
joint systems for siphons irrigation systems and storm drains shall be watertight .
watertight joint systems for plastic pipe shall conform to subsection num .
construction requirements installation shall conform to the requirements of section num or section num as applicable .
installation for aluminized corrugated steel pipe type num shall conform to all requirements for corrugated steel pipe csp including the fill height tables and requirements in standard plan mnum .
joining and installation of plastic pipe shall conform to astm d num and the manufacturers recommendations .
method of measurement drainage pipe will not be measured but will be the net length of pipe called for on the plans except when field changes are ordered or when there are errors on the plans .
in case of exceptions the quantity to be measured shall be the actual net length of conduit measured along the bottom centerline of the installed pipe .
the net length shall include end sections when required .
basis of payment the accepted quantities of drainage pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the specified size and class .
payment will be made under num num pay item pay unit _____inch drainage pipe class__ linear foot structure excavation and structure backfill will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num construction surveying description this work consists of the construction surveying calculating and staking necessary for the construction of all elements of the project .
the work shall be done under the supervision of a professional land surveyor pls or professional engineer pe who is experienced and competent in road and bridge construction surveying and licensed in the state of colorado .
locating preserving referencing installing and restoring land monuments such as primary control monuments from which the right of way or any land boundary will be calculated described or monumented public land survey system plss monuments general land office glo monuments bureau of land management blm monuments mineral survey ms monuments right of way row monuments property boundary monuments easement monuments and other monuments that are required by law or regulation to be established by a pls and the determination of any land boundary shall be done in accordance with section num under the supervision of a professional land surveyor pls who is experienced and competent in right of way and boundary surveying and licensed in the state of colorado .
the pls or pe shall be available to review work resolve problems and make decisions in a timely manner .
unless specified otherwise in the contract all survey procedures shall be in conformance with the cdot survey manual .
materials and equipment the contractor shall furnish all personnel survey equipment safety equipment materials and traffic control necessary to perform the required construction surveying and staking .
all surveying equipment including electronic distance meters edm total stations theodolites levels rods tapes tripods tribrachs and global positioning system gps receivers and equipment shall be checked and calibrated in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of work and every six months thereafter .
edm and total stations shall be checked and calibrated on a national oceanic and atmospheric administration national geodetic survey noaa ngs calibrated baseline in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of work and every six months thereafter .
gps receivers and equipment shall be checked and calibrated on a noaa ngs calibrated baseline in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of work and every six months thereafter .
num num levels shall be checked and calibrated in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of any level circuit .
if any survey equipment is found to be functioning outside the manufacturers specified tolerance certification from an approved repair facility showing that the instruments have been repaired properly adjusted or both if necessary shall be included in the survey records and submitted to the engineer before being used .
traffic control shall be in accordance with section num .
construction requirements general .
the department will establish primary horizontal and vertical control for the project .
all available information defining the extent of that control is provided on the plans in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and num or is available from the engineer .
a presurvey conference construction survey shall be held in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num prior to performing any surveying work under this section .
the engineer region survey coordinator or designee contractors superintendent contractors surveyor pls or pe and party chief shall attend .
a presurvey conference construction survey form shall be included in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num appendix num.a.num .
a surveying work schedule shall be submitted to the engineer for review prior to the conference .
contractor surveying .
the contractor shall perform all construction surveying and staking that is necessary for construction of the project .
construction surveying and staking shall be based on the primary control established by the department .
bid items which require stakes to be set by the contractors surveyor pls or pe are shown on the survey tabulation sheet of the plans in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
the contractor shall check all department established primary horizontal and vertical control points in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and verify and document in the survey records their horizontal accuracy tolerance in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and their vertical accuracy tolerance in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num for a cdot class a primary survey prior to using them for construction surveying control .
staking .
acceptable staking placement intervals for the various construction survey items are described in the cdot survey manual chapter num .
staking placement intervals specified on the survey tabulation sheet have precedence over those in the cdot survey manual .
stationing shall be established in the field on centerline or an approved offset .
num num accuracy and tolerances .
horizontal and vertical accuracy tolerances for secondary control surveys and monuments and for each construction item being staked shall be as specified in the contract or in the cdot survey manual chapter num .
if a discrepancy should occur the higher degree of accuracy or the more restrictive tolerance shall apply .
horizontal accuracy tolerances for primary control surveys and monuments shall be as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
vertical accuracy tolerances for primary control surveys and monuments shall be as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num .
horizontal accuracy tolerances for secondary control surveys and monuments shall be as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
vertical accuracy tolerances for secondary control surveys monuments andor secondary benchmarks shall be as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
responsibility and inspection .
supervision and coordination of construction surveying and staking is the contractors responsibility .
the engineer may inspect the contractors surveying however such inspection will not relieve the contractor of any responsibility for accuracy or completeness of work .
the contractor shall check the work to verify the accuracy and include documentation of this check in the survey records .
all contractor surveying inaccuracies errors or omissions shall be corrected at the contractors expense .
engineers inspection or the contractors corrections shall not entitle the contractor to additional payment or contract time extension .
reset monuments and stakes .
primary and secondary control monuments benchmarks and other significant stakes that are damaged destroyed or made inaccessible by the progress of construction shall be replaced transferred or reestablished at the contractors expense in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
a supplemental or amended project control diagram shall be submitted to the engineer and the region survey coordinator for any replaced transferred or re established primary control monuments in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
locating preserving referencing installing and restoring land monuments such as primary control monuments from which the right of way or any land boundary will be calculated described or monumented plss monuments glo monuments blm monuments ms monuments row monuments property boundary monuments easement monuments and other monuments that are required by law or regulation to be established by a pls shall be done in accordance with section num under the supervision of a pls who is experienced and competent in right of way and boundary surveying and licensed in the state of colorado .
num num changes .
all changes in lines and grades required by field conditions and all discrepancies in grades alignment location or dimensions detected by the contractor shall be immediately submitted to the engineer in writing .
no changes in given data or plans will be allowed unless approved by the engineer in writing .
all changes shall be documented in the survey records .
pay quantities measurements .
the engineer will perform all interim and final measurements deemed necessary by the department to determine contract pay quantities .
the contractor shall establish and maintain primary and secondary control points and stationing as required for these measurements .
survey records .
survey records shall be completed as the work is done .
field survey notes for construction surveying and checking by the contractor shall be recorded in survey records in conformance with the format given in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
survey fieldbooks shall be indexed in accordance with the survey manual chapter num section num .
all survey records generated shall be the property of the department and shall be available to the engineer for inspection or reproduction at all times .
all survey records shall be transmitted to the engineer for inclusion into the project records before final project acceptance .
all survey records shall be stamped with the seal of and signed by the responsible pls or pe identified in subsection num .
if an electronic format is used it shall contain the same information and format as required in the survey manual chapter num section num for written documentation a printout shall be signed and sealed by the pls or pe in responsible charge identified in subsection num and shall be submitted to the engineer on a cd rom compact disc or other acceptable medium which contains the stakeout data and the raw data from the actual placement of stakes .
initial staking for major structures overhead signs concrete box culverts bridges and all other structures assigned a structure number shall be done in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num from two independent setups .
an independent check shall be made by the contractor and shown in the survey records for all bridge structures .
method of measurement construction surveying will not be measured but will be paid for on a lump sum basis .
basis of payment payment for construction surveying will be the contract lump sum bid and will be full compensation for all surveying work necessary to complete the project as shown on the plans to include all resetting of stakes marks monuments secondary and primary control points and preparing supplemental or amended project control diagrams .
num num construction surveying required by plan force account or by additional work beyond the scope of the original contract will be paid for at a negotiated rate not to exceed the rate established in section num .
that rate shall also apply to reductions in construction surveying as impacted by reductions or deletions to the original contract work .
any survey work not performed to the contract requirements shall be subject to price reduction or rejection .
partial payment for construction surveying as determined by the engineer will be made as the work progresses .
the contractor shall submit a schedule of estimated contractor construction surveying time as required on the survey tabulation sheet before the first partial payment is made .
copies of the survey records for all completed survey work shall be submitted to the engineer prior to payment of the monthly estimate .
before final payment is made the following two items shall be completed bear the seal and signature of the responsible pls or pe identified in subsection num and have copies submitted to the engineer for review num all survey records .
num supplemental or amended project control diagram a copy of which shall be submitted to the region survey coordinator .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit construction surveying lump sum traffic control for construction surveying will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num mobilization description this work consists of the mobilization of personnel equipment and supplies at the project site in preparation for work on the project .
this item shall also include the establishment of the contractors offices buildings and other necessary facilities and all other costs incurred or labor and operations which must be performed prior to beginning the other items under the contract .
basis of payment partial payments for mobilization will be made once each month as the work progresses .
these partial payments will be made as follows num when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num when num percent of the original contract amount is earned num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less will be paid .
num upon completion of all work on the project payment on any amount bid for mobilization in excess of num percent of the original contract amount will be paid .
num the total sum of all payments shall not exceed the original contract amount bid for the item regardless of the fact that the contractor may have for any reason shut down the work on the project or moved equipment away from the project and then back again .
for the purpose of this section the term original contract amount as used above shall mean the amount bid for the construction items in the contract not including the amount bid for mobilization .
payments for materials on hand as described in subsection num will not be included as a percent of original contract amount earned until said materials on hand have been incorporated into the work and accepted and paid for as contract items .
these payments shall be independent of partial payments as defined in subsection num .
payment will be full compensation for all work necessary to complete the item .
num num payment will be made under pay item pay unit mobilization lump sum nothing herein shall be construed to limit or preclude partial payments for other items as provided for by the contract .
num num section num pavement marking description this work consists of furnishing and applying pavement marking and furnishing installing and removing temporary pavement marking in accordance with these specifications the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways mutcd the colorado supplement thereto and in conformity to the lines dimensions patterns locations and details shown on the plans or established .
materials materials shall conform to the requirements of the following subsections paint num glass beads num modified epoxy pavement marking material num thermoplastic marking material num pavement primer num preformed plastic pavement marking material num pavement marking tape num pavement marking tape removable num raised pavement marker num preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material num methyl methacrylate pavement marking material num construction requirements general .
all pavement markings shall be placed in accordance with the following requirements .
when the term full compliance is used it means the pavement markings shall meet the requirements of standard plan snum .
a pavement marking plan .
when pavement marking location details are not provided in the contract the contractor shall submit a layout of existing conditions to the engineer for approval or modification .
this layout is to be used as the final pavement marking plan .
b roadways closed to traffic during construction .
fullcompliance final markings shall be in place prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
pavement markings on detour routes shall be fullcompliance markings .
c roadways constructed under traffic .
full compliance final pavement markings shall be placed within two weeks after final surfacing is completed .
num num full compliance pavement markings shall also be placed on any roadways opened to traffic when the project pavement work is discontinued for more than two weeks .
d temporary pavement markings .
temporary pavement markings and control points for the installation of those pavement markings for roadways that are being constructed under traffic shall be installed as follows num .
when one roadway of a normally physically divided highway is closed and a crossover is constructed fullcompliance pavement markings shall be placed along the tapers and through the median crossovers to the two way traffic section .
pavement markings through the twoway traffic section shall be as shown on the plans .
all temporary paved roadways shall have fullcompliance center line lane line and edge line markings before they are open for traffic .
upon removal markings applied to a final surface shall not leave a scar that conflicts with permanent markings .
num .
the following criteria apply to all construction on roadways open to traffic other than dnum .
above fullcompliance center line lane line and edge line temporary markings shall be in place at the end of each work day .
nopassing zone restrictions shall be identified by fullcompliance nopassing zone markings .
nopassing zone markings shall be in place daily .
temporary pavement stencils school rr xing etc are not required unless specified in the plans .
temporary pavement markings shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations in such a way that the markings adequately follow the desired alignment .
num .
control points consisting of num inch by num foot marks at numfoot intervals may be placed as guide markers for the installation of temporary or final pavement markings .
raised flexible pavement markers may be substituted for these marks .
control points shall not be used as a substitute for any required marking .
e pavement marking for seal coats section num .
num .
raised flexible pavement markers suitable for use on seal coats shall be installed as follows nopassing zones shall be marked with two markers placed sidebyside at numfoot intervals throughout the zone .
num num passing zones shall be marked with one marker at numfoot centers .
closer spacing shall be used on curves as deemed appropriate .
raised flexible pavement markers installed on numfoot centers may also be used to mark lane lines through multilane roadway sections .
auxiliary lanes and shoulder lines may be marked with flexible markers on numfoot centers or as appropriate .
num .
fullcompliance final pavement markings shall be placed within one week of completion of the seal coat project .
pavement marking with low temperature acrylic paint and high build acrylic paint .
striping shall be applied on asphalt or portland cement concrete pavements when the air and pavement temperatures are as follows for highbuild waterborne paint at least num f and expected to remain num f or above for at least num hours for low temperature waterborne paint at least num f and expected to remain num f or above for at least num hours .
the pavement surface shall be dry and clean and free of all latent materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
weather conditions shall be conducive to satisfactory results .
glass beads shall be applied into the paint by means of a low pressure gravity drop bead applicator .
the contractor shall use equipment that meets the following requirements as approved num equipment shall permit traffic to pass safely within the limits of the roadway surface and shoulder while operating .
num equipment shall be designed for placement of both solid and broken line stripes with a reasonably cleanedged stripe of the width and location as shown on the contract and no overspray on the road surface .
num equipment shall have a glass bead dispenser directly behind and synchronized with the paint applicator .
each applicator shall have individual control and automatic skip control that will paint a strip with a gap as shown in the contract .
num the equipment may be equipped with a heat exchanger to heat the paint to reduce drying time .
num the operation shall include a trailing vehicle equipped with a flashing arrow board .
the contractor shall prevent traffic from crossing a wet stripe .
stripes which have been marred or picked up by traffic before they have dried shall be repaired at the contract ors expense .
removal of paint from vehicles that crossed wet paint shall be at the contractors expense .
the waterbased paint and stripes shall fall within the following minimum and maximum ranges num num description pavement marking paint low temp high build alignment lateral deviation num inch per num feet max coverage rate sq .
ft. per gallon num num thickness mil num num width inches per plans num per plans num dry time minutes num num beads application rate lbs.gal num num equipment shall have a bead dispenser directly behind synchronized with the paint applicator and shall be capable of painting a cleanedged stripe of the designated width  inch with no overspray on the road surface .
for centerlines and lane lines an automatic skip control shall be used .
machines having multiple applicators shall be used for centerlines with no passing zones .
in areas where machines are not practical suitable handoperated equipment shall be used as directed by the engineer .
stripes shall be protected until dry .
modified epoxy pavement marking .
the modified epoxy pavement marking compound shall be applied with equipment that will precisely meter the two components in the ratio given in subsection numa .
the equipment shall automatically shut off or warn the operator if one component is not being mixed .
the equipment shall produce the required amount of heat at the mixing head and gun tip to provide and maintain the temperatures specified .
before mixing the individual components a and b shall each be heated to a temperature of num to num f. after mixing the application temperature for the combined material at the gun tip shall be num to num f. the num f upper limit is the maximum temperature under any circumstances .
both pavement and air temperatures shall be at least num f at the time of modified epoxy pavement marking application .
the surface areas of new portland cement concrete pavement and decks that are to receive markings shall be waterblasted prior to placement of the modified epoxy pavement marking .
the amount of waterblasting shall be sufficient to remove all dirt laitance and curing compound residue .
the surface areas of new asphalt pavement existing asphalt pavement and existing concrete pavement that are to receive markings shall be cleaned with a high pressure air blast to remove loose material prior to placement of the modified epoxy pavement marking .
should any pavement become dirty from tracked mud etc .
as determined by the engineer it shall be cleaned prior to the placement of the modified epoxy pavement marking .
when recommended by the modified epoxy manufacturer a high pressure water blast integrated into the gun carriage shall be used to clean the pavement surface prior to modified epoxy pavement marking application .
the water blast shall be num num followed by a high pressure air blast to remove all residual water leaving only a damp surface .
modified epoxy pavement marking shall be applied to the road surface according to the modified epoxy manufacturers recommended methods at the application rate or coverage shown below .
glass beads shall be applied into the modified epoxy pavement marking by means of a low pressure gravity drop bead applicator .
modified epoxy pavement marking and beads shall be applied within the following limits application rate or coverage per gallon of modified epoxy pavement marking minimum maximum num mil marking num sq .
ft. num sq .
ft. beads num lbs .
thermoplastic pavement marking .
a equipmentgeneral .
the material shall be applied to the pavement by an extrusion method wherein one side of the shaping die is the pavement and the other three sides are contained by or are part of suitable equipment for heating mixing and controlling the flow of the material .
the equipment shall be constructed to provide continuous mixing and agitation of the material .
conveying parts of the equipment between the main material reservoir and the shaping die shall be so constructed as to prevent accumulation and clogging .
all parts of the equipment which come in contact with the material shall be easily accessible and exposable for cleaning and maintenance .
all mixing and conveying parts up to and including the shaping die shall maintain the material at the plastic temperature .
the equipment shall be so constructed as to assure continuous uniformity in the dimensions of the stripe .
the applicator shall provide a means for cleanly cutting off square stripe ends and shall provide a method of applying skip lines .
the use of pans aprons or similar appliances which the die overruns will not be permitted under this specification .
beads for the surface of the completed stripe shall be applied by an automatic bead dispenser attached to the applicator in such manner that the beads are dispensed almost instantly upon the completed line .
the bead dispenser shall be equipped with an automatic cutoff control synchronized with the cutoff of the thermoplastic material .
num num the equipment shall be so constructed as to provide for varying die widths to produce varying widths of traffic markings .
the equipment shall be so designed to permit agitation of the material to prevent scorching discoloration or excessive high temperatures of any part of the material .
a special kettle shall be provided for melting and heating the composition .
the kettle shall be equipped with an automatic thermostatic control device so that heating can be done by controlled heat transfer liquid rather than direct flame .
the applicator and kettle shall be so equipped and arranged as to satisfy the requirements of the national fire underwriters .
the equipment shall be so equipped as to permit preheating of the pavement immediately prior to application of the material .
the applicator shall be mobile and maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
b types of equipment .
num .
portable applicator .
the portable applicator shall be a device typically used for painting crosswalk lines stop bars short lane lines and short center lines .
the applicator shall be easily maneuverable and capable of being propelled by the operator .
num .
mobile applicator .
the mobile applicator shall contain equipment to provide for automatic installation of skip lines in any combination of line and skip up to num feet .
the mobile applicator shall be moved in conjunction with the melting and heating kettles in such a manner as to provide continuous highway operation of the kettles and the mobile applicator as an integral unit .
num .
epoxy primer equipment .
the epoxy primer application shall be accomplished using equipment having the following features a .
the main storage tank shall be equipped with a visible gauge which will allow the engineer to readily ascertain the rate of application .
b .
the main storage tank shall be equipped with a heating device which will maintain the epoxy at a constant efficient temperature .
c. the spray nozzle and epoxy spray shall be protected from the action of wind to insure placement where needed .
num .
cleaning equipment .
equipment must be provided to insure removal of laitance dust debris paint and other foreign matter from the road surface immediately prior to the installation of the composition or immediately prior to the application of primer .
num num c application .
the stripe shall be applied to the pavement either to the right or left of the application unit dependent upon roadway lane being used .
the unit shall not occupy more than one lane of roadway while operating .
the finished lines shall have well defined edges and be free of waviness .
all of the equipment necessary to the preheating and application of the material shall be so designed that the temperature of the material can be controlled within the limits necessary to its pourability for good application .
at the time of installation of thermoplastic materials the pavement shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint or other foreign contaminants .
pavement and ambient temperatures shall be at least num f. an epoxy resin primer conforming to subsection num shall be applied to all pavement surfaces prior to the application of the thermoplastic pavement marking .
the marking material shall not be applied until the epoxy resin primer reaches the tacky stage approximately num minutes under normal conditions .
an infrared heating device may be employed to shorten the curing time of the epoxy .
to insure the best possible adhesion the marking material as specified shall be installed at the manufacturers recommended temperature .
the minimum thickness of thermoplastic lines as viewed from a lateral cross section shall not be less than num inch at the edges or less than  inch at the center .
measurements shall be taken as an average throughout any num inch section of the line .
the material when formed into traffic stripes must be readily renewable by placing an overlay of new material directly over an old line of compatible material .
such new material shall bond itself to the old line in such a manner that no splitting or separation takes place .
glass beads shall be applied to the thermoplastic pavement marking by means of a low pressure gravity drop bead applicator at a rate of num pounds per num square feet minimum .
methyl methacrylate pavement marking .
methyl methacrylate pavement marking shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall use installation equipment materials equipment technicians and operators recommended by the manufacturer .
methyl methacrylate pavement markings shall be applied to the road surface according to the manufacturers recommended methods at num mil minimum thickness .
glass beads shall be applied using a double drop bead application system .
the first bead applicator shall apply glass beads at the rate of num pounds per square yard num pounds per gallon minimum and num pounds per square yard num pounds per gallon minimum for the second bead applicator .
methyl methacrylate pavement marking and beads shall be applied within the following limits num num application rate or coverage per gallon of methyl methacrylate pavement marking minimum maximum methyl methacrylate pavement marking num sq .
ft. num sq .
ft. first bead applicator num lbs second bead applicator num lbs preformed plastic pavement marking .
this retroreflective preformed plastic strip shall be suitable for application on asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement .
the strip shall be applied at the locations called for on the plans or as directed .
if recommended by the manufacturer an epoxy resin primer conforming to subsection num shall be applied to all pavement surfaces prior to the application of the preformed plastic pavement marking .
the surface of the pavement shall be clean free of loose foreign material dry and have no moisture for a minimum of num hours prior to application of the markings .
the air and surface temperature shall be a minimum num f or as recommended by the manufacturer .
the marking strip as applied shall be in good appearance free of cracks and the edges shall be true and straight .
the preformed plastic pavement marking shall be type i type ii or type iii as shown on the plans .
prior to beginning installation operations the contractor shall submit to the engineer instructions from the performed plastic pavement manufacturer detailing surface preparation grooving requirements and material application .
the instructions shall include the following num equipment requirements .
num approved work methods and procedures .
num material application temperature requirements .
num ambient air and surface temperature requirements .
num weather limitations .
num special precautions .
num any other requirements necessary for successful installation and satisfactory performance of the material .
the contractor shall secure from the manufacturer all warranties and guarantees num num with respect to materials workmanship performance or combination thereof and shall include these warranties and guarantees with the certification of compliance .
materials supplied without installation instructions or with incomplete instructions will not be accepted for use .
unless otherwise shown on the plans typical pavement markings shall conform to the shapes and sizes as shown on standard plan snum .
the contractor shall make all arrangements to have a manufacturertrained installer of the manufacturers products onsite during the placement of preformed plastic pavement marking to ensure proper installation .
a minimum of two weeks prior to the placement of the preformed plastic pavement marking the contractor shall submit written documentation of the installers qualifications and training in the installation of preformed plastic pavement marking .
upon completion of the work the contractor shall obtain and submit to the engineer written documentation from the manufacturertrained installer certifying that the product was installed in full compliance with this specification and manufacturers recommendations .
the preformed plastic pavement marking shall be inlaid on new and existing pavements as shown in the contract .
the material shall be usable for patching worn areas of the same type according to the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall not perform wet cutting of pavement unless otherwise directed .
application and removal of temporary pavement marking associated with wetcutting of pavement shall be at the contractors expense .
the preformed plastic pavement marking shall conform to pavement contours by the action of traffic and shall be appliable on new dense and open graded asphalt wearing courses during the paving operations according to the manufacturers recommendations .
after application the markings shall be immediately ready for traffic .
a inlaid preformed plastic pavement marking .
the grooved width for inlaid preformed plastic pavement marking is called for in the contract .
the grooved width shall be the pavement marking width plus num inch with a tolerance of  inch .
the depth of the grooves shall be num mils num mils .
groove position shall be a minimum of num inches from the edge of the pavement marking to the longitudinal pavement joint .
grooving shall not be performed on bridge decks with polyester polymer concrete overlays .
the bottom of the groove shall have a smooth flat finished surface .
the spacers between blade cuts shall be such that there will be less than a num mil rise in the finished groove between the blades .
grooves shall be clean dry and free of laitance oil dirt grease paint or other foreign contaminants .
the contractor shall prevent traffic from traversing the num num grooves and reclean grooves as necessary prior to application of the preformed plastic pavement markings .
b reserved .
preformed thermoplastic pavement marking .
the markings shall consist of a resilient white or yellow thermoplastic product with glass beads uniformly distributed throughout the entire cross sectional area .
legends and symbols shall be capable of being affixed to bituminous pavements by heating .
the markings shall conform to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
the material shall have resealing characteristics with the capability of fusing with itself and previously applied thermoplastic markings under normal use .
the preformed thermoplastic markings shall be packaged in a protective plastic film with cardboard stiffeners where necessary to prevent damage in transit .
the carton in which the material is packed shall be clearly labeled for ease of identification .
a application .
application temperature shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
the pavement and air temperature shall be as recommended by the manufacturer at the time of application .
the materials shall be applied using a heating method recommended by the manufacturer .
the contractor shall provide the engineer a copy of the manufacturers installation recommendations prior to beginning the work .
the pavement shall be clean dry and free from debris .
the preformed thermoplastic markings may be installed on top of existing thermoplastic markings after all loose material has been removed .
the preformed thermoplastic markings shall not be installed on top of existing preformed plastic pavement markings without first removing the existing markings to a depth that insures removal of the adhesive backing of the preformed plastic .
it shall not be installed on top of pavement marking paint without first removing the paint .
b equipment .
the contractor shall use a heating method specifically recommended by the manufacturer for the installation of preformed thermoplastic markings .
pavement marking tape .
retroreflective tape shall be suitable for temporary use on asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavements .
the tape shall be applied at the locations shown on the plans or as directed .
the tape shall conform to subsection num .
the surface to which the tape is applied shall be clean dry and free of dirt oils and grease .
the tape shall be pressed down immediately after application until it adheres properly and conforms to the surface .
temporary marking tape sections longer than num foot shall be removed before placement of the final pavement course .
all tape shall be removed on sections where tape conflicts with revised traffic lanes prior to opening of new lanes to traffic .
num num pavement marking tape removable shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and maintained throughout the required construction phase at no additional cost to the department .
raised pavement markers .
raised pavement markers temporary shall be installed on center lines edge lines and lane lines where specified in the contract .
single markers shall be installed at num foot intervals for solid lines .
a group of four markers at num foot spacings and at num foot intervals shall be installed for skip lines .
markers supplementing lines shall be installed at the spacing shown on the plans .
raised pavement markers temporary shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall be maintained throughout the required construction phase at the contractors expense .
method of measurement the types of pavement marking described herein will be measured by the following units complete in place and accepted .
pavement marking paint will be measured by the number of gallons used including glass beads .
material used in excess of coverage limit prescribed will not be measured .
modified epoxy pavement marking polyurea and methyl methacrylate pavement marking will be measured by the total number of gallons of components a and b used including glass beads .
material used in excess of coverage limit prescribed will not be measured .
thermoplastic pavement marking preformed thermoplastic pavement marking and preformed plastic pavement marking will be measured by the square foot .
the unmarked spaces between markings will not be included in the overall measurement .
the amount of pavement marking tape to be measured will be the linear feet of the specified width tape applied .
gaps in marking will not be measured for payment .
raised pavement marker temporary will be measured as a unit in place and shall include all adhesive necessary for installation .
removal of the raised pavement marker shall be included in the work .
pavement word and symbol markings transverse and longitudinal crosswalk lines and stop lines will not be measured but shall be the quantities in square feet designated in the contract except measurements will be made for revisions requested by the engineer .
the unmarked spaces within these markings will not be included in the measurement .
num num basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract price per unit of measurement for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit pavement marking paint gallon pavement marking paint high build gallon pavement marking paint low temperature gallon modified epoxy pavement marking gallon methyl methacrylate pavement marking gallon thermoplastic pavement marking square foot preformed plastic pavement marking type __ inlaid square foot preformed plastic pavement marking wordsymbol type i inlaid square foot preformed plastic pavement marking xwalkstop line type i inlaid square foot ____inch pavement marking tape linear foot pavement marking tape removable linear linear foot raised pavement marker temporary each pavement marking paint wordsymbol square foot pavement marking paint xwalkstop line square foot thermoplastic pavement marking wordsymbol square foot thermoplastic pavement marking xwalkstop line square foot preformed thermoplastic pavement marking square foot preformed plastic pavement marking num mil wordsymbol square foot preformed plastic pavement marking num mil xwalkstop line square foot waterblasting will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work glass beads and cleaning with high pressure water blast or air blast shall be included in the cost of the work .
each authorized application of temporary pavement marking will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the type of material used .
num num control points and contractor pavement marking plans will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
all costs associated with having the preformed plastic pavement marking manufacturertrained installer onsite and providing the documentation will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num section num survey monumentation description this work consists of locating preserving referencing installing and restoring land monuments such as primary control monuments from which the right of way or any land boundary will be calculated described or monumented public land survey system plss monuments general land office glo monuments bureau of land management blm monuments mineral survey ms monuments right of way row monuments property boundary monuments easement monuments and other monuments that are required by law or regulation to be established and recorded by a professional land surveyor pls along with installing or adjusting monument boxes as listed on the survey tabulation sheet or as shown on the plans .
all such monuments included in this section shall be established in accordance with the applicable and most recent editions of the department of interiors manual of surveying instructions blm manual colorado revised statutes crs colorado state board of licensure for professional engineers and land surveyors state board rules and policies the memorandum of understanding mou with the state board and cdot and the cdot survey manual under the supervision of a pls who is experienced and competent in right of way and boundary surveying and licensed in the state of colorado .
the pls shall be available to review work resolve problems and make decisions in a timely manner .
unless specified otherwise in the contract all survey procedures shall be in conformance with the cdot survey manual .
materials and equipment the contractor shall furnish all personnel survey equipment safety equipment materials and traffic control necessary to perform the required monumentation and related surveying .
monuments and monument boxes will be furnished by the department .
the various types of monuments and monument boxes shall be constructed according to the details shown on standard plan mnum .
the contractor shall furnish all labor survey tools equipment incidental materials such as but not limited to concrete grout asphalt caulk glue epoxy nails stakes lath and replacement monuments of the variety not included on the standard plan mnum .
all surveying equipment including electronic distance meters edm total stations theodolites levels rods tapes tripods tribrachs and global positioning system gps receivers and equipment shall be checked and calibrated in accordance with the colorado department of transportation cdot survey manual chapter num section num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of work and every six months thereafter .
num num edm and total stations shall be checked and calibrated on a national oceanic and atmospheric administration national geodetic survey noaa ngs calibrated baseline in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of work and every six months thereafter .
gps receivers and equipment shall be checked and calibrated on a noaa ngs calibrated baseline in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of work and every six months thereafter .
levels shall be checked and calibrated in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num and documented in the survey records prior to the start of any level circuit .
if any survey equipment is found to be functioning outside the manufacturers specified tolerance certification from an approved repair facility showing that the instruments have been repaired properly adjusted or both if needed shall be included in the survey records and submitted to the engineer before being used .
traffic control shall be in accordance with section num .
construction requirements general .
the department will establish primary horizontal and vertical control for the project .
all available information defining the extent of that control is provided on the plans in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and num or is available from the engineer .
a presurvey conference construction survey shall be held in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num prior to performing any surveying work under this section .
the engineer region survey coordinator and plans coordinator or designee contractors superintendent contractors surveyor pls and party chief shall attend .
a presurvey conference construction survey form shall be included in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num appendix num.a.num .
a surveying work schedule shall be submitted to the engineer for review prior to the presurvey conference .
the contractor shall check all department established primary horizontal and vertical control points in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and verify and document in the survey records their horizontal accuracy tolerance in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and their vertical accuracy tolerance in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num for a cdot class a primary survey prior to using them for monumentation surveying control .
survey records shall be completed as the work is done .
field survey notes for monumentation surveying and checking by the contractor shall be recorded in survey records in conformance with the format given in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
survey field books shall be indexed in accordance with the survey manual chapter num section num .
num num all survey records generated shall be the property of the department and shall be available to the engineer for inspection or reproduction at all times .
all survey records shall be transmitted to the engineer for inclusion into the project records before final project acceptance .
all survey records shall be stamped with the seal of and signed by the responsible pls identified in subsection num .
if an electronic format is used it shall contain the same information and format as required in the survey manual chapter num section num for written documentation a printout shall be signed and sealed by the pls in responsible charge of establishing the monuments as identified in subsection num and shall be submitted to the engineer on a cd rom compact disc or other acceptable medium which contains the stakeout data and the raw data from the actual placement of the monuments .
survey records shall include the requirements specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num and num for any plss monument glo monument blm monument or ms monument on the project .
copies of any new monument records filed by the pls with the state board of registration in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num shall be submitted to the engineer prior to filing .
locating monuments .
this work consists of field locating all survey monumentation which is in place as a result of a government federal state county or municipal survey or resurvey as shown on original plss glo blm or ms plats notes or other survey monumentation documented in the public record in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
a diligent search of construction zones and project limits shall be performed by the pls in accordance with the survey manual chapter num section num to locate any survey monumentation of the public record .
an electronic magnetic field sensor or locator shall be used in this search .
the responsible pls shall document the search and time spent searching in the survey records using a narrative form .
the survey records shall include the procedures used to make the diligent search a description of each monument searched for and the actions taken to reference and preserve the location of the monument in accordance with subsection num .
preserving and referencing monuments .
this work consists of field surveying establishing installing and making measurements to reference monuments that will facilitate the installation of a replacement monument in the event the construction activity disturbs a monument of the public record as listed in subsection num .
referencing of monuments for possible replacement requires the use of correct replacement methods so the stated precision of the monument in question is not degraded .
when a construction activity is planned which will disturb an existing plss glo b.l.m .
or ms monument the monument shall be referenced and the survey records shall include the information required in subsection num and the monument shall be upgraded by the pls and a new monument record filed with num num the state board in accordance with the survey manual chapter num section num and section num when the following conditions are met num no boundary survey was done for the project .
num a monument record has been filed with the state board and there are no monument records which indicate conflicting locations .
num the existing monument does not meet the physical standards set by the state board .
a new monument record shall be filed with the state board in accordance with title num crs and state board rules and polices a disclaimer should be written on the new monument record stating the new monument was set in the same location as described by the previous monument record .
when conflicting evidence of the location of an existing plss glo blm or ms monument is encountered and construction activity is planned which will alter the evidence the monument shall be referenced and the survey records shall include the information required in subsection num .
a minimum of two cdot permanent reference monuments shall be established in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and section num to reference the location of all existing found monuments .
reference monuments must meet the required physical standards of the actual monument for the type of monument being referenced .
these references shall be set when all of the following conditions are met num no boundary survey was done for the project .
num no monument record or conflicting monument records are filed with the state board .
the reference monuments shall be set and stamped in accordance with title num crs and state board rules and polices a new monument record should be marked other for type of monument and a full explanation given on the monument record as to why the presumed monument was not upgraded the monument record shall be filed with the state board in accordance with title num crs .
copies of all new monument records filed by the pls with the state board shall be submitted to the engineer prior to filing .
the equipment used in referencing or replacing the monument shall be able to produce the stated accuracies as specified by the owner of the monument .
for example the colorado high accuracy reference network harn and cdot harn densification harnd monuments shall be referenced or replaced using dual frequency survey grade gps equipment in accordance with the procedures set forth under the most recent policy of the national ocean service regarding the incorporation of geodetic data of other organizations into the national geodetic survey data base standards of accuracy are given in the standards and specifications for geodetic control networks and geometric geodetic accuracy standards and specifications for using gps relative positioning techniques as amended .
national geodetic survey ngs u.s. coast and geodetic uscg and u.s. geological survey usgs benchmarks shall be referenced by setting a minimum num num of num temporary benchmarks in accordance with the procedures set forth under the most recent edition of the ngs benchmark reset procedures .
the temporary benchmarks shall be set outside the construction area so a permanent monument can be reset upon completion of the construction .
referencing moving or replacing a federal or local government agency monument shall be done in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num .
prior to referencing moving or replacing the monument the ngs state geodetic advisor and the cdot region survey coordinator is to be notified contact information is available in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
survey records for referencing moving or replacing a federal or local government agency monument shall include documentation of the work in accordance with subsection num .
the survey records shall be submitted to the engineer for review by the region survey coordinator before payment is made and shall include the following num description of the original monument and two sets of close up photographs .
num two sets of labeled color photographs showing a close up of the replaced monument and a view of the monument looking toward the horizon in each of the cardinal directions .
num a complete description of the reference monuments and replacement monument with a toreach description .
num a signed and sealed statement by the responsible pls that states the replacement monuments positional tolerance has not been degraded .
the documentation shall conform to the owner of the monuments specifications which control the work .
installing monuments .
this survey work consists of installing primary control monuments benchmarks row monuments property boundary monuments easement monuments plss glo blm or ms monuments and other monuments included on the plans .
the work shall include determining the location of the monuments installing the monuments and verifying the positional accuracy of the monument is correct .
a primary control survey when not furnished by the department shall be performed in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num meeting the horizontal and vertical accuracy tolerances for a cdot class a primary survey .
a project control diagram shall be submitted to the engineer and the region survey coordinator for all new primary control monuments and surveys in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
vertical accuracy tolerances for primary control monuments and surveys shall be as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num .
unless stated otherwise in the contract if construction activity disturbs a primary control monument or benchmark a new primary control monument or num num benchmark shall be installed by the contractor in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
primary control monuments shall be set so they are intervisible from at least two adjacent primary control monuments and shall not exceed num mile between adjacent intervisible primary control monuments .
primary control monuments set by the contractor shall not conflict with construction activities .
the primary control survey shall consist of a closed loop network and have adequate redundancy precision and accuracy to prove that all the monuments included in the network are within the horizontal and vertical accuracy tolerance as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num for a cdot class a primary survey .
survey records shall include documentation of primary control monuments and survey in accordance with subsection num .
a supplemental or amended project control diagram shall be submitted to the engineer and the region survey coordinator for all replaced transferred or reestablished primary control monuments in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num .
row monuments property boundary monuments and easement monuments shall be installed in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num meeting the horizontal accuracy tolerances as specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num for a cdot class b secondary survey using the primary control monuments and the data on the control and monumentation sheet of the row plans .
additional secondary control monuments may be required to be set in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num meeting the horizontal accuracy tolerance specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num for a cdot class b secondary survey before the row monuments are installed .
the procedures used to set row monuments shall include an independent check of the installation in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and section num .
survey records shall include documentation of the survey preformed to establish the monuments in accordance with subsection num .
the independent check shall be documented in the survey records and the field measured differences calculated or reduced to show the work is within the specified horizontal accuracy tolerance .
plss glo blm or ms monuments shall be installed in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and chapter num section num meeting the horizontal accuracy tolerance specified in the cdot survey manual chapter num section num for a cdot class b secondary survey using the primary control monuments and the data on the control and monumentation sheet of the row plans .
the procedures used to set plss glo blm or ms monuments shall include an independent check of the installation in accordance with the cdot survey manual chapter num section num and section num .
survey records shall include documentation of the survey preformed to establish the monuments in accordance with subsection num .
the independent check shall be documented in the survey records and the field measured differences calculated or reduced to show the work is within the specified horizontal accuracy tolerance .
num num the installation of row property boundary easement plss glo blm or ms monuments installed at a different location than the data shown on the monumentation sheet of the row plans shall be submitted to the engineer and the region survey coordinator along with the monuments description and horizontal data in order that the new monument can be revised on the land survey control diagram and row plan sheets .
copies of all new monument records filed by the pls with the state board for the installation of new plss glo blm or ms monuments shall be submitted to the engineer prior to filing .
monument box .
this survey work shall consist of installing or adjusting monument boxes included on the plans .
when it is necessary to set a monument within a monument box in accordance with title num crs and state board rules and policies the work shall be done in accordance with standard plan mnum .
if the monument meets the physical standard as stated by the state board and is situated within the finished roadway a monument box shall be installed as shown on standard plan mnum .
when an existing monument box due to construction will no longer meet the physical standard set by the state board the box shall be replaced or adjusted to meet those standards .
method of measurement survey monuments monument boxes and adjust monument boxes will be measured by the actual number of the various types installed and accepted by the engineer .
measurement for locating survey monuments will be by the hour as approved by the engineer .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
no payments will be made before the proposed work schedule is submitted .
legible signed and sealed copies of survey records in accordance with subsection num shall be submitted on a monthly basis to the engineer for completed work before payment is made for that pay item .
before final payment is made the following three items shall be completed bear the seal and signature of the responsible pls identified in subsection num and have copies submitted to the engineer for review prior to being deposited with the county in accordance with title num crs property real and personal state board rules and policies mou and the cdot survey manual num all survey records .
num the row plans .
num the project control diagram new supplemental or amended .
num num the presurvey conference construction surveys equipment calibrations and survey records will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit locate monuments hour survey monument type each monument box each adjust monument box each traffic control for monumentation and related surveying will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num .
num num section num construction zone traffic control description this work consists of furnishing installing moving maintaining and removing temporary traffic signs advance warning arrow panels flashing beacon portable barricades channelizing devices delineators temporary traffic signals temporary portable rumble strips mobile pavement marking zones temporary emergency pulloff areas masking and unmasking existing signs in construction zones and concrete barriers as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways and the colorado supplement thereto in accordance with the contract .
devices shall comply with the performance criteria contained in nchrp report num only applicable for devices developed prior to num or mash acceptable for all devices .
devices temporarily not in use shall as a minimum be removed from the shoulder area .
moving will include devices removed from the project and later returned to use .
this work also includes traffic control management flagging and pilot car operation .
materials signs and barricades .
construction traffic sign and barricade materials shall conform to the applicable portions of section num with the following exception sign panels may be fabricated from plywood aluminum steel or other suitable materials provided they are stable and durable enough to meet the other requirements of section num .
material that the engineer determines is inadequate to produce the desired results shall not be used .
temporary sign support assembly shall be timber perforated square metal tubing inserted into a larger base post or slip base or perforated metal uchannel with a slip base .
the temporary sign support assembly shall conform to nchrp only applicable for sign support assemblies developed prior to num or mash acceptable for all sign support assemblies and aashto requirements regarding temporary sign supports during construction .
if uchannel posts with a slip base are selected they shall be used only in multi post applications as shown on standard plan snum .
reflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of subsection num .
retroreflective sign sheeting types shall be as defined in the cdot retroreflective sheeting materials guide .
retroreflective sheeting shall be one of the types specified for the particular application in table num .
num num retroreflective sheeting for all signs requiring an orange background shall be fluorescent .
table num retroreflective sheeting types sheeting type iv type vi rollup sign material type fluorescentnum application work zone work zone work zone all orange construction signs x orange construction signs that are used only during daytime hours for short term or mobile operations xnum x barricades temporary x x vertical panels x x flaggers stopslow paddle x x drums and tubular markersnum xnum x nonorange fixed support signs with prefix w x special warning signs x stop sign rnum yield sign rnum wrong way sign rnuma do not enter sign rnum exit sign enuma x detour sign mnum or mnum x all other fixed support signsnum x x all other signs used only during working hours x x all other signs that are used only during daytime hours for short term or mobile operations x xnum x num fluorescent sheeting shall be of a brand that is on the cdot approved products list .
num drum and tubular marker sheeting shall be manufactured for flexible devices and sheeting materials shall conform to section num .
num fixed support signs are defined as all signs that must remain in use outside of working hours .
they shall be mounted in accordance with standard plan snum .
num rs num only .
num white only .
num for projects advertised prior to september num num type iv or fluorescent sheeting will be permitted .
for projects advertised on or after september num num only fluorescent sheeting will be permitted .
num num the contractor shall provide sign panel legend for standard signs in accordance with standard highway signs published by the fhwa and the colorado supplement thereto and sign panel legend for special signs in accordance with the detailed sign layouts provided by the engineer .
electronic advance warning signs .
advance warning flashing or sequencing arrow panels shall be furnished of a size as required by project conditions and shall meet the following requirements type minimum size minimum number of panel lamps minimum legibility distance a numxnum num  mile b numxnum num  mile c numxnum num num mile the panel face shall be rectangular in shape solid construction and shall be finished nonreflective black .
the panels shall be mounted on a vehicle trailer or other suitable support .
vehiclemounted panels shall be provided with remote controls .
arrow panels shall have the capability of the following mode selection left arrow or chevron right arrow or chevron left and right arrow and caution .
the caution mode consists of four or more lamps arranged in a pattern which will not indicate a direction .
arrow panels shall include an automatic photocell sensor type signal lamp dimmer with manual override and shall be capable of minimum num percent dimming from rated lamp voltage .
temporary traffic signals .
temporary traffic signals must meet the physical display and operational requirements of conventional traffic signals .
a minimum of two signal faces shall be provided for each approach and each signal face shall consist of three num inch sections .
at railroad grade crossing locations one signal face with three num inch sections shall be visible from each rail approach .
the traffic signal controllers shall conform to the requirements of subsection numb and shall be capable of twophase operation or more if specified on the plans with allred timing intervals .
the contractor shall submit a list of equipment proposed to be used .
the equipment shall be identified by trade name size and number .
material deemed inadequate by the engineer shall not be used .
traffic cones .
traffic cones shall not be used outside of working hours unattended .
the minimum cone height shall be num inches .
however when they are used on freeways at night time or when specified in the contract the minimum height shall be num inches .
when traffic cones are used during night time they shall be reflectorized .
the num num reflectorized material shall be selected from the colorado approved products list and shall have a smooth sealed outer surface that will display the same approximate color day and night .
reflectorization of cones shall be provided by a white band at least num inches wide placed no more than num to num inches from the top and an additional white band num inches wide placed a minimum of num inches below the num inch band .
tubular markers shall be num to num inches in diameter shall be num inches  inch in height predominantly orange in color and shall be reflectorized .
channelizing device fixed .
channelizing device fixed shall be num inches  inch in height and num to num inches in width for the surface facing traffic .
the shape of the device is immaterial as long as it can accommodate the striping pattern and functions as described below .
reflectorization shall be alternating num to num inches wide orange and white stripes slanting downward at a num degree angle toward the side to which traffic will pass .
the striping shall start at the top and extend downward at least num inches .
reflective sheeting shall be type iv .
these devices shall be manufactured of flexible highimpact resistant material shall be physically attached to the pavement and shall be capable of returning to a vertical position after impact by a vehicle .
the brand name and model of the channelizing device fixed shall be submitted to the engineer for approval before use .
temporary channelizing devices .
a stackable vertical panels .
stackable vertical panels shall comply with the crash test requirements contained in nchrp report num only applicable for vertical panels developed prior to num or mash acceptable for all vertical panels and shall meet mutcd requirements for vertical panels .
vertical panels shall be retroreflectorized with type iv sheeting in accordance with subsection num .
the stackable vertical panels shall have the following properties property specification panel material low density polyethylene color orange and white stripes with orange or white frame and black ballast vertical panel height num num num in .
ballast type rectangular or square ballast weight num num lbs note the ballast type and weight shall be as shown in the contract or as approved by the engineer .
markings for vertical panels shall be alternating orange and white retro reflective stripes sloping downward at an angle of num degrees in the direction of vehicular traffic .
the width of the stripes shall conform to the requirements of the mutcd .
num num vertical panels shall be retroreflectorized with type iv sheeting .
the stackable vertical panels shall be selected from the departments approved products list and shall have a smooth sealed outer surface that will display the same approximate color day and night .
b stackable tubular markers .
stackable tubular markers shall comply with the crash test requirements contained in nchrp report num only applicable for stackable tubular markers developed prior to num or mash acceptable for all stackable tubular markers and shall conform to mutcd requirements for tubular markers .
the stackable tubular markers shall have the following properties property specification tubular section low density polyethylene color orange tubular marker with black base height min .
num in ballast type rectangular octagonal or square ballast weight num num lbs .
note the ballast type and weight shall be as shown in the contract or as approved by the engineer .
tubular markers shall be retroreflectorized as shown in table num .
the stackable tubular markers shall be selected from the departments approved products list and shall have a smooth sealed outer surface that will display the same approximate color day and night .
c temporary portable rumble strips .
temporary portable rumble strips shall be made of thermoset cast urethane and shall operate in temperatures ranging from num to num f. the contractor shall submit documentation from the manufacturer showing that the product meets all atssa and fhwa criteria for temporary portable rumble strips .
the rumble strip shall be capable of being installed without adhesives or bolts and shall have a minimum weight of num pounds .
the face of the rumble strip shall be a nonslip textured surface .
concrete barrier temporary .
concrete barrier temporary shall conform to precast type num concrete barrier as detailed in standard plan mnum num .
undamaged and unpainted sections of concrete barrier temporary with stabilization pins as shown on the plans may be used as guard rail type num precastportable when approved .
general .
all traffic control devices shall be provided with all components necessary to comprise a complete installation .
work zone devices designated by fhwa as category i ii or iii shall comply with the performance criteria contained in nchrp report num only applicable for devices developed prior to num or mash acceptable for all devices .
devices num num designated as category iv including but not limited to portable or trailermounted devices such as flashing arrow panels temporary traffic signals area lighting supports and changeable message signs are not required to meet nchrp num or mash requirements .
except for category iv devices the contractor shall obtain and present to the engineer the manufacturers written nchrp num only applicable for devices developed prior to num or mash acceptable for all devices certification for each work zone device before it is first used on the project .
the flashing beacon portable shall include all work and material necessary to complete the item .
the beacon head lens signal lamp flasher and electrical boxes and fittings shall conform to permanent flashing beacon requirements .
the post or mounting method shall conform to construction traffic control materials .
the flashing beacon shall be in accordance with subsection num .
portable devices that requires weight to prevent overturning shall be weighted with appropriate sized sand bags .
traffic control devices that are damaged weathered worn or otherwise determined to be unacceptable shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
delineator type temporary shall conform to delineator type described in section num .
undamaged delineator type temporary when approved may be used as delineator type .
construction requirements transportation management plan .
the contractor shall prepare a transportation management plan for each phase of the project .
the contractor shall manage the work zone impacts of the project in accordance with the transportation management plan tmp .
for significant projects the tmp shall consist of the traffic control plan tcp included in the contract a transportation operations to component and public information pi requirements .
the tcp addresses traffic safety and control through the work zone the to component shall address sustained operations and management of the work zone impact area and the pi component requirements shall address communication with the public and concerned stakeholders .
for nonsignificant projects tmp shall consist of the tcp and other components as specified in the contract .
the proposed tmp shall be approved in writing by the engineer before the contractor begins the corresponding phase of construction .
the initial tmp shall be submitted at the preconstruction conference .
the project will be considered a significant project unless otherwise specified in the contract .
the contractors superintendent shall implement the tmp .
a traffic control plan .
the contractor shall control traffic in accordance with the traffic control plan tcp as shown in the contract .
to implement the num num tcp the contractor shall develop and submit a method for handling traffic mht for each different phase of construction which shows the contractors proposed construction phasing and proposed traffic control devices consistent with the tcp .
if at any time the contractor desires to change the mht it shall be considered a different phase requiring a new mht .
any major revisions to the tcp as determined by the engineer must be authorized by a contract modification order .
each proposed mht shall be approved in writing by the engineer before the corresponding phase of construction will be allowed to begin .
the initial mht shall be submitted at the preconstruction conference .
the proposed mht shall include as a minimum the following num a detailed diagram which shows the location of all traffic control devices including advance construction signs and speed limit signs method length and time duration for lane closures and location of flaggers and time duration of the flagging operation .
lane closures shall be kept to a minimum in both length and duration and cause a minimum of interference to the traveling public consistent with the work being performed .
num a tabulation of all traffic control devices shown in the detailed diagram including but not limited to construction signs vertical panels vertical panels with light type num and type num barricades type num barricades cones drum channelizing devices concrete barrier temporary advance warning flashing or sequencing arrow panels .
traffic control devices may be used for more than one operation or phase .
however all devices required for any particular phase must be detailed and tabulated for each phase .
num when required by the contract the contractors method of handling traffic mht shall include details of a mobile pavement marking zone .
the mobile pavement marking zone shall include as a minimum three operations groups as follows i the application group composed of the pavement marking application truck and at least one cone installation truck .
ii the pickup group composed of at least one truck for warning and one truck for cone pickup .
iii the signing group composed of one or more trucks installing signs .
at a minimum the following signs shall be used highwaypaintingnext miles num inch by num inch highwaypaintingahead num inch diamond speedlimit num inch by num inch truck mounted message boards may be used in lieu of temporary signs .
num num groups num and num shall each be equipped with a truck mounted advance warning flashing or sequencing arrow panel c type and a truck mounted impact attenuator .
the impact attenuator shall be located on the rearmost vehicle of each group .
a separate vehicle for this attenuator may be used .
each truckmounted impact attenuator shall be certified by the manufacturer to be able to withstand a num mph impact in accordance with nchrp num test level num only applicable for truckmounted impact attenuators developed prior to num or mash test level num acceptable for all truckmounted impact attenuators .
the cone setting truck and the cone pickup truck shall not be the same vehicle .
group num shall also be equipped with a truck mounted nopassingthrupaintingzone num inch by num inch sign .
group num shall place highwaypaintingahead signs on intersecting crossroads and interchange entrance ramps as the pavement marking operation approaches .
if required for spot locations this group shall also provide flagging .
all groups shall maintain radio communications to ensure appropriate advance warning and buffer distances are maintained for traffic .
all groups shall clear the roadway every num minutes or as deemed necessary by the engineer to allow traffic queues to pass .
traffic cone spacing shall be determined as required by the standard plans calculations based on current speed limits .
cone spacing shall not exceed num feet .
cones shall be placed a distance of num miles on the centerline .
the distance and spacing may be adjusted depending on traffic conditions and terrain as determined by the engineer .
num the contractor shall furnish supporting references from documents such as the mutcd standard plans etc .
for any devices incorporated into the mht which are not included in the tcp provided by the contract .
num an access maintenance plan for all properties requiring access during construction .
this plan shall also indicate the areas where equipment will be stored vehicles parked and construction signs and materials stored if within the project limits .
the contractor shall ingress and egress the project at existing access points including median crossings shown on the plans unless otherwise approved .
num a plan for maintaining and controlling pedestrian bicycle and other nonvehicular traffic .
num a plan for emergency vehicle access .
num the contractor shall provide verification by field survey that the vertical clearances for structures in all areas covered by a proposed mht meet or exceed the minimum clearances shown in table num .
if the vertical num num clearance is less than what is shown for the particular condition in table num num the contractor shall identify the location where this clearance can not be met and provide an appropriate signing plan .
if the existing vertical clearance is already less than what is shown in table num the contractor shall identify the location but a signing plan will be required only if the clearance is to be reduced further .
this information shall be included in the mht and shall be submitted to the engineer for approval a minimum of five days before the mht is implemented .
num the contractor shall provide verification by field survey that the total driving lane plus shoulder in all areas covered by a proposed mht is at least num feet .
if this width can not be maintained the contractor shall identify the location where this clearance can not be met and provide an appropriate signing plan .
if the existing width is already less than num feet the contractor shall identify the location but a signing plan will be required only if the width is to be reduced further .
this information shall be included in the mht and shall be submitted to the engineer for approval a minimum of five days before the mht is implemented .
table num vertical clearances to structures highway underpasses railway underpasses overhead wires local rural roads num feet num feetnum num local urban streets urban and rural collectors freeways num feetnum num feetnum num rural arterial urban arterial num vertical clearance to sign trusses and pedestrian overpasses shall be num feet num measured from top of rail to bottom of highway structure .
all railway clearances are subject to the individual railroads approval .
num communication and power lines of num to num volts num feet num to num volts num feet num to num volts num feet for voltages over num volts increase clearance  inch for each num volts over num. b transportation operations plan .
the contractor shall provide weekly written verification that the to requirements are enforced throughout the work .
the to shall provide the following num .
procedures to respond to traffic incidents that may occur in the work zone num num and restore normal project operations num .
details of the process to review incidents for the purpose of modifying the tcp to reduce the frequency and severity of such incidents .
num .
other procedures the contractor deems necessary to maintain traffic operations .
num .
a postclosure evaluation report shall be completed by the contractor and submitted at project acceptance .
the report shall include cause and impact of delays actions taken to mitigate incidents why expected delays were exceeded and how the situation can be avoided in the future .
c public information .
public information requirements will be specified in a project special provision titled revision of section num public information services .
traffic control management .
the contractor shall designate an individual other than the superintendent to be the traffic control supervisor .
the traffic control supervisor shall be certified as a worksite traffic supervisor by either the american traffic safety services association atssa or the colorado contractors association cca and shall have a current department flaggers certificate .
a copy of the traffic control supervisors certifications shall be provided to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
the contractors superintendent and all others serving in a similar supervisory capacity shall have completed a cdotapproved twoday traffic control supervisor training as offered by the cca .
the oneday atssa traffic control technician tct training along with the twoday atssa traffic control supervisor training will serve as an alternate .
if the alternate is chosen the contractor shall provide written evidence that at least an num percent score was achieved in both of the two training classes .
the certifications of completion or certifications of achievement for all appropriate staff shall be submitted to the engineer at the preconstruction conference .
the traffic control supervisors duties shall include num preparing revising and implementing each required method of handling traffic in accordance with the traffic control plan .
num directly supervising project flaggers .
num coordinating all traffic control operations including those of subcontractors and suppliers .
num coordinating project activities with appropriate police and fire control agencies .
num preparing a traffic control diary on every calendar day traffic control devices are in use .
this diary shall be submitted to the engineer daily and become a part of the departments project records .
the diary shall include the following information as a minimum num num iv date v for traffic control inspection the time of the inspection vi project number vii traffic control supervisors name viii description of traffic control operations lane closures shoulder closures pilot car operations detours etc .
including location setup and takedown time and approved method of handling traffic mht number ix types and quantities of traffic control devices used in accordance with the approved mht x list of flaggers and uniformed traffic control utc used including start time stop time and number of flagging hours and utc hours used xi traffic control problems traffic accidents damaged missing or dirty devices etc .
and corrective action taken num inspecting traffic control devices on every calendar day that traffic control devices are in use masked or turned away from traffic .
these inspections shall include at least one night inspection per week .
the tcs or another representative who is certified as a work site traffic supervisor shall perform these inspections .
num insuring that traffic control devices are functioning as required .
num overseeing all requirements covered by the contract which contribute to the convenience safety and orderly movement of traffic .
have an uptodate copy of the mutcd and applicable standards and specifications available at all times on the project .
num attending all project scheduling meetings .
num supervising the cleaning and maintenance of all traffic control devices .
a certified worksite traffic supervisor shall be responsible for traffic control management tcm on a numhourperday basis .
the tcs shall be on the work site at all times when traffic control management tcm is performed and shall be on call at all times .
upon request of the engineer the tcs may be required to be on the project site at times other than normal working hours .
during nonwork periods the tcs shall respond to the job site within num minutes .
the tcs may appoint a qualified representative to serve as the tcs for periods of time as approved by the engineer .
the qualified representative shall be certified as a tcs and shall assume all duties and responsibilities of the tcs .
the contractor shall maintain a numhour telephone number at which the tcs can be contacted .
the tcs shall not act as a flagger except in an emergency or in relief for short periods of no more than num minutes over a num minute period .
temporary masking signs .
sign legend or portions thereof that conflict with the construction signing or traffic control plan shall be completely covered by the contractor so that none of the covered sign or legend is visible to traffic .
num num if the whole sign is to be covered it shall be covered with a nontransparent material that covers the entire face of the sign .
if partial legend is to be covered it shall be with a material furnished with reflective sheeting conforming to section num and shall be the same color as the masked panel .
all covering materials shall be plywood hardboard sheet metal aluminum corrugated polypropylene or rigid plastic and shall be durable enough to resist deterioration due to weathering and atmospheric conditions for the duration of the project .
examples are aluminum at least num inch thick corrugated polypropylene board and plywood at least num inch thick .
adhesives glues tapes or mechanical fasteners that mar the face of the panel to be masked shall not be used .
general .
portable construction traffic signs shall be removed when not required .
permanently mounted construction traffic signs shall be masked or turned away from traffic when not required .
when work is suspended or the project is in free time and there is no condition requiring traffic control devices or construction traffic signs all of the construction traffic signs shall be masked or turned away from traffic .
if this condition is to exist for more than num days all construction traffic signs shall be removed .
when storing portable signs or supports within the project they shall be removed beyond the clear zone and shall not be visible to traffic .
the minimum clear zone distance shall be num feet measured from the edge of traveled way .
if the signs can not be stored at least num feet from the traveled way they shall be removed .
signs shall not be stored on the paved surface .
all storage areas shall be approved .
when masking is used it shall be done in accordance with subsection num .
perforated square metal tubing or uchannel shall be installed for temporary sign supports according to the manufacturers recommendations and as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall be responsible for all maintenance of the signs and posts .
if a sign or post is damaged during construction the contractor shall be responsible for replacing and maintaining the sign and posts at no additional cost to the project .
the construction traffic signs for reduced speed limit signs and double fines signs shall be placed or unmasked no sooner than four hours prior to the start of work activities .
the time when the double fine signing is to be placed or unmasked and location of the reduced speed limit signs and double fine signs shall be as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
double fine signing shall be removed or masked as soon as work activities are completed .
work activities are defined as all construction and maintenance activities where workers are present in the clear zone or there are existing hazards in the travel way shoulders or clear zones .
hazards include but are not limited to workers equipment drop offs lane closures temporary guardrail and other objects both in the roadway and the adjacent roadside that may affect the traveling public .
the retroreflective surfaces of all signs and other traffic control devices shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to preserve their legibility and retroreflectivity .
however all devices shall be cleaned a minimum of once every two weeks .
num num vertical panels fabricated with vehicle wheel rims and steel drum channelizing devices shall not be used .
channelizing device fixed shall be attached to the pavement in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
anchoring methods or devices which penetrate the surface of the permanent pavement will not be permitted .
upon removal of the device the roadway surface shall be cleaned patched or both as approved by the engineer .
the flashing beacon shall be installed in accordance with subsection num .
for solar powered flashing beacons batteries may be placed in a lockable container attached to a supplemental pole supporting the solar panels that is installed outside the clear zone or behind guardrail .
if it is not possible to place this assembly outside the clear zone or behind guardrail the batteries shall be placed in a lockable pull box and buried at the base of the pole .
other installations shall be as approved .
the contractor shall ensure the proper operation of the flashing beacon throughout the duration of the project .
if the beacon fails to operate properly it shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
the contractor may propose an alternate method by submitting a revised mht in accordance with subsection num for approval by the engineer .
all additional traffic control devices required during the time that the beacon is being repaired or the mht is being prepared and reviewed shall be at the contractors expense .
flagging and pilot car operation .
flagging and pilot car operation shall be performed as described in the latest edition of part vi of the mutcd as adopted by cdot .
all traffic control personnel shall wear safety apparel and hardhats meeting the requirements of the latest version of the isea american national standard for highvisibility safety apparel and headwear .
safety apparel shall be labeled as meeting the standard performance for class num or class num risk exposure .
the apparel and hardhat background material color shall be either fluorescent orange red or fluorescent yellowgreen as defined in the standard .
the retroreflective material shall be either orange yellow white silver yellowgreen or a fluorescent version of these colors and shall be visible at a minimum distance of num feet .
night time flagging stations shall be illuminated with flood lights unless otherwise approved and shall not be paid for separately .
a the contractor shall provide all flagging through the project necessary to assure proper safety to traffic .
all flagging personnel shall have completed the departments minimum training requirements for flaggers within two years prior to starting work on the project .
b reimbursement for flagging shall be limited to the following areas num the entire construction area under contract and for a distance of num feet outside the project limits or approach to project except that if the project num num consists of two or more sections the limits will apply to each section individually .
num those areas beyond the abovedescribed limits where the engineer determines the use of flaggers are necessary to provide adequate warning to traffic .
num a detour provided on the plans or approved by the engineer for by passing all or any portion of the construction irrespective of whether the detour termini are within the project limits .
c the cost of all flagging for haul routes from the contractors materials sources to the limits of the project shall be at the contractors expense .
d the authorized duties of flaggers consist of directing the traveling public and the construction traffic that affects the traveling public within the project limits .
emergency pulloff area temporary .
the specific locations where emergency pulloff areas will be allowed shall be clearly detailed in the traffic control plans tcp .
the emergency pulloff areas shall be spaced onehalf to one mile apart unless otherwise shown on the tcp .
if the engineer determines that law enforcement is required the pull off area shall be extended as shown on the plans .
temporary pavement material for the pulloff area shall be a minimum of num inches thick unless otherwise shown on the plans and may be either pccp or hma .
if the materials used require that the contractor provide thickness greater than the minimum to serve the life of the pulloff area these shall be provided at no additional cost to the project .
upon completion of the project the contractor shall remove the pulloff area and return the shoulder signing and earthwork to its original condition unless otherwise shown on the plans .
materials removed and not designated in the contract to be salvaged or incorporated into the work shall become property of the contractor .
all damaged portions of the shoulder earthwork landscaping signing culverts and end sections shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
temporary portable rumble strip .
temporary portable rumble strips shall be placed in locations shown on the traffic control plans and shall be removed at the end of each work day or as approved by the engineer .
prior to placement of the rumble strip the roadway shall be cleaned to be free of dust sand and other materials that may cause slippage .
the minimum roadway temperature at the time of installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if the strip slides it shall be thoroughly cleaned on both sides and reset onto a clean roadway surface .
num num a minimum of two temporary portable rumble strips shall be arranged in an array as shown on the plans .
an additional temporary portable rumble strip may be added as approved by the engineer .
damaged or missing rumble strips shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
temporary portable rumble strips shall be used only on roadways with posted speed limits of num mph or less .
method of measurement quantities to be measured for construction traffic control devices shall be the number of units of the various sizes and descriptions listed below .
construction traffic signs panel size a up to num square feet including type num and type num barricades panel size b over num to num square feet panel size c over num square feet special as shown on the plans the total number of traffic control devices of each type on the schedule and approved subsequent modified schedules shall be the maximum number approved for payment .
traffic channelizing devices consisting of vertical panels traffic cones or drum channelizing devices will be measured by the unit .
concrete barriers will be measured by the linear foot .
barricades will be measured by the number used .
barricade warning lights shall be furnished as a part of this item when required by the traffic control plan tcp .
advance warning flashing or sequencing arrow panels will be measured by the unit according to size .
temporary portable rumble strips will be measured by the actual number of strips that are used on the project .
the flashing beacon portable will be measured as a unit complete in place .
sign panel will be paid for under the appropriate item .
solar power system for flashing beacon portable poles and lockable container will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the quantity to be measured for traffic control management will be the number of authorized numhour days of active tcm performed by the tcs or another representative certified as a work site traffic supervisor .
payment will be made for one day of traffic control management regardless of the number of tcss required to adequately control the work .
an authorized numhour day of active tcm will be every calendar day on which active traffic control occurs in accordance with an approved mht .
this includes activities such as flagging operations pilot car operations and setting up or removal of construction zones shoulder closures lane closures or detours .
traffic control devices that are left in place during non working hours including configurations such as lane closures temporary num num channelization or detours are not considered active traffic control .
the quantity to be measured for traffic control inspection will be the number of authorized numhour days of traffic control inspection tci performed by the tcs or another representative certified as a work site traffic supervisor .
an authorized numhour day of tci shall be every calendar day that traffic control devices as shown in the mht are in use masked or turned away from traffic on the project and the only traffic control activity is the inspection of traffic control devices .
resetting repairing or replacing traffic control devices is considered maintenance of the devices .
cleaning and maintaining of traffic control devices are not considered traffic control activities subsidiary to the traffic control management traffic control inspection or flagging pay items .
payment will be made for either traffic control management or traffic control inspection for every calendar day that traffic control devices as shown in the mht are in use masked or turned away from traffic on the project .
payment will not be made for both items for the same calendar day .
work on a night shift that begins before midnight and ends after midnight will be considered as occurring on the calendar day on which the shift ends .
the quantity to be measured for flagging will be the total number of actual flagging hours that are used as authorized in accordance with an approved mht .
payment will not be made for time spent by flaggers to set up and take down construction traffic control devices .
the quantity to be measured for pilot car operation will be the total number of hours that pilot car operation is used as authorized .
hours of flagging and hours of pilot car operation in excess of those authorized shall be at the contractors expense .
emergency pulloff area temporary will be measured by the actual number of pulloff areas that are constructed maintained and removed .
when the contract provides payment for mobile pavement marking zone on a lump sum basis it will not be measured but will be paid for as a single lump sum upon satisfactory completion of the work associated with this item .
when the contract provides payment for mobile pavement marking zone by the day it will be measured as the actual number of days that mobile pavement marking zone is utilized in this project .
basis of payment payment for the individual traffic control devices necessary to complete the work shall be full compensation for furnishing erecting cleaning maintaining resetting repairing replacing moving removing and disposing of the construction traffic control devices .
all construction traffic control devices that are not permanently incorporated into the project will remain the property of the contractor .
construction traffic control devices as determined by the project traffic control plan tcp will be paid for as follows num percent of the accepted amount upon num num first utilization an additional num percent of the accepted amount when num percent of the original contract amount has been earned and the final num percent when the project has been completed in accordance with subsection num exclusive of any maintenance periods .
the percent of original contract amount earned will be determined by comparing the amount earned for bid items other than traffic control devices and mobilization with the original contract amount minus the amounts bid for traffic control devices and mobilization .
the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price for each of the pay items listed below that appear in the bid schedule .
payment will be made under pay item pay unit construction traffic sign panel size each construction traffic sign special square foot vertical panel each vertical panel with light flashing each vertical panel with light steady burn each advance warning flashing or sequencing arrow panel ____type each drum channelizing device each traffic cone each tubular marker each channelizing device fixed each concrete barrier temporary linear foot delineator type temporary each barricade type temporary each traffic control management day traffic control inspection day flagging hour pilot car operation hour flashing beacon portable each traffic signal temporary lump sum mobile pavement marking zone lump sum emergency pull off area temporary each mobile pavement marking zone day stackable vertical panel each stackable tubular marker each temporary portable rumble strips each construction traffic sign special is a project specific sign indicated on the schedule of construction traffic control devices .
when traffic control management and traffic control inspection are not pay num num items traffic control management will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
flagger hand devices will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
cost of electrical power including batteries for all temporary lighting or warning devices shown on the tcp will not be paid for separately but will be considered subsidiary to the item .
temporary masking signs including the covering materials and fastening devices will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
the contractor may provide larger construction traffic signs than those shown on the plans if approved however payment will be made for the panel size designated .
if the contractor fails to complete construction within the approved contract time payment will not be made for the use of section num pay items for the period of time after expiration of the approved contract time .
these items shall be provided at the contractors expense .
cleaning and patching of the roadway after removal of the channelizing device fixed will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
placement unmasking removal and masking of reduced speed limit signs and double fines signs will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
preparation and implementation of the traffic management plan will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work except for public information services which will be measured and paid for in accordance with section num as revised for this project .
traffic control management vehicles traffic control devices and all other work materials and equipment necessary for the mobile pavement marking zone will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
flagging required for the mobile pavement marking zone will be measured and paid for separately .
payment for emergency pulloff area temporary will be full compensation for all work materials and equipment necessary to construct maintain and remove the emergency pulloff area including hma or pccp required for constructing the temporary pulloff area temporary concrete barriers impact attenuators and other traffic control devices construction signing and maintaining the temporary pavement .
payment for temporary portable rumble strips will be full compensation for all work and material required to complete the item including cleaning the roadway surface installing the rumble strip maintaining the strip through the duration of each days use including cleaning and resetting of the strip if it slides removal at num num the end of each work day and final removal .
signing required for the rumble strip will be measured and paid for under the construction signing items .
num num section num shotcrete description this work consists of constructing pneumatically applied concrete onto designated surfaces at locations and thicknesses with the lines and dimensions shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
materials shotcrete proportioning and placement shall comply with the requirements of aci num specifications for materials proportioning and application of shotcrete and the requirements of section num class shotcrete prepackaged material shall meet the requirements of astm cnum and meet the sulfate resistance requirements listed in the general notes .
the maximum aggregate size in shotcrete shall be  inch .
when specified steel fibers shall be incorporated into the mixture .
steel fibers shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum type i section num .
when specified polypropylene fibers shall be incorporated into the mixture .
polypropylene fibers shall have a nominal length of  inch and shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum type iii section num .
submittals .
the following documents and shop drawings shall be submitted in accordance with subsection num .
shotcrete shall not be placed on the project before the submittals have been reviewed and approved by the engineer .
a mix design .
a shotcrete mix design meeting the requirements of subsection num. b shotcrete application method statement .
the shotcrete application method statement shall indicate drymix process or wetmix process and shall include drawings and notes describing equipment procedures and sequences for shotcrete production application curing plan and applicable manufacturers literature and recommendations .
the shotcrete application method statement shall also include written documentation that verifies the qualifications of the nozzlemen that will be performing the work .
all nozzlemen shall have had at least one year of experience in the application of shotcrete and hold a current certification for aci shotcrete nozzleman for the methods and orientations to be used .
c process control pc plan .
the pc plan shall address the following num procedures for identifying the strength of the placed shotcrete .
num procedures for determining the thickness of the placed shotcrete .
num num num plan for preconstruction testing as described in the plans .
num surface preparation .
num curing method .
num cold andor hot weather placement procedures .
num pc testing and inspection personnel .
num pc testing frequency .
num pc testing criteria .
num excavation plan addressing minimum compressive strength required before continuing with excavation .
num procedures to control excavation and a plan for filling voids in over excavated areas .
num plan for multiple shotcrete layers and applications where applicable .
d architectural application .
when an architectural application is specified the contractor shall submit the following for approval by the engineer prior to full production num a test panel of the shotcrete application with the date of application .
num where a coloring process is required a sample color concrete chip and appropriate technical information on the proposed pigment colorants or photoreactive stains .
construction requirements general .
shotcrete shall be applied at the locations and to the thicknesses shown on the plans .
the thickness of shotcrete shall not be less than the dimensions shown on the plans .
acceptable shotcrete shall consist of a dense and uniform mixture without rebound inclusions segregation or discernible weakness of bond between the rock or structure and the shotcrete .
acceptance will be based on the requirements of subsection num and the visual inspection and sounding of the shotcrete .
shotcrete that exhibits movement or settlement after placement while still in the plastic state shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
applications that are deemed by the engineer to be unacceptable shall also be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
for rock and soil cuts surfaces shall be prepared to the line and grade shown on the plans .
the contractor shall provide documentation including survey data to show that the excavated face conforms to the plans so that the minimum thickness is achieved .
if the engineer determines that irregularities are excessive additional reinforcing may be required .
all costs associated with additional shotcrete required to bring an over excavated cut to the proper line and grade shall be borne by the contractor .
the contractor shall fill all voids holes or pits created during num num the excavation process .
where additional shotcrete in excess of the plan thickness is required to make the final shotcrete face conform to the plans the contractor shall provide a plan and method statement for applying the additional shotcrete .
the work shall not proceed until the proposed plan and methods have been reviewed and approved by the engineer .
a light application of water may be used to clean the surface of all dry soil or rock surfaces prior to application of the shotcrete .
shotcrete shall not be applied to frozen surfaces .
deicing compounds shall not be used to thaw ice snow or frost .
before patching concrete structures loose material shall be removed and surfaces shall be dampened to a saturated surface dry condition .
prior to the placement of new shotcrete the contractor shall sandblast exposed reinforcing steel clean .
rebound shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
rebound shall not be worked back into the surface and shall not be salvaged and included in later batches .
weep holes and the drainage system shall be installed as shown on the plans .
where reinforcement fibers are required the fibers shall be uniformly dispersed in the shotcrete .
production shall be suspended when visible fiber clumps are observed .
when multiple layers of shotcrete are to be applied each layer of shotcrete shall be cleaned .
if curing compound is used the curing compound shall be removed by sandblasting or a method approved by the engineer .
curing shotcrete .
curing shall be in accordance with subsection num and shall include the following film curing with polyethylene sheeting may be used to supplement water curing .
the contractor shall spray the shotcrete surface with water immediately prior to installation of the polyethylene sheeting .
polyethylene sheeting shall completely cover the surfaces and the contractor shall overlap the sheeting edges .
joints between sheets shall be sealed .
the contractor shall promptly repair any tears holes and other damage .
anchor sheeting shall be installed as necessary to prevent billowing .
the minimum curing period shall be determined by one of the following methods num the minimum curing period shall be seven days .
num the minimum curing period shall be from the time the shotcrete has been placed until the shotcrete has met a compressive strength of num percent of the required field compressive strength .
compressive strength shall be determined by coring information panels .
information panels shall be constructed by the contractor on the final portion of a placement and stored as close to the structure as possible .
if the information panels are lost mislabeled damaged or destroyed in the field the minimum curing period shall be seven days .
num num num the minimum curing period shall be from the time the shotcrete has been placed until the shotcrete has met a compressive strength of num percent of the required field compressive strength .
the contractor shall develop a maturity relationship for the shotcrete mix design in accordance with cp num .
the contractor shall provide the maturity meter and all necessary thermocouples thermometers wires and connectors .
the contractor shall be responsible for the placement protection and maintenance of the maturity meters and associated equipment .
locations where the maturity meters are placed shall be protected in the same manner as the rest of the shotcrete .
the contractor shall install the thermocouples at locations designated by the engineer .
the contractor shall monitor the temperature at intervals acceptable to the engineer .
if the maturity meter malfunctions the minimum curing period shall be seven days .
all costs associated with curing shall be at the contractors expense .
the curing period may be stopped when succeeding layers of shotcrete are to be placed .
when the ambient temperature is expected to fall below num f during the curing period the contractor shall maintain the shotcrete internal temperature above num f during the curing period .
the contractor shall monitor the internal shotcrete temperature by the use of maturity meters or highlow thermocouples .
maturity meter probes or thermocouples shall be located num feet from the edge of the final portion of shotcrete placed for the day and be located at middepth of the layer .
the contractor shall determine the necessity for undertaking protective measures .
maturity meters thermocouples and information panels will not be measured or paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
enclosures with artificial heat sources will be permitted .
if enclosures are used the contractor shall monitor the structural integrity of the enclosure .
artificial heat sources shall not be placed in such a manner as to expose any area of shotcrete to drying due to excessive temperatures .
at the end of the curing period the protection shall remain in place until it can be removed without allowing the shotcrete temperature to fall more than num f in a numhour period .
sudden changes of shotcrete temperature shall be prevented .
the following procedures shall be followed if the temperature of the shotcrete structure falls below num f before the minimum curing period is complete num the contractor shall take cores following the procedures of astm cnum at locations designated by the engineer .
num the engineer will take immediate possession of the cores and submit the cores for a petrographic examination in accordance with astm c num .
num all costs associated with coring transmittal of cores and petrographic examination shall be borne by the contractor regardless of the outcome of the petrographic examination .
num shotcrete damaged by frost as determined by the petrographic examination num num shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num the contractor shall patch areas used for sampling and testing immediately after samples have been removed .
acceptance .
a test panels .
a test panel shall be produced for each mix and each workday .
when more than num cubic yards of a shotcrete mixture has been placed in a day a test panel shall be produced for every num cubic yards or fraction thereof .
test panels shall be produced in accordance with astm c num standard practice for preparing and testing specimens from shotcrete test panels .
test panels shall be constructed in the same manner as that being used on the project including distance from nozzle angle and orientation .
test panels shall be cured in similar conditions to what is anticipated in the field and shall be field cured until test specimens are taken .
b field compressive strength .
the field compressive strength shall be determined from at least three test specimens from each test panel in accordance with astm c num and tested at num days .
the contractor shall remove test specimens and immediately give them to the engineer .
the contractor shall remove the test specimens between num and num days of age .
the test specimens shall be stored in watertight plastic bags and labeled with the project number test panel number and date of placement .
if the num day compressive strength does not meet the required strength the contractor may take additional cores from the test panel to be tested at num days .
the contractor shall remove the num day test specimens between num and num days of age .
shotcrete will be evaluated for acceptance and price reduction in accordance with subsection num c noted deficiencies .
when shotcrete exhibits segregation honeycombing delamination or excessive cracking the following procedures shall be applied num the contractor shall take cores following the procedures of astm cnum at locations designated by the engineer .
the shotcrete shall be at least num days old .
a set of three cores will be taken for each num square feet of shotcrete .
cores containing reinforcing steel shall not be tested .
num the engineer will take immediate possession of the cores and test the cores for compressive strength .
a core that breaks during coring operations such that it can not be tested in accordance with astm c num will be assigned a compressive strength of num psi .
num if a set of cores does not produce an average strength of num psi the shotcrete represented by the cores shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num all costs associated with coring shall be at the contractors expense regardless of the outcome .
num the contractor shall patch areas used for sampling and testing immediately after samples have been removed .
num num method of measurement shotcrete will be measured by the actual number of square yards applied and accepted .
the quantity will be determined by the engineer .
there will be no increase of pay if the thickness exceeds the required minimums shown on the plans .
basis of payment the accepted quantities will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for each of the items listed below that appear in the bid schedule pay item pay unit shotcrete square yard shotcrete sculpting square yard payment will be full compensation for all work materials and equipment required to complete the item including submittals test panels test specimens samples pigment fiber drainage system and maturity meters .
shotcrete that is sculpted will be measured and paid for as shotcrete sculpting .
the architectural surface treatment shall include full compensation for furnishing all labor materials tools equipment and incidentals and for doing all work involved in providing architectural surface treatment complete in place including the test panels line layout and all supporting metal bracing and support as specified in the contract .
test panels for shotcrete sculpting will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
line layout and metal bracing for shotcrete sculpting will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the work .
num num division num materials details section num hydraulic cement hydraulic cement .
hydraulic cement shall conform to the requirements of the following specifications for the type specified or permitted portland cement astm cnum blended hydraulic cement astm cnum hydraulic cement astm cnum all concrete including precast prestressed and pipe shall be constructed with one of the following hydraulic cements unless permitted otherwise .
astm cnum type i astm cnum type ii astm cnum type v astm cnum type ip astm cnum type ipms astm cnum type iphs astm cnum type gu consisting of no more than num percent limestone astm cnum type ms consisting of no more than num percent limestone astm cnum type hs consisting of no more than num percent limestone cement shall be from a preapproved source listed on the departments approved products list .
the cement shall be subject to sampling and testing by the department .
test results that do not meet the physical and chemical requirements may result in the suspension of the use of the cement until the corrections necessary have been taken to insure that the material meets the specifications .
the contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against dampness .
cement which for an reason has become partially set or which contains lumps of caked cement shall not be used .
cement salvaged from discarded or used bags shall not be used .
fly ash .
fly ash for concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum class c or class f with the following exceptions num the loss on ignition shall not exceed num percent .
num the cao in class f fly ash shall not exceed num percent .
num num blending of pozzolans according to astm dnum is permitted to meet the requirements of astm cnum .
fly ash shall be from a preapproved source listed on the departments approved products list .
preapproval shall include submission of a report from the supplier documenting the results of testing the fly ash from that source in accordance with the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp described in num cfr num appendix ii .
the report shall include the results of tclp testing for heavy metals and other contaminants found in the fly ash .
the report shall list the contaminants tested and the allowable levels for each contaminant tested .
a new report shall be submitted for each preapproved source annually .
additional tclp testing may be required when the department suspects that the fly ash source may have been contaminated .
the fly ash shall be subject to sampling and testing by the department .
test results that do not meet the physical and chemical requirements may result in the suspension of the use of fly ash until the corrections necessary have been taken to insure that the material meets the specifications .
silica fume .
silica fume for concrete shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum .
silica fume shall be from a preapproved source listed on the departments approved products list .
the silica fume shall be subject to sampling and testing by the department .
test results that do not meet the physical and chemical requirements may result in the suspension of the use of the silica fume until the corrections necessary have been taken to insure that the material meets the specifications .
highreactivity pozzolans .
highreactivity pozzolans hrp shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
hrps include but are not limited to metakaolin rice hull ash zirconium fume ultrafine fly ash and fume from the production of num percent ferrosilicon with sionum less than num percent .
hrps shall meet the following optional requirement of aashto m num the sulfate expansion at num days shall not exceed num percent hrp shall be from a preapproved source listed on the departments approved products list .
the hrp shall be subject to sampling and testing by the department .
test results that do not meet the physical and chemical requirements may result in the suspension of the use of hrp until the necessary corrections have been taken to ensure that the material conforms to the specifications .
num num section num bituminous materials asphalt cements .
a superpave performance graded binders .
superpave performance graded binders shall conform to the requirements listed in table num .
taken from aashto m num asphalt cement shall not be acid modified or alkaline modified .
asphalt cement shall not contain any used oils that have not been rerefined .
modifiers that do not comply with environmental rules and regulations including num cfr part numa num iv and part numsubpart c shall not be added .
modifiers shall not be carcinogenic .
the supplier of the pg binder shall be certified in accordance with cp num .
table num superpave performance graded binders property requirement for pg binder aashto test no .
num num num num num num original binder properties flash point temp .
c minimum num num num num num num t num viscosity at num c pas maximum num num num num num num t num dynamic shear temp .
c where gsin  num rads num kpa num num num num num num t num ductility num c num cmmin .
cm minimum num t num toughness joules inch lbs num num cpl num tenacity joules inchlbs num num cpl num acid or alkali modification passfail pass pass pass pass pass pass cpl num table num continues on following page .
num num table num continued property requirement for pg binder aashto test no .
num num num num num num rtfo residue properties cpl num mass loss percent maximum num num num num num num cpl num dynamic shear temp .
c where gsin  num rads num kpa num num num num num num t num elastic recovery num c percent min .
num num t num ductility num c num cmmin .
cm minimum num t num pav residue properties aging temperature num c r num dynamic shear temp .
c where gsin  num rads num kpa num num num num num num t num creep stiffness num s test temperature in c num num num num num num t num s maximum mpa num num num num num num t num mvalue minimum num num num num num num t num acceptance samples of the pg binder will be taken on the project in accordance with the schedule in the field materials manual .
the department will test for acid modification and alkaline modification during the binder certification process .
thereafter the department will randomly test for acid modification and alkaline modification .
b damp proofing .
asphalt for damp proofing shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum and the asphaltic primer shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
emulsified asphalts .
emulsified asphalts shall conform to aashto m num or m num for the designated types and grades .
emulsified asphalt and aggregate used for surface seals shall be sampled and will be tested for information only in accordance with cpl num .
emulsified asphalt hfmsnums with a residual penetration greater than num dmm shall conform to all properties listed in aashto m num table num except that ductility shall be reported for information only .
num num a emulsion for tack and fog coats .
emulsions for tack and fog coats shall conform to the requirements listed in table num or num prior to dilution .
table num tack and fog coat emulsions property cssnumh ssnumh aashto test no .
tests on emulsion viscosity at num c saybolt furol s min num num t num max num num storage stability num hr maxnum num num t num particle charge test positive t num sieve test max num num t num oil distillate by volume max num num tnum residue by distillation evaporation minnum num num t num cpl num tests on residue penetration num c numg nums min dmm num num t num penetration num c numg nums max dmm num num t num ductility num c num cmmin cm min num num t num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num t num numif successful application is achieved in the field the engineer may wave this requirement .
num cpl num is a rapid evaporation test for determining percent residue of an emulsion and providing material for tests on residue .
cpl num is for acceptance only .
if the percent residue or any test on the residue fails to meet specifications the tests will be repeated using the distillation test in accordance with aashto tnum to determine acceptability .
num for polymerized emulsions the distillation and evaporation tests will be performed in accordance with aashto tnum or cpl num respectively with modifications to include num num c num num f maximum temperature to be held for num minutes .
b emulsion for chip seals polymerized emulsions for chip seals shall conform to the requirements listed in table num .
emulsion for chip seals shall be an emulsified blend of polymerized asphalt water and emulsifiers .
the asphalt cement shall be polymerized prior to emulsification and shall contain at least num percent polymer by weight of asphalt cement .
the emulsion standing undisturbed for a minimum of num hours shall show no white milky separation but shall be smooth and homogeneous throughout .
the emulsion shall be pumpable and suitable for application through a distributor .
num num table num polymerized emulsions for chip seals property crsnum crs nump crs numr hfms nump aashto test no .
tests on emulsion viscosity at num c saybolt furol s min num num num num t num max num num num num storage stability num hr max num num num num t num particle charge test positive positive positive t num sieve test max num num num num t num demulsibilitynum min num num num t num oil distillate by volume max or range num num num num tnum residue by distillation evaporation minnum num num num num t num cpl num tests on residue penetration num c numg nums min dmm num num num num t num penetration num c numg nums max dmm num num num num t num ductility num c num cmmin cm min num num t num ductility num c num cmmin cm min num solubility in trichloroethylene minnum num num num num t num elastic recovery num c min num t num float test num c s min num t num toughness inlbs min num num cpl num tenacity inlbs min num num cpl num numif successful application is achieved in the field the engineer may waive this requirement .
num cpl num is a rapid evaporation test for determining percent residue of an emulsion and providing material for tests on residue .
cpl num is for acceptance only .
if the percent residue or any test on the residue fails to meet specifications the tests will be repeated using the distillation test in acccordance with aashto tnum to determine acceptability .
num for polymerized emulsions the distillation and evaporation tests will be performed in accordance with aashto tnum or cpl num respectively with modifications to include num num c num num f maximum temperature to be held for num minutes .
num solubility may be determined on the base asphalt cement prior to polymer modification .
num num c emulsion for slurry seals and microsurfacing .
emulsions for slurry seals and microsurfacing shall conform to the requirements listed in table num .
the modified emulsion shall contain a minimum of num percent polymer sbr latex or natural latex by weight .
table num slurry seal and microsurfacing emulsions property cqs numhl cqs numhp aashto test no .
tests on emulsion viscosity at num c saybolt furol s min num num t num max num num storage stability num hr maxnum num num t num particle charge test positive positive t num sieve test max num num t num oil distillate by volume max num num tnum residue by distillation evaporation minnum num num t num cpl num tests on residue penetration num c numg nums min dmm num num t num penetration num c numg nums max dmm num num t num ductility num c num cmmin cm min num num t num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num t num numif successful application is achieved in the field the engineer may wave this requirement .
num cpl num is a rapid evaporation test for determining percent residue of an emulsion and providing material for tests on residue .
cpl num is for acceptance only .
if the percent residue or any test on the residue fails to meet specifications the tests will be repeated using the distillation test in accordance with aashto tnum to determine acceptability .
num for polymerized emulsions the distillation and evaporation tests will be performed in accordance with aashto tnum or cpl num respectively with modifications to include num num c num num f maximum temperature to be held for num minutes .
num num d emulsion for prime coat .
emulsion for prime coat shall conform to the requirements of table num .
circulate before use if not used within num hours .
table num asphalt emulsion for prime coat aep property requirement aashto test no .
viscosity saybolt furol at num c num f s num t num residue num min .
t num to num c num f oil distillate by volume num max .
tnum tests on residue from distillation solubility in trichloroethylene num min .
t num e recycling agent .
recycling agent for item num cold bituminous pavement recycle shall be either a high float emulsified asphalt polymerized or an emulsified recycling agent as follows num .
high float emulsified asphalt polymerized .
high float emulsified asphalt polymerized for cold bituminous pavement recycle shall be an emulsified blend of polymer modified asphalt water and emulsifiers conforming to table num for hfmsnumsp .
the asphalt cement shall be polymerized prior to emulsification and shall contain at least num percent polymer .
the emulsion standing undisturbed for a minimum of num hours shall show no white milky separation and shall be smooth and homogeneous throughout .
the emulsion shall be pumpable and suitable for application through a pressure distributor .
num num table num high float emulsified asphalt polymerized hfmsnumsp property requirement aashto test minimum maximum tests on emulsion viscosity saybolt furol at num c num f sec num num t num storage stability test num hours num t num sieve test num t num residue num num t num oil distillate by volume num num t num tests on residue penetration num c num f numg num sec num num t num float test num c num f sec num t num solubility in tce num t num elastic recovery num c num f num t num num num num f maximum temperature to be held for num minutes .
num when approved by the engineer emulsified asphalt hfmsnumsp with a residual penetration greater than num dmm may be used with cold bituminous pavement recycle to address problems with cool weather or extremely aged existing pavement .
emulsified asphalt hfmsnumsp with a residual penetration greater than num dmm shall meet all properties listed in table num except that elastic recovery shall be reported for information only .
num num num .
emulsified recycling agent .
emulsified recycling agent for use in cold bituminous pavement recycle shall conform to the requirements in table num .
table num emulsified recycling agent property requirement test minimum maximum tests on emulsion viscosity num c sfs num num astm dnum pumping stability pass gb methodnum sieve test w num astm dnum cement mixing w num astm dnum particle charge positive astm dnum conc .
of oil phase num astm dnum tests on residue viscosity num c cst num num astm dnum flash point coc c f num astm dnum maltenes dist .
pcanum rationum sanum num num astm dnum pcs ratio num astm dnum asphaltenes max .
num astm dnum num pumping stability is determined by charging num ml of emulsion into a one liter beaker and circulating the emulsion through a gear pump roper num.bnum having a num mm num inch inlet and outlet .
the emulsion passes if there is no significant separation after circulating ten minutes .
num test procedure identical with astm dnum except that distilled water shall be used in place of num percent sodium oleate solution .
num astm dnum evaporation test for percent of residue is modified by heating num gram sample to numc num f until foaming ceases then cooling immediately and calculating results .
num in the maltenes distribution ratio test by astm method dnum .
pc polar compounds s saturates anum first acidaffin anum second acidaffins num num f asphalt rejuvenating agents .
asphalt rejuvenating agents ara shall be composed of a petroleum resinoil base uniformly emulsified with water and shall conform to the physical and chemical requirements of table num or astm dnum .
table num asphalt rejuvenating agent property test method requirement viscosity s.f .
num c num f s astm dnum num numresidue min .
astm dnum num nummiscibility test astm dnum no coagulation numsieve test max .
astm dnum num particle charge test astm dnum positive astm dnum mod viscosity num c num f mmnums astm dnum num num flash point coc c min .
astm dnum num asphaltenes max .
astm dnum num nummaltenes dist .
pcanum ratio sanum astm dnum num saturated hydrocarbons astm dnum num num astm dnum modified evaporation test for percent of residue is made by heating num gram sample to num c num f until foaming ceases then cooling immediately and calculating results .
num test procedure identical with astm dnum except that num normal calcium chloride solution shall be used in place of distilled water .
num test procedure identical with astm dnum except that distilled water shall be used in place of num sodium oleate solution .
num in the maltenes distribution ratio test by astm method dnum pc polar compounds s saturates anum first acidaffin anum second acidaffins for hotinplace recycling aranump is an acceptable alternative to ara .
aranump shall meet the requirements below emulsified polymer modified asphalt rejuvenating agent aranump for use in hotinplace recycling of bituminous pavements shall be modified with a minimum of num percent styrenebutadiene solution polymer .
the finished product shall conform to the physical requirements listed in table num below .
num num table num ara nump property test method min max test on emulsion viscosity sayboltfurol num f s astm dnum num residue num f astm dnum mod num sieve test astm dnum num oil distillate astm dnum num test on residue penetration num f numg nums dmm astm dnum modified num num asphaltenes astm dnum num unused hot poured joint and crack sealant .
hot poured material for filling joints and cracks shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum type ii or type iv .
the concrete blocks used in the bond test shall be prepared in accordance with cpl num .
sealant material shall be supplied preblended prereacted and prepackaged .
if supplied in solid form the sealant material shall be cast in a plastic or other dissolvable liner having the capability of becoming part of the crack sealing liquid .
the sealant shall be delivered in the manufacturers original sealed container .
each container shall be legibly marked with the manufacturers name the trade name of the sealer the manufacturers batch or lot number the application temperature range the recommended application temperature and the safe heating temperature .
the sealant shall be listed in cdots approved products list prior to use .
num num section num aggregates unused all sieve sizes and designations described in this section refer to laboratory sieves having square openings and conforming to astm enum .
the grading and composition requirements for coarse and fine aggregates for concrete are set forth in table num .
num num table num concrete aggregate gradation table percentage passing designated sieves and nominal size designation sieve size coarse aggregates from aashto m num fine aggregate no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num mm to num mm num to num num mm to num mm num to no .
num num mm to num mm num to  num mm to num mm num to num num mm to num mm num to num num mm to num mm  to num num mm to num mm  to num num mm to num mm  to num num mm to num mm num to num num mm to num m num to num num mm num num num num mm num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num mm  num num num num num num num num num num mm  num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num num num m num num num num m num num num num m num num num num num fine aggregate for concrete .
fine aggregate for concrete shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num class a .
the minimum sand equivalent as tested in accordance with colorado procedure num shall be num unless otherwise specified .
the fineness modulus as determined by aashto t num shall not be less than num or greater than num unless otherwise approved .
coarse aggregate for concrete .
coarse aggregate for concrete shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num class a except that the percentage of wear shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
aggregate for bases .
aggregates for bases except aggregate base course rap shall be crushed stone crushed slag crushed gravel natural gravel or crushed reclaimed concrete .
aggregate base course rap shall be num percent crushed recycled asphalt pavement material .
all materials except aggregate base course rap shall conform to the quality requirements of aashto m num except that the requirements for the ratio of minus num m no .
num sieve fraction to the minus num m no .
num sieve fraction stated in num of aashto m num shall not apply the requirements for the los angeles wear test aashto t num astm cnum shall not apply to class num num and num .
aggregates for bases shall meet the grading requirements of table num for the class specified for the project unless otherwise specified .
the liquid limit shall be as shown in table num and the plasticity index shall not exceed six when the aggregate is tested in accordance with aashto t num and t num respectively .
table num classification for aggregate base course sieve size mass percent passing square mesh sieves ll not greater than num ll not greater than num class num class num class num class num class num class num class num nummm num num nummm num num nummm num num nummm num  num nummm num num num nummm num num num nummm num num num num nummm num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num m num num num num max num num num num note class num material shall consist of bank or pit run material .
num num aggregate base coarse rap shall be num percent reclaimed asphalt pavement material conforming to the requirements of table num .
table num classification for reclaimed asphalt pavement aggregate base course sieve size mass percent passing square mesh sieves abc rap num mm num num num mm num num num mm  num num mm  num num mm  num num mm num num num mm num num num m num num aggregates for hot mix asphalt .
aggregates for hot mix asphalt hma shall be of uniform quality composed of clean hard durable particles of crushed stone crushed gravel natural gravel or crushed slag .
excess of fine material shall be wasted before crushing .
a percentage of the aggregate retained on the num mm no .
num sieve for gradings s sx and sg and on the num mm no .
num sieve for gradings sf and stshall have at least two mechanically induced fractured faces when tested in accordance with colorado procedure num .
this percentage will be specified in table num as revised for the project in section num .
the angularity of the fine aggregate shall be a minimum of num percent when determined according to aashto t num .
grading sf mixes when determined by the region materials engineer may not require fine aggregate angularity of num percent .
aggregate samples representing each aggregate stockpile shall be nonplastic if the percent of aggregate passing the num mm no .
num sieve is greater than or equal to num percent by weight of the individual aggregate sample .
plasticity will be determined in accordance with aashto t num .
the material shall not contain clay balls vegetable matter or other deleterious substances .
the aggregate for gradings st s sx and sg shall have a percentage of wear of num or less when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
num num table num master range table for hot mix asphalt sieve size percent by weight passing square mesh sieves grading sf grading st grading sx grading s grading sg num mm num num num mm num num num num num mm  num num num num mm  num num num num mm  num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num num num num num num num mm num num num num m num num m num num m num num m num num num num num num num num num num num these additional form num specification screens will initially be established using values from the as used gradation shown on the design mix .
num num aggregates for stone matrix asphalt sma shall be of uniform quality composed of clean hard durable particles of crushed stone crushed gravel or crushed slag .
a minimum of num percent of the particles retained on the num mm no .
num sieve shall have at least two mechanically induced fractured faces when tested in accordance with colorado procedure num .
the particles passing the num mm no .
num sieve shall be the product of crushing rock larger than num mm  inch and shall be nonplastic when tested in accordance with aashto t num .
additionally each source of aggregate for sma shall meet the following requirements num no more than num percent when tested in accordance with aashto t num resistance to degradation of smallsize coarse aggregate by abrasion and impact in the los angeles machine .
num no more than num percent when tested in accordance with aashto t num soundness of aggregate by use of sodium sulfate .
table num master range table for stone matrix asphalt sieve size percent by weight passing square mesh sieves num mm num nominal num mm num nominal num mm num nominal num mm num nominal num mm num num num mm  num num num mm  num num num num num mm num num num num num num mm num num num num num num mm num num num num num nummm num num num m num num num num num num m num num num num m num num m num num num num num num num the aggregates for hot mix asphalt hma and stone matrix asphalt sma shall meet the requirements of table num when tested in accordance with cpl num resistance of coarse aggregate to degradation by abrasion in the microdeval apparatus .
the contractor shall be assessed a price reduction of num for each production sample of the combined aggregate with a value greater than num according to cpl num .
table num aggregate degradation by abrasion in the microdeval cpl num not to exceed combined aggregate mix design num combined aggregate num tons or fraction thereof during production num aggregate for cover coat material .
aggregates for cover coat material shall be crushed stone crushed slag crushed gravel or natural gravel .
aggregates shall be composed of clean tough durable fragments free from an excess of flat elongated soft or disintegrated pieces and free from fragments coated with dirt or other objectionable matter .
slag shall be aircooled blastfurnace slag reasonably uniform in density .
the aggregate shall conform to the following requirements num the percentage of wear los angeles abrasion test aashto t num shall not be more than num .
num the maximum amount of flat and elongated aggregate with a ratio of num shall not exceed num percent as determined by astm dnum .
num when blastfurnace slag is used the weight per cubic foot shall be at least num pounds .
num for type i ii or iv cover coat material num percent by weight of the particles retained on the num mm no .
num sieve shall have at least two fractured faces when tested in accordance with colorado procedure num .
num lightweight aggregate used for cover coat material shall be an aggregate prepared by expanding shale clay or slate in a rotary fired kiln .
lightweight aggregate shall have a dry loose unit weight of num to num pounds per cubic foot determined in accordance with aashto t num shoveling procedure .
the total mass of the test sample of lightweight aggregate used in aashto t num los angles abrasion shall be num g. num num table num gradation specifications for cover coat aggregate sieve size percent by weight passing square mesh sieve num mm num type num num mm  type ii num mm  type iv num mm  num num mm  num num num mm num num num num num mm num num num num num m num num num num type iv shall be used only with lightweight aggregates .
mineral filler .
mineral filler shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num and shall consist of rock dust slag dust hydrated lime hydraulic cement fly ash or other suitable mineral matter .
it shall be free of organic impurities and agglomerations .
when used it shall be dry enough to flow freely .
mineral filler shall be graded within the following limits sieve size mass percent passing num m no .
num num num m no .
num num num m no .
num num mineral filler shall have a plasticity index not greater than four excluding hydrated lime and hydraulic cement .
if mineral filler other than limestone dust is used in stone matrix asphalt sma it shall consist of mineral matter that meets the requirements of tables num num and the following alternative mineral filler shall consist of finely divided mineral matter such as rock dust slag dust fly ash loess or other suitable mineral matter .
calcium oxide content of any mineral filler shall not exceed num percent .
alternative mineral filler test data shall be provided as part of the sma mix design submittal and as required in table num during production .
the contractor shall sample and test alternative mineral filler at the frequencies listed in table num .
production will be suspended if alternative mineral filler test results fail to meet requirements .
the contractor shall submit written plans to correct the mineral filler operation to the engineer for approval prior to commencing paving .
num num table num required testing for alternative sma mineral fillers type of test contractor testing frequency specification limit remarks plasticity index aashto tnum one per num tons of sma placed num maximum hydrometer analysis aashto tnum one at mix design submittal report gradation aashto tnum one per num tons of sma placed table num calcium oxide content astm c num one at mix design submittal num maximum modified rigden voids napa publication isnum one per num tons of sma placed shall not exceed num the minimum frequency shall be twice per project sampling of alternative mineral fillers shall be at the point of introduction to the sma and a split sample shall be submitted to the engineer table num alternative sma mineral gradation aashto mnumastm d num sieve percent passing num m num num num m num num num num m num num num bed course material .
a bed course material for sidewalks curbing and bikeways shall consist of cinders sand slag gravel crushed stone or other approved material of such gradation that all particles shall pass through a sieve having num mm  inch square openings .
num num b bed course material for slope protection or riprap filter blanket shall be a porous free draining material consisting of sand gravel cinders slag crushed stone or other approved free draining material .
this material shall meet the following gradation requirements mass percent passing sieve size square mesh sieves num mm num inch num num mm no .
num num num m no .
num num structure backfill material .
a class i structure backfill shall meet the following gradation requirements mass percent passing sieve size square mesh sieves num mm num inch num num mm no .
num num num m no .
num num num m no .
num num in addition this material shall have a liquid limit not exceeding num and a plasticity index of not over six when determined in conformity with aashto t num and t num respectively .
b class num structure backfill shall be composed of suitable materials developed on the project .
to be suitable for use under this classification backfill shall be free of frozen lumps wood or other organic material .
if the material contains rock fragments that in the opinion of the engineer will be injurious to the structure the native material shall not be used for backfilling and the contractor shall furnish class num structure backfill material at the contract unit price .
if contract unit price does not exist for class i structure backfill it will be paid for in accordance with subsection num .
filter material .
filter material shall consist of free draining sand gravel slag or crushed stone .
the grading requirements are set forth in table num .
num num table num gradation specifications for filter material sieve size mass percent passing square mesh sieves class a class b class c num mm num num num mm num num num mm  num num num mm no .
num num num num num m no .
num num num m no .
num num num num m no .
num num num m no .
num num num num aggregate for median cover .
aggregate for median cover shall consist of clean crushed stone crushed gravel or natural gravel .
the percentage of wear when tested in accordance with aashto t num shall not be more than num .
the grading requirements shall be as follows mass percent passing sieve size square mesh sieves num mm num inch num num mm num inch num num mm  inch num num num section num masonry units clay or shale brick .
brick shall conform to the requirements of one of the following specifications sewer and manhole brickaashto m num .
building brickaashto m num .
concrete brick .
concrete brick shall conform to the requirements of astm c num .
concrete masonry blocks .
concrete masonry blocks may be rectangular or segmented and when specified shall have ends shaped to provide interlock at vertical joints .
the blocks shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum or for hollow blocks to astm c num .
dimensions and tolerances shall conform to the above applicable requirements or those specified on the plans .
masonry mortar .
masonry mortar shall be type s conforming to astm cnum .
num num section num joint waterproofing and bearing material joint fillers .
a joint sealant with backer rod .
the joint sealant material shall be a silicone that is on the departments approved products list .
the silicone materials shall be stored and applied in accordance with manufacturers recommendations but they shall not be exposed to ambient temperatures in excess of num f or stored in direct sunlight .
the backer rod placed prior to joint sealant shall be constructed of closed cell polyethylene strand as approved .
b preformed joint fillers .
preformed fillers for joints shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num and shall be punched to admit the dowels where called for on the plans .
the filler for each joint shall be furnished in a single piece for the full depth and thickness required for the joint unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
when the use of more than one piece is authorized for a joint the abutting ends shall be fastened securely and held accurately to shape by stapling or other positive fastening satisfactory to the engineer .
watertight joint systems .
watertight joint systems for plastic pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm d num .
gaskets .
rubber gasketed joints shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum and shall be flexible and able to withstand expansion contraction and settlement .
all rubber gaskets shall be stored in as cool a place as practicable preferably at num f or less .
rubber gaskets shall not be exposed to the direct rays of the sun for more than num hours .
rubber gaskets of the type requiring lubrication shall be lubricated with the lubricant recommended and supplied by the manufacturer of the pipe .
pipe joint sealing compounds .
joint sealing compounds for concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
joint sealants for metal pipe shall conform to the pipe manufacturers recommendations .
compression ring .
compression ring jointing connections for clay pipe made of resilient material shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum .
bearing materials num num table num polyisoprene natural rubber elastomer specimen properties astm test procedure requirements num duro num duro num duro physical properties hardness dnum num num num num num num tensile strength mpa minimum psi .
dnum num num num num num num ultimate elongation minimum dnum num num num heat resistance num hr.num c num f change in durometer hardness maximum points num num num change in tensile strength maximum dnum num num num change in ultimate elongation maximum dnum num num num compression set dnum maximum num hr.num c num f method b num num num ozone resistance num strain num ppm ozone in air by volume num num c num num fnum hr .
mounting procedure astm dnum procedure a dnum no cracks no cracks no cracks adhesion bond made during vulcanization n per mm lb .
per inch dnum b num num num num num num low temperature brittleness grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f dnum procedure b no failure no failure no failure instantaneous thermal stiffening grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f dnum num num num num num num low temperature crystallization dnum grade num num days at num c num f grade num num days at num c num f grade num num days at num c num f quad shear test as described in annex a num num num num num num num stiffness at test temperature shall not exceed num times the stiffness measured at num c num f. num stiffness at test time and temperature shall not exceed num times the stiffness measured at num c num f with no time delay .
the stiffness shall be measured with a quad shear test rig in an enclosed freezer unit .
the test specimens shall be taken from a randomly selected bearing .
a num strain cycle shall be used and a complete cycle of strain shall be applied with a period of num seconds .
the first  cycle of strain shall be discarded and the stiffness shall be determined by the slope of the force deflection curve for the next  cycle of loading .
num astm dnum refers to the modulus of rigidity while astm dnum refers to the shear modulus stiffness .
the word stiffness is used to describe both terms .
num num table num chloroprene neoprene elastomer specimen properties astm test procedure requirements num duro num duro num duro physical properties hardness d num num num num num num num tensile strength mpa minimum psi .
dnum num num num num num num ultimate elongation minimum dnum num num num heat resistance num hr .
num c num f change in durometer hardness maximum points num num num change in tensile strength maximum dnum num num num change in ultimate elongation maximum dnum num num num compression set dnum maximum num hr.num c num f method b num num num ozone resistance num strain num ppm ozone in air by volume num num c num num f num hr .
mounting procedure astm dnum procedure a dnum no cracks no cracks no cracks adhesion bond made during vulcanization n per mm lb .
per inch dnum b num num num num num num low temperature brittleness grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f dnum procedure b no failure no failure no failure instantaneous thermal stiffening grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f grade num at num c num f dnum num num num num num num low temperature crystallization dnum grade num num days at num c num f grade num num days at num c num f grade num num days at num c num f quad shear test as described in annex a num num num num num num num stiffness at test temperature shall not exceed num times the stiffness measured at num c num f. num stiffness at test time and temperature shall not exceed num times the stiffness measured at num c num f with no time delay .
the stiffness shall be measured with a quad shear test rig in an enclosed freezer unit .
the test specimens shall be taken from a randomly selected bearing .
a num strain cycle shall be used and a complete cycle of strain shall be applied with a period of num seconds .
the first  cycle of strain shall be discarded and the stiffness shall be determined by the slope of the force deflection curve for the next  cycle of loading .
num astm d num refers to the modulus of rigidity while astm d num refers to the shear modulus stiffness .
the word stiffness is used to describe both terms .
num num a elastomeric bearing pads .
laminates shall be rolled mild steel sheets conforming to aashto m num grade num unless otherwise specified .
a durometer hardness of num shall be used unless otherwise shown on the plans .
the elastomer portion of the elastomeric compound shall be num percent virgin natural polyisoprene natural rubber or num percent virgin chloroprene neoprene and shall be at least num percent by volume of the total compound .
b sheet lead .
sheet lead shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum for common desilverized lead .
c polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe sheets .
ptfe resin shall be virgin material conforming to the requirements of astm d num or dnum .
the specific gravity shall be num to num and the melting point shall be num f numf .
filler material shall be milled glass fibers carbon or other approved inert filler materials .
finished unfilled ptfe sheet shall be made from ptfe resin and shall conform to the following requirements tensile strength min .
astm dnum or dnum num psi elongation min .
astm dnum or dnum num percent filled ptfe sheet shall be made from ptfe resin uniformly blended with inert filler material .
finished filled ptfe sheet containing glass fiber or carbon shall conform to the following requirements mechanical astm method num glass fiber num carbon tensile strength min .
dnum or dnum num psi num psi elongation min .
dnum or dnum num num physical astm method num glass fiber num carbon specific gravity min .
dnum or dnum num num melting point dnum or dnum num f num f num f num f the maximum coefficient of friction for the ptfe shall be as follows bearing pressure num psi num psi num psi unfilled ptfe num num num filled ptfe num num num num num the average bearing pressure on the ptfe sliding surface due to all loads shall not exceed type ii bearing device unfilled and filled ptfe num psi type iii bearing device filled ptfe num psi unfilled ptfe recessed num psi unfilled ptfe not recessed num psi the edge load pressure due to all loads and rotations shall not exceed unfilled and filled ptfe type ii and iii bearing device num psi d stainless steel sheets .
the stainless steel sheet shall be num gage minimum thickness and shall conform to astm anum type num. e adhesive material .
adhesive material shall be an epoxy resin meeting the requirements of federal specification mmmanum fep film or approved equal .
f certification and testing .
the contractor shall furnish a manufacturers certification that the material proposed for use on the project meets the requirements set forth in the tables above .
the department also reserves the right to test random samples of full size bearings proposed for use on the project .
the following values shall be met under laboratory testing of full size bearings .
num compressive strain of any layer of an elastomeric bearing shall not exceed num percent at num psi average unit pressure or at the design dead load plus live load pressure when so shown on the plans .
num the shear resistance of the bearing shall not exceed num psi for num durometer num psi for num durometer or num psi for num durometer polyisoprene compounds nor num psi for num durometer num psi for num durometer or num psi for num durometer chloroprene compounds .
shear resistance shall be measured at num percent strain of the total effective rubber thickness after an extended fourday ambient temperature of num f. components of nominal hardness between values shown may be used and test requirements interpolated .
when test specimens are cut from the finished product a num percent variation in physical properties will be permitted .
g tolerances .
flash tolerance finish and appearance shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the rubber handbook as published by the rubber manufacturers association inc. rma fnum and t.num for molded bearings and rma fnum for extruded bearings .
for both plain and laminated bearings the permissible variation from the dimensions and configuration required by the plans and these specifications shall be as follows num num num overall vertical dimensions average total thickness num inches or less num  inch average total thickness over num inches num  inch num overall horizontal dimension num inches and less num  inch over num inches num  inch num thickness of individual layers of elastomer laminated bearings only  inch num variation from a plane parallel to the theoretical surface as determined by measurements at the edges of the bearings top  inch sides  inch individual nonelastic laminates  inch num position of exposed connection members  inch num edge cover of embedded laminates or connection members num  inch num size of holes slots or inserts  inch num position of holes slots or inserts  inch protective covering for bridge deck waterproofing membrane .
the protective covering shall be composed of one or more layers of felt thoroughly bonded together and saturated with asphalt .
both exposed sides shall be asphalt coated .
the density shall be num pounds per num square feet .
the surfaces shall be coated with suitable mineral matter to prevent the material from sticking to itself .
the covering may be furnished either in rolls or sheets .
the covering shall be free of visible external defects such as holes ragged or untrue edges breaks cracks tears protuberances and indentations .
the covering furnished in rolls shall not crack nor be so sticky as to cause material damage upon being unrolled at atmospheric temperatures as low as num f. the covering shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with colorado procedure lnum property determined specification width min .
num  max .
num  pliability at num c num f at least num of num strips shall not crack when bent num over a rounded corner of num mm  radius .
behavior on heating to num c num f max .
num percent volatile loss .
no flowing sagging or blistering .
weight per square foot num lbs num num protective covering may be conditionally accepted in the field based on visual inspection for appearance workmanship and weight per square foot of a representative specimen .
prefabricated reinforced membrane and primer .
the membrane shall be a factory laminated sheet composed of either rubberized asphalt bituminous mastic or similar compounds reinforced with synthetic or fiberglass fabric .
it shall be uniformly manufactured free from blemishes discontinuities and other defects .
the membrane shall be supplied in rolls having a minimum width of num inches and shall conform to the following requirements property determined test procedure specification thickness num mils minimum pliability cp lnum no cracks the primer used to bond membrane to the deck and to seal seams and patches shall be a water resistant adhesive compatible with the membrane .
the primer shall be of suitable consistency for application by brush roller or spray without further dilution .
single component hot applied elastomeric membrane .
the membrane shall be capable of being sprayed or spread to a uniform thickness at the application temperature recommended by the manufacturer .
after cooling it shall form a tough resilient membrane well bonded to the concrete surface and shall conform to the requirement of astm d num type num except that blocks for the bond test shall be prepared in accordance with cpl num .
the sealant shall be listed in cdots approved products list prior to use .
waterstop .
neoprene waterstop shall be made of suitable synthetic rubber .
neoprene waterstop shall conform to the applicable requirements designated in the latest edition of the corp of engineers specifications for rubber waterstops crdcnum .
plastic waterstop shall be made of polyvinyl chloride pvc plastic .
plastic waterstop shall conform to the requirements designated in the latest edition of the corp of engineers specifications for polyvinyl chloride waterstops crdcnum .
num num section num concrete and clay pipe nonreinforced concrete pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameters and strength classes .
pipe shall be obtained from a manufacturer that is a current plant quality certified member of the american concrete pipe association acpa meeting all current acpa requirements for this certification .
a copy of the acpa certification shall be submitted to the engineer prior to delivery of the pipe .
reinforced concrete pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameters and strength classes .
unless otherwise specified pipe wall design and use of elliptical reinforcement in circular pipe are optional .
reinforced concrete pipe being jacked shall be class v and shall be furnished with grouting nipples spaced not more than num feet apart .
joints for this pipe shall come equipped with steel rings and rubber gaskets conforming to astm cnum .
elliptical pipe conforming to aashto m num shall be furnished when required on the plans .
arch pipe conforming to aashto m num shall be furnished when required on the plans .
precast reinforced concrete end sections shall have at least one line of reinforcement conforming to the requirements of aashto m num equivalent to the square inches per linear foot for elliptical reinforcement in circular pipe class ii wall b .
pipe shall be obtained from a manufacturer that is a current plant quality certified member of the american concrete pipe association acpa meeting all current acpa requirements for this certification .
a copy of the acpa certification shall be submitted to the engineer prior to delivery of the pipe .
perforated concrete pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameters and strength classes .
unless otherwise specified perforations shall be type num .
pipe shall be obtained from a manufacturer that is a current plant quality certified member of the american concrete pipe association acpa meeting all current acpa requirements for this certification .
a copy of the acpa certification shall be submitted to the engineer prior to delivery of the pipe .
drain tile .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num or m num for the specified material diameters and quality classes .
num num porous concrete pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameters .
pipe shall be obtained from a manufacturer that is a current plant quality certified member of the american concrete pipe association acpa meeting all current acpa requirements for this certification .
a copy of the acpa certification shall be submitted to the engineer prior to delivery of the pipe .
vitrified clay pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameter and strength class .
coated concrete pipe .
this pipe may be reinforced or nonreinforced in accordance with the requirements shown on the plans for the designated diameters and strength classes and in addition shall be coated with asphalt mastic conforming to the requirements of aashto m num .
asphalt mastic shall be uniformly applied in two coats by spray or brush to the entire designated surface to be coated to a total thickness of num mils .
asphalt mastic may also be applied by trowel in one coat provided the required thickness is obtained .
the first coat shall be dry to touch before the second coat is applied .
the second coat shall be dry to touch before any handling or backfilling operations .
the finished coat shall cover the surface to be protected evenly without running and without any visible holidays bubbles or bare spots .
num num section num metal pipe ductile iron pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm anum for the specified diameters and strength classes .
unless otherwise specified either smooth corrugated or ribbed pipe may be furnished .
corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches .
these conduits and coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num except for the following sawed ends and butt welded joints will be permitted for pipe with helical corrugations formed with continuous lock or welded seams provided all burrs are removed from sawed ends and provided the welds are acceptable .
pipe fabricated with resistance spot welds shall also conform to the following additional requirement where double welding is necessary adjacent welds shall not be closer than two spot weld nugget diameters from center to center .
shop formed elliptical pipe shall be furnished where specified .
field elongation will be accepted as an alternate to shop elongation when done in a neat workmanlike manner .
special fittings and elbows for these conduits shall be the same metal thickness as the conduit to which they are joined and shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto m num .
semicircular corrugated steel pipe for encasement along with required fastening devices shall conform to the requirements of this subsection and the requirements of military specification milpnum type i or ii class num .
coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num with the following exceptions num the use of channel bands as described in num of aashto m num will not be allowed .
num connecting bands shall be at least num  inches wide .
bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches .
conduit fittings elbows end sections and coupling bands shall be fully coated with bituminous material conforming to the requirements of aashto m num type a coating or materials conforming to the requirements of aashto m num except that the use of tar base material will not be permitted .
coatings shall be shop applied .
the finished coat shall uniformly cover the surface to be protected .
the coating shall not contain any visible holidays bubbles or bare spots .
minimum thickness shall be num mm num mils measured on the crest of the corrugations .
in complying with aashto m num each section shall be given a double dip application .
in the first immersion the section shall remain submerged until the metal has reached a temperature that will allow the hot bituminous material to penetrate and seal each joint .
num num other coatings meeting the requirements of aashto m num or m num will be acceptable upon written approval by the engineer .
materials meeting the requirements of aashto m num shall be uniformly applied by spray trowel or brush to the entire designated surface to be coated to a minimum thickness of num mm num mils .
the coating shall be dry to the touch prior to any handling or backfilling operations .
special fittings and elbows for conduits shall be of the same gage as the conduit to which they are joined .
when aramid fiber bonded corrugated steel pipe is specified the pipe shall conform to astm anum and the bituminous coating shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num type a .
corrugated steel pipe for underdrains .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num type i except that all reference to sleeve type coupler or coupling as described in num and num therein shall be disregarded .
sleeve type couplers or couplings will not be permitted .
perforated pipe shall have class num perforations .
bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe for underdrains .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num type i. perforated pipe shall have class num perforations .
underdrain fittings elbows end sections and coupling bands shall be fully coated with bituminous material conforming to the requirements of aashto m num type a coating or materials conforming to the requirements of aashto m num except that the use of tar base material will not be permitted .
coatings shall be shop applied .
the finished coat shall uniformly cover the surface to be protected .
the coating shall not contain any visible holidays bubbles or bare spots .
minimum thickness shall be num mm num mils measured on the crest of the corrugations .
in complying with aashto m num each section shall be given a double dip application .
in the first immersion the section shall remain submerged until the metal has reached a temperature that will allow the hot bituminous material to penetrate and seal each joint .
other coatings meeting the requirements of aashto m num or m num will be acceptable upon written approval by the engineer .
materials meeting the requirements of aashto m num shall be uniformly applied by spray trowel or brush to the entire designated surface to be coated to a minimum thickness of num mm num mils .
the coating shall be dry to the touch prior to any handling or backfilling operations .
special fittings and elbows for underdrains shall be of the same gage as the conduit to which they are joined .
the specified minimum size of perforations shall apply after coating .
num num corrugated aluminum pipe .
this pipe and coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum type num pipe .
corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
nonperforated pipe shall be type num .
perforated pipe shall be type iii with class i perforations .
extensions .
connecting bands and extensions to existing culverts shall be of the same type metal or alloy unless otherwise shown on the plans .
repair of damaged coating .
units on which the spelter coating has been damaged shall be either regalvanized as provided under aashto m num or painted with one full brush coat of a zinc rich paint meeting military specification dodpnuma or by other approved process on properly cleaned surface as determined by the engineer .
bituminous coated material which has been damaged shall be repaired with field applied asphalt mastic conforming to aashto m num .
other coating material may be used when approved by the engineer .
polymer precoated corrugated steel pipe .
polymer precoated corrugated steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
aluminized corrugated steel pipe type num .
aluminized corrugated steel pipe type num shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
num num section num paints general .
this specification covers readymixed paints and coatings .
paints and coatings shall be manufactured eight weeks or less prior to delivery to the project .
each paint container shall be labeled with the name and address of the manufacturer trade name or trademark type of paint number of gallons batch number and date of manufacture .
paints shall be free of foreign material that is capable of clogging screens valves pumps and other parts of the application equipment .
paint shall not contain the following num benzene .
num chlorinated solvents .
num ethylene glycol ethers .
num ethylene glycol acetates .
num lead .
num mercury .
num chromium .
num cadmium .
num petroleum products .
the contractor shall obtain certification in writing from the manufacturer showing that the product is free of the materials described above and that it meets or exceeds the requirements of num cfr num .
paints shall not form a surface skin within num hours in threequarter filled tightly closed containers .
paint and coating pigments shall be lead free and shall not thicken become granular or curdle in their containers .
volatile organic compound voc levels for paints and coatings shall comply with the most current epa regulations .
all product compositional proportions are specified by weight .
material safety data sheets and manufacturers recommended application instruction sheets representing each paint and coating shall be submitted to the engineer for the project records prior to use .
list of paints .
paints specification structural steel bridge paint subsection num white wood primer ttpnum outside white paint ttpnum class a exterior black paint ttpnum black or white baking enamel ttenum class b num num paints cont .
specification cont .
federal yellow enamel ttenum class a aluminum paint subsection num pavement marking paint subsection num structural steel bridge paint .
all structural steel shall be painted using an inorganic zincrich polyurethane system .
the primer shall be an approved inorganic zincrich primer conforming to the requirements of table num of the steel structures painting council specification no .
num sspcpaint num .
the vehicle of this primer shall be sspcpaint num type numc .
the primer shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommendations with a minimum dry film thickness of num mils .
the manufacturer shall certify in writing to the engineer that the sspcsp num steel cleaning is compatible with the primer used .
the top coat shall be an approved highbuild polyurethane enamel with a minimum dry film thickness of num mils .
to prevent bubbling a mist coat shall be applied prior to application of the top coat .
aluminum paint .
the paint shall be supplied readymixed in the proportion of astm d num type ii class b num pounds of aluminum paste per num gallon of mixing varnish see subsection num c. aluminum paint shall dry to touch in  to num hours and dry hard in num hours maximum .
material will be inspected for leafing on a vertical primed steel surface at a spreading rate of num square feet per gallon .
pavement marking materials .
all pavement marking materials shall be selected from the departments approved products list apl .
prior to start of work a certificate of compliance coc for all pavement marking materials shall be submitted in accordance with subsection num. a color .
the pavement marking paint without dropon beads shall meet the following requirements white federal standard no .
numbnum .
the yellowness index yi of white shall not exceed num per astm enum initially .
the color after drying shall be a flatwhite free from tint and shall provide the maximum amount of opacity and visibility under both daylight and artificial light .
yellow materials for pavement markings shall meet the initial daytime chromaticity that falls within the box created by the following corner points num num initial daytime chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x num num num num y num num num num b low temperature acrylic waterborne paint .
low temperature acrylic waterborne paint binder nonvolatile portion of vehicle shall be num percent fastrack xsr acrylic polymer by weight as determined by infrared analysis or other chemical analysis available to the department .
the paint shall meet the requirements of table num. c high build acrylic waterborne paint .
high build acrylic waterborne paint binder nonvolatile portion of vehicle shall be num percent fastrack hd numa acrylic cross linking polymer by weight as determined by infrared analysis or other chemical analysis available to the department .
the paint shall meet the requirements of table num. d performance requirements .
the low temperature acrylic waterborne paint and high build acrylic waterborne paint shall be water resistant and shall show no softening or blistering .
num num table num low temperature acrylic waterborne paint property white yellow test method nonvolatile portion of vehicle white and yellow num min num min astm dnum pigment composition percent by weight num num astm dnum astm dnum paint titanium dioxide content lb.gal num min astm dnum properties of the finished paint total nonvolatiles solids by weight num min num min ftms numc method num astm dnum or astm dnum density lbs.gal num num num num astm dnum consistency viscosity white and yellow krebsstormer units num num astm dnum freeze thaw stability shall complete num or more test cycles successfully astm dnum fineness of grind cleanliness rating b minimum num num astm dnum scrub resistance num num astm dnum directional reflectance num mil wet film num min num min astm enum dry opacity contrast ratio num mil wet film num min num min astm dnum percent by weight shall include percent of organic yellow pigment .
num num table num high build acrylic waterborne paint property white yellow test method nonvolatile portion of vehicle white and yellow num min num min astm dnum pigment composition percent by weight num num astm dnum astm dnum paint titanium dioxide content lb.gal num min astm dnum properties of the finished paint total nonvolatiles solids by weight num min num min ftms numc method num astm dnum or astm dnum density lbs.gal num num num num astm dnum consistency viscosity white and yellow krebsstormer units num num astm dnum freeze thaw stability shall complete num or more test cycles successfully astm dnum fineness of grind cleanliness rating b minimum num num astm dnum scrub resistance num num astm dnum directional reflectance num mil wet film num min num min astm enum dry opacity contrast ratio num mil wet film num min num min astm dnum percent by weight shall include percent of organic yellow pigment .
num num materials specifications a paint pigment .
chrominum oxide green astm dnum magnesium silicate astm dnum titanium dioxide astm d num class iv red iron oxide astm dnum black iron oxide astm dnum yellow iron oxide astm dnum b organomontmorillonite .
organomontmorillonite shall be an organic ammonium compound of montmorillonite with a high gelling efficiency in a wide range of organic liquids .
it shall be a fine creamy white powder with maximum water content of num percent and a maximum of num percent retained on the num m no .
num sieve .
organomontmorillonite shall be prewetted with methanol or ethanol as recommended by the manufacturer .
c varnish for aluminum paint .
material specification resin num phenol formaldehyde milrnuma oiltung astm dnum mineral spirits astm dnum driers cobalt andor manganese astm dnum properties of varnish viscosity gh ac oil length num liters per num kilograms of resin num gal .
nonvolatile num min .
proportion of thinners num mineral spirits num xylene color hellige num max .
zinc reactivity none kauri reduction num min .
rosin and rosin derivatives none appearance clear and transparent drying time set to touch num to num hrs .
dry hard num hrs .
max .
alkali resistance .
no visible attack to film dried num hours after num hours in num sodium hydroxide solution at num c num f. pavement primers .
the type and application rate of epoxy resin primer shall be as recommended by the thermoplastic or preformed plastic pavement marking manufacturer .
num num a primer application rate of zero will not be accepted except for thermoplastic marking and inlaid preformed plastic pavement marking placed on new asphalt surfaces as recommended by the manufacturer and approved in writing by the engineer .
however if the engineer determines that a new asphalt surface has become soiled prior to placement of the pavement markings pavement primer will be required and shall be applied as approved .
the epoxy resin primer material may be accepted at the job site on the basis of a manufacturers certification or a sample may be sent to the laboratory for testing in which case three weeks shall be allowed between sampling and intended use .
structural concrete coating .
the coating shall be a onecomponent highbuild nonvapor barrier num percent acrylic emulsion in water and a texturing agent .
minimum physical properties solids by weight num percent without texturing agent solids by volume num percent without texturing agent weight per gallon num lbs.gal .
without texturing agent texturing agent num to num lbs.gal .
no .
num to num ottawa sand or equivalent all coating material shall be delivered to the project site in sealed containers bearing the manufacturers original labels .
a material safety data sheet msds prepared in accordance with federal standard num and a complete set of manufacturers mixing and application instructions shall be submitted to the engineer before the contractor begins applying the coating .
inspection and testing .
the manufacturer shall notify the engineer well in advance of actual paint manufacture in order to arrange for sampling and testing of raw materials and inspection of paint production .
test methods shall be according to astm or if not covered therein federal test method standard no .
num .
all paint shall have been approved before delivery .
num num section num reinforcing steel and wire rope reinforcing steel .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of the following specifications deformed and plain billetsteel bars for concrete reinforcement astm anum axlesteel deformed and plain bars for concrete reinforcement astm anum lowalloy steel deformed bars for concrete reinforcement to be welded astm anum fabricated deformed steel bar mats for concrete reinforcement astm anum steel welded wire fabric plain for concrete reinforcement aashto m num steel welded wire fabric deformed for concrete reinforcement aashto m num epoxy coated reinforcing bars aashto a num unless otherwise designated bars conforming to astm a num astm a num shall be furnished in grade num for num bars and larger and grade num or num for bars smaller than num .
in astm a num bar material conforming to astm a num will not be permitted .
wire rope .
the wire rope shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameter and strength class .
dowel bars and tie bars .
tie bars for longitudinal and transverse joints shall conform to aashto a num and shall be grade num epoxycoated and deformed .
bar size shall be as designated on standard plan mnum .
dowel bars for transverse joints shall conform to aashto m num for the coating and to astm a num grade num for the core material and shall be epoxycoated smooth and lightly greased precoated with wax or asphalt emulsion or sprayed with an approved material for their full length .
bar size shall be as designated on the standard plan mnum .
num num section num fence and guardrail barbed wire .
steel barbed wire shall conform to the requirements of astm a num class i .
aluminum barbed wire shall be manufactured in accordance with astm b num with alloy numo for the line wire and alloy numhnum for the barbs .
woven wire .
woven wire shall conform to the details and requirements shown on the plans and to the following zinc coated steel woven wire shall conform to the requirements of astm a num coating class i .
aluminum coated steel woven wire shall conform to the requirements of astm a num type a. fittings and attachments shall be zinc coated to conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
chain link fabric .
chain link fabric and required fittings and hardware shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the kind of metal sizes of wire and mesh specified .
zinc coating for steel fabric shall conform to astm a num class i and aluminum coating for steel fabric to astm a num class i .
snow fence .
wirebound picket fence shall conform to the requirements of astm f num .
posts shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
w beam rail .
the rail elements shall be corrugated sheet steel beams conforming to the requirements of aashto m num of the designated class and type .
the beams shall be galvanized shop painted or corrosion resistant as may be specified .
the same requirements shall apply to metal offset devices .
corrosion resistant steel for rail elements and terminals shall not be painted or galvanized .
corrosion resistant beam rails shall consist of corrugated sheet steel conforming to the requirements of aashto m num type iv and shall have a corrosion resistance of at least num times that of carbon steel without copper num max or twice that of carbon steel with copper .
the sheet steel may be either in coils or cut lengths when processed for corrugation .
all corrosion resistant material shall be sandblasted to provide a uniform weathered appearance .
all corrosion resistant steel parts shall be handled with care to avoid gouges scratches or dents .
care shall be exercised to keep foreign material such as paint grease oil or crayon from contact with the surface .
steel parts damaged either physically or by contact with foreign substances will not be accepted .
num num during shipment or site storage corrosion resistant steel parts must be positioned to allow free drainage and air circulation on the surfaces .
natural oxide formation on the steel may occur and will not be considered objectionable .
the contractor shall furnish three copies of a certified mill test report to the engineer .
this report shall show the results of physical and chemical tests of the metal and its coating .
timber for wood sound barrier .
timber shall be any of the timber species given in subsection num including all species defined as native .
throughout the project posts shall be of one species boards may be of another species and rails may be a mix of any permissible species except where single sided fence is built the rails shall be of one species .
the exposed board surfaces shall be of one finish throughout the entire fence and may be rough sawn sis snumsnume or snum posts and rails may have any of the finishes .
species selected for posts rails and boards shall conform to the grading rules of the western wood products association wwpa the southern pine inspection bureau spib or the west coast lumber inspection bureau wclib for grading and strength .
num posts .
wwpa or wclib posts and timbers no .
num or better or spib timbers no .
numsr or better .
num rails .
wwpa wclib or spib light framing standard or better or structural joists and planks no .
num or better .
num boards .
wwpa no .
num common or better or spib no .
num or better .
num treatment .
the selected species shall be pressure treated lumber conforming in all respects to the awpa standard unum commodity specification a sawn products and awpa commodity standard b posts ground contact for posts above ground for balance of fence .
a treatment report is required from the treatment plant .
num preservative .
aashto mnum .
all lumber shall be manufactured in accordance with product standard num as published by the department of commerce and shall be grade marked by a grading agency or have an accompanying certificate from the grading agency .
the grading agency shall be certified by the board of review of the american lumber standards committee .
all posts rails and fence board materials shall be dried after treatment to a maximum of num percent moisture content .
fence posts .
wood posts shall conform to the details and dimensions indicated on the plans .
wood posts shall be straight sound and seasoned with ends sawed off square or as indicated .
all knots shall be trimmed flush with the surface .
wood posts shall be peeled and shall be treated with preservative in accordance with aashto m num .
when native cedar posts are called for on the plans the requirements for peeling and for treating may be omitted .
num num all dimension timber and lumber required for fences or gates shall be sound straight and free from knots splits and shakes .
it shall be of the species and grades indicated on the plans .
concrete posts shall be made of concrete of the class specified and shall contain steel reinforcement as shown on the plans .
steel posts shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
fittings hardware and other appurtenances not specifically covered by the contract shall be standard commercial grade and in accord with current standard practice .
pipe material for fence posts shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans and to the requirements of class num pipe grade a or grade b of federal specification rrfnumc .
guardrail posts .
posts shall be of either wood or steel .
when the choice of post is at the option of the contractor there shall be only one kind furnished on the project unless otherwise specified in the contract .
a wood posts shall be fabricated from an approved or specified timber species and shall be of the quality diameter or section and length as specified or as shown in the contract .
treated posts shall be fabricated or framed before treatment and shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num. b steel posts shall be of the section and length as specified or as shown in the contract .
steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the grade specified .
the posts shall be galvanized or corrosion resistant as may be specified .
all corrosion resistant material shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num. c concrete deadmen for end anchorages shall be as specified or as shown in the contract .
guardrail hardware .
splices end connections end anchor rods and accessories shall be as specified or as shown in the contract .
bolts nuts and washers shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num class c or aashto m num class num type num .
all other fittings shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
bolts nuts and washers for corrosion resistant guard rail shall be of corrosion resistant material and conform to or exceed the requirements of astm a num .
where high strength bolts are required they shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
num num section num concrete curing materials and admixtures curing materials .
curing materials shall conform to the following requirements burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf aashto m num liquid membraneforming compounds for curing concrete astm cnum sheet materials for curing concrete aashto m num only the performance requirements of aashto mnum shall apply .
straw used for curing shall consist of threshed straw of oats barley wheat or rye .
clean field or marsh hay may be substituted for straw when approved by the engineer .
old dry straw or hay which breaks readily in the spreading process will not be accepted .
airentraining admixtures .
airentraining admixtures shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
admixtures which have been frozen will be rejected in accordance with subsections num and num .
chemical admixtures .
chemical admixtures for concrete shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
admixtures which have been frozen will be rejected .
num num section num miscellaneous water .
water used in mixing or curing concrete shall be reasonably clean and free of oil salt acid alkali sugar vegetation or other substance injurious to the finished product .
concrete mixing water shall meet the requirements of astm cnum .
the contractor shall perform and submit tests to the engineer at the frequencies listed in astm cnum .
potable water may be used without testing .
where the source of water is relatively shallow the intake shall be so enclosed as to exclude silt mud grass and other foreign materials .
calcium chloride .
calcium chloride shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
hydrated lime .
the hydrated lime for hot mix asphalt hma shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num type i .
in addition the particle size requirements shall conform to aashto m num when tested in accordance with cpl num physical testing of quicklime hydrated lime and limestone .
unused precast concrete units .
precast concrete manhole base sections riser sections and grade rings shall conform to aashto m num .
all other precast units shall be cast in substantial forms .
structural concrete used shall attain a minimum numday compressive strength of num psi as determined in accordance with aashto t num .
when airentrained concrete is specified it shall have an air content of num to num percent by volume .
the precast units shall be cured in accordance with aashto m num .
additional reinforcement shall be provided as necessary to provide for handling of the precast units .
a sufficient number of cylinders shall be cast and field cured from each batch or truckmixer load of concrete to permit compression tests at num num and num days and to allow for at least two cylinders for each test .
when the strength requirement is met the units will be certified for use .
cracks in units honeycombed or patched areas in excess of num square inches excessive water absorption or failure to meet strength requirements will be cause for rejection .
frames grates covers and steps .
metal units shall conform to the plan dimensions and to the following specification requirements for the designated materials .
gray iron castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num and aashto m num class numb .
carbonsteel castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num class num .
num num ductile iron castings shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
grade shall be optional unless otherwise designated .
structural steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of astm a num .
grade shall be optional unless otherwise designated .
steps shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
galvanizing where specified for these units shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num .
geosynthetics .
geosynthetic rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping to protect against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled to provide product identification sufficient for inventory and process control purposes .
rolls shall be stored in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof cover .
the contractor shall submit a certified test report from the manufacturer in accordance with subsection num including all data necessary to verify compliance with this specification .
securing pins shall be made from galvanized steel wire or other approved wire material num inch or larger in diameter .
they shall be ushaped with legs num inches long and a num inch crown .
physical requirements of geosynthetics shall meet or exceed what is shown in table num .
unless otherwise stated all property values represent minimum average roll values marv in the weakest principle direction .
stated values are for noncritical nonsevere conditions .
lots shall be sampled in accordance with astm d num. a geomembrane .
geomembrane shall be manufactured for stopping seepage loss .
the lining shall consist of virgin polyvinyl chloride pvc resins plasticizers stabilizers and other necessary materials that when compounded shall meet or exceed the physical requirements for the thickness specified in table num .
individual widths of pvc materials shall be fabricated into large sections by dielectric sealing into a single piece or into a minimum number of panels up to num feet wide as required to fit the facility .
lap joints with a minimum joint width of  inch shall be used .
after fabrication the lining shall be accordion folded in both directions and packaged for minimum handling in the field .
shipping boxes shall be substantial enough to prevent damage to contents .
num num table num physical requirements for geomembrane property thickness test method num mm num mil num mm num mil num mm num mil thickness tolerance num num num astm dnum tensile strength knm lbs.in .
width num num num num num num astm dnum method b modulus num elongation knm lbs.in .
num num num num num num astm dnum method b ultimate elongation num num num astm dnum method a tear resistance n lbs num num num num num num astm dnum low temperature impact c f num num num num num num astm dnum volatile loss max .
num num num astm dnum method a pinholes no .
num mnum no .
per num sq .
yds .
max .
num num num bonded seam strength of tensile strength num num num b reserved .
geotextiles .
geotextile rolls shall be furnished with suitable wrapping to protect against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure prior to placement .
each roll shall be labeled to provide product identification sufficient for inventory and process control purposes .
rolls shall be stored in a manner which protects them from the elements .
if stored outdoors they shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof cover .
the contractor shall submit a certified test report from the manufacturer in accordance with subsection num including all data necessary to verify compliance with this specification .
securing pins shall be made from galvanized steel wire or other approved wire material num inch or larger in diameter .
they shall be ushaped with legs num inches long and a num inch crown .
num num physical requirements for all geotextiles shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
materials shall be selected from the new york department of transportations approved products list of geosynthetic materials that meet the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep and aashto mnum testing requi.rements .
the current list of products that meet these requirements is located at www.dot.ny.gov the geotextile approved products list may be accessed by clicking on the following tabs once on the nydot site to num a to z site index .
num approved list .
num approved products .
num materials and equipment .
num geosynthetics for highway construction .
num geotextiles .
num num table num typical values of permeability coefficientsnum turbulent flow particle size range millimeters inches effective size permeability coefficient k cms d max d min d num mm inches derrick stone num num num num num num num oneman stone num num num num num num num clean fine to coarse gravel num num num  num  num fine uniform gravel num  num num num  num very coarse clean uniform sand num  num num num num num laminar flow uniform coarse sand num  num num num num uniform medium sand num num num num clean wellgraded sand gravel num num num num uniform fine sand num num num num x num wellgraded silty sand gravel num num num num x num silty sand num num num num x num uniform silt num num num num x num sandy clay num num num num x num silty clay num num num num x num clay num to num clay sizes num num num num x num colloidal clay num m num num num num num num basic soils engineering r.k. hough numnd edition ronald pess co. num page num .
note since the permeability coefficient of the soil will be unknown in most noncritical nonsevere applications for erosion control and drainage the soilpermeability coefficients listed in table num may be used as a guide for comparing the permeability coefficient of the fabric with that of the inplace soil .
gabions and slope mattresses .
all wire used in the manufacture and assembly of the mesh shall conform to federal specification qqwnumh finish num class num .
wire mesh for gabions cage thickness num inches and greater shall be num gauge num num u.s. soft temper .
wire mesh for slope mattress cage thickness up to num inches shall be num gauge u.s. soft temper .
samples for testing shall include at least one sample of each component of the mesh .
tie and connecting wire shall be supplied for securely fastening all edges of the gabions and diaphragms .
gabions shall be provided with four cross connecting wires in each cell  unit high and eight in each cell one unit high .
gabions shall also have inner tie wires connecting the front face to the rear face at approximate spacing of num inches in both vertical and horizontal dimensions .
tie wire shall meet the same specifications for wire used in the mesh except that tie wire for gabion cages shall not be more than two gages lighter .
all wire used including tie and connecting wire shall be certified by mill test reports showing compliance with specification requirements .
a mesh opening .
the longer dimension of the mesh openings for gabions and slope mattresses shall be as shown on the plans .
b wire mesh .
wire mesh shall be woven in such a manner as to be nonraveling and have elasticity .
tests for compliance with these and the following properties shall be performed by the contractor .
a certified test report showing these required results and information shall be supplied with each project .
tests are to be run on cages of the same specification made within a year prior to the date of letting .
c nonraveling .
the mesh for both gabions and slope mattresses shall show no raveling beyond the mesh opening in which the break occurred when the loading is continued after the first break in the test conducted with the pull parallel to the axis of the wire twist .
d elasticity .
for gabions when pulled parallel to the axis of the wire twist and deformation is controlled by spreader bars no wire shall break until the mesh has been stretched at least num percent .
the pull test shall be performed both parallel and perpendicular to the axis of the wire twist and in either case the first wire break shall not occur until the loading on the table below has been reached .
e edge wire connection .
the edge wire connection for both gabions and slope mattresses shall be strong enough so that when tested the first wire break shall occur in the wire mesh .
f selvedge .
the selvedge on each sheet of mesh for both gabions and slope mattresses shall be galvanized steel wire as described above two gages heavier than that used in the body of the mesh .
for gabions it shall be attached to the wire mesh strong enough so that when tested no wire shall break until the loading on the table below has been reached .
for slope mattresses the first wire break shall be in the wire mesh .
num num g field connections .
the field connections between adjacent wire baskets shall be made as recommended by the manufacturer and shall develop a connection strong enough that the failure under test shall occur in the mesh rather than in the lacing .
table num minimum strength tests for gabion baskets only part minimum strength pounds per foot wire mesh pulled parallel to wire twist num pulled perpendicular to wire twist num connection of selvedge wire to mesh num h dimensions .
gabions and slope mattresses shall be supplied in the various sizes shown on the plans .
cages and mattresses furnished by a manufacturer shall be of uniform size .
i tolerances .
all gabion and slope mattress dimensions are subject to a tolerance limit of num percent of manufacturers stated sizes .
j riprap .
riprap shall consist of hard dense sound rough fractured stone or local sandstone as nearly cubical as practicable .
thin slab type stones and flaking rock shall not be used .
stone shall have a specific gravity of at least num and shall be resistant to the action of air and water .
flaking or fragmental rock will not be permitted .
the sizes of riprap stone for gabions and slope mattresses shall conform to the following stone size gabions cage thickness num inch or greater num to num inch slope mattress num to num inch k soil anchor stakes for wire mesh slope mattresses .
soil anchor stakes shall be steel and may be num crane rails of a convenient size min .
num pounds per yard .
num size num inch steel pipe conforming to astm a num either black or galvanized .
num size num inch x num inch x  inch structural steel angles conforming to astm a num grade num or better .
num used rails pipe or angles may be used provided the material is not rusted or damaged to such an extent that the strength of the stakes is affected .
num num soil anchor stakes shall be of the lengths called for on the plans .
epoxy .
epoxy used for bonding new or wet concrete to old concrete shall be an approved product and shall be of the type specifically intended for bonding wet concrete to existing concrete .
each container of epoxy shall conform to astm c num .
plastic pipe for underdrains .
polyethylene perforated or nonperforated corrugated pipe shall conform to aashto m num .
perforated or nonperforated polyvinyl chloride pipesmooth interior smooth or ribbed exterior shall conform to aashto m num .
geocomposite drains .
geocomposite drains underdrains and edge drains for subsurface drainage shall be constructed of a drainage geotextile and a semirigid drainage core .
a drainage pipe collector may also be included in the drain system .
drainage geotextile shall be a minimum class num conforming to aashto m num .
the drainage pipe collector when used shall conform to the requirements designated in subsection num for the type of pipe used .
the semirigid drainage core shall be constructed of material that will not deteriorate in subsurface conditions and shall conform to the physical requirements of table num .
table num physical requirements for drainage core property value test method compressive strength kpa lbs.sq .
in .
num num astm d num inplane flow capacity lsm gal.min.ft .
minimum num num astm d num minimum core thickness mm inch num num plastic pipe .
plastic pipe shall conform to the following requirements for the type of pipe used a polyethylene pe pipe .
polyethylene pe pipe shall conform to the following requirements for the type of culvert pipe used num aashto m num corrugated pipe for nominal pipe sizes of num to num inches num to num mm with the following additions or exceptions i type s and type sp are acceptable .
type c type cp and type d will not be accepted .
ii rotational molded pipe will not be accepted .
num aashto m num corrugated pipe for nominal pipe sizes of num to num inches num to num mm with the following additions or exceptions num num i type s and type sp are acceptable .
type c type cp and type d will not be accepted .
ii rotational molded pipe will not be accepted .
num astm f num ribbed profile with the following additions or exceptions i aashto lrfd bridge design specifications section num num year life requirements .
ii minimum cell class per astm d num of numc or numc .
iii minimum section properties as noted in section num .
num astm f num smooth wall with the following additions or exceptions i a dr of num or less will be required .
ii aashto lrfd bridge design specification section num num year life requirements .
iii minimum cell class per astm d num of numc .
the contractor shall provide a polyethylene pe pipe product that is prequalified under the aashto national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
only products from suppliers whose manufacturing plant and pe pipe products comply with this specification shall be placed by the contractor .
the current list of plants and pe pipe products that meet these requirements is located at www.ntpep.org .
the contractor shall use plants listed as compliant and a size listed in the ntpep reports on pe thermoplastic pipe .
every certificate of compliance coc on each diameter pe pipe product delivered to the project shall include a statement that the product has been manufactured at a ntpep inspected plant has been tested by ntpep has a ntpep product number and is currently on the ntpep website .
the coc shall confirm that the supplied pipe meets the applicable specification limits in subsection num .
manufacturers shall remain acceptable to cdot as long as the results of verification samples and performance in the field are satisfactory .
any changes in the pe pipe formulation will require resubmittal for prequalification testing by ntpep .
b polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe num aashto m num profile for nominal pipe sizes of num to num inches .
num astm fnum profile for nominal pipe sizes num to num inches with num psi minimum pipe stiffness .
num astm fnum profile for nominal pipe sizes num to num inches with num psi minimum pipe stiffness .
num num c polypropylene pp pipe .
aashto m num for nominal pipe sizes of num to num inches with the following exceptions type s and type sp are acceptable type c type cp and type d will not be accepted .
the contractor shall provide a polypropylene pp pipe product that is prequalified under the aashto national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
only products from suppliers whose manufacturing plant and pp pipe products comply with this specification shall be placed by the contractor .
the current list of plants and pp pipe products that meet these requirements is located at www.ntpep.org .
the contractor shall use plants listed as compliant and a size listed in the ntpep reports on pp thermoplastic pipe .
every certificate of compliance coc on each diameter pp pipe product delivered to the project shall include a statement that the product has been manufactured at a ntpep inspected plant has been tested by ntpep has a ntpep product number and is currently on the ntpep website .
the coc shall confirm that the supplied pipe meets the applicable specification limits in subsection num .
manufacturers shall remain acceptable to cdot as long as the results of verification samples and performance in the field are satisfactory .
any changes in the pp pipe formulation will require resubmittal for prequalification testing by ntpep .
d steel reinforced polyethylene srpe .
srpe pipe shall be aashto mp num ribbed pipe for nominal pipe sizes num to num inches with the following exceptions nominal pipe sizes num to num inches are acceptable nominal pipe sizes num to num inches will not be accepted .
num num section num traffic control materials signsgeneral .
aluminum or steel used for traffic control shall conform to table num .
table num aluminum steel application astm designation alloy no .
temper astm designation sign panels b num b num b num numtnum numhnum numhnum a num traffic controller cabinets b num numtnum a num grade num clip bolts b num numtnum locknuts or steel nuts and bolts b num numtnum a num clips and backing angles b num numtnum num in lieu of astm treatment aluminum sign blanks shall receive a class num anodized coating prior to the placement of retroreflective sheeting .
num steel sheets shall have a znum zinc coating in accordance with astm a num and a light phosphate coating .
phosphate coating of num oz.sq .
ft. will be required for application with reflective sheeting .
nuts and bolts shall be galvanized or cadmium plated .
aluminum sign panel tolerances .
aluminum sign panel sheet dimensional tolerances shall conform to the applicable requirements of the american national standards institute dimensional tolerances for aluminum products ansihnumm with the following exceptions the flatness tolerances shall be onehalf the values listed in table num and shall apply to all aluminum alloy grades permitted for sign panels .
sign blanks are to be tensile leveled for sheet thickness less than num inch and stretcher leveled for thickness equal to or greater than num inch .
the individual sign blank bow tolerance deviation of a side edge from a straight line shall not exceed num inch and the dimensions of the opposing sides shall be within num inch .
aluminum sign panel shall be subject to the requirements of the first paragraph of subsection num. unused num num sign message materials .
the legend border and overlay shall be used in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendation .
retroreflective sheeting background material shall be on the departments approved product list and the retroreflective sheeting background material shall be the type specified on the plans .
at a minimum astm num type iv shall be used for ground mount signs .
astm dnum type xi shall be used for class iii overhead signs .
for class iii overhead signs the legend and borders shall be astm dnum type xi sheeting .
all reflective sheeting shall be sealed at the seams and edges as recommended by the manufacturer .
hardware .
all hardware shall be compatible with sign material and shall not cause discoloration due to weather .
unused .
reflectors .
reflectors shall consist of a clear and transparent acrylic plastic prismatic reflex lens with a smooth front face except for the legibly molded manufacturers trademark and a back hermetically sealed surface with prismatic configuration effecting total internal reflection of light .
firmly fused to the back surface shall be a backing material .
the backing material shall be white opaque plastic of the same type as the lens and delineator reflectors may be backed with a plastic coated metallic foil .
delineator reflectors shall be housed in embossed aluminum and provided with a single grommetted mounting hole .
the delineator unit shall withstand the combined corrosion test described in astm b num .
glass beads for traffic markings .
glass beads for pavement marking shall conform to aashto m num except for the following num gradation u.s .
mesh microns passing modified epoxy and methyl methacrylate acrylic waterborne low temperature and high build num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num roundness all beads shall meet a minimum of num percent true spheres in accordance with the office of federal lands highways flh tnum or a computerized optical testing method .
num color clarity beads shall be colorless clear and free of carbon residues .
num refractive index minimum num by oil immersion method .
num air inclusions less than num percent by visual count .
num coatings according to the manufacturers recommendation for optimum adhesion and embedment .
num chemical resistance beads shall be resistant to hydrochloric acid water calcium chloride and sodium sulfide as tested using the methods outlined in sections num to num of the ttb federal spec.numd .
num for modified epoxy pavement parking a minimum of num percent of the total weight shall be manufactured using a molten kiln direct melt method .
for acrylic waterborne paint a minimum of num percent of the total weight shall be manufactured using a molten kiln direct melt method .
all molten kiln direct melt glass beads shall be above the num m num sieve .
num glass beads used for any type of pavement marking shall not contain more than num parts per million ppm arsenic num ppm antimony and num ppm lead as tested in accordance with epa methods num and numc or other approved testing method glass beads shall be furnished in fully identified containers and shall be free of extraneous material or clumps .
glass beads for thermoplastic pavement marking shall conform to aashto m num type num .
sampling and inspection .
the engineer shall be notified well in advance of beginning of shop work so that adequate arrangements may be made for sampling and inspection .
shop inspection may be waived and complete inspection made when the fabricated sign panels are delivered to the site of the work .
the following samples shall be submitted to the engineer for approval num a num inch xnum inch sample of finished material for figure frames .
num a num inch xnum inch sample of reflective sheeting representing each lot used on the project .
num two reflectors for each num or part thereof of each size and color with a limit of num samples for any one size or color .
when reflective buttons are so affixed to the cutout frames that their removal for testing will cause breakage it shall be the responsibility of the sign fabricator to furnish a representative sample of reflective buttons .
num num pounds of glass beads representing each lot used on the project .
num num num num pint of paint of each color representing each lot used on the project .
num num pound of thermoplastic marking material and one liter of each primer component .
num num inch strip of preformed plastic pavement marking .
num num inch strip of pavement marking tape .
num num square foot of preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material .
quality requirements of reflective materials .
reflective devices and reflective sheeting shall be materials which are on the departments approved products list .
a reflective devices .
num .
reflective quality requirements .
a. delineator and median barrier reflectors .
the specific intensity of each delineator and median barrier reflector shall be at least equal to the following minimum values when tested in accordance with aashto t num with an observation angle of num degrees .
entrance angle degrees specific intensity candlepower per footcandle crystal yellow blue red green num num num num num num num num num num num num b. cutout figure reflectors .
the specific brightness of crystal reflectors used in cutout figures shall be at least equal to the following minimum values .
observation angle degrees entrance angle degrees specific brightness candlepower per sq .
in .
per footcandle num num num num num num num .
material and component requirements .
plastic for delineator and cutout figure reflectors shall be poly methyl methacrylate conforming to requirements of astm d num grade num .
the reflectors shall meet test requirements of cp lnum sec .
num and num. b retroreflective sheeting .
reflective sheeting for traffic control devices shall be listed on the cdot approved products list and conform to the requirements of astm d num .
num num num .
retroreflective quality requirements .
drums and tubular markers .
retroreflective sheeting shall conform to astm dnum type iv with the following modifications the minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra shall conform to the following minimum values .
observation angle entrance angle minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra cdfcftnum cdlx.mnum white fluorescent orange numo numo num num numo numo num num numo numo num num numo numo num num num .
daytime color .
drums and tubular markers .
all fluorescent orange sheeting shall meet the color requirements of astm dnum with the following modifications the chromaticity coordinates and total luminance factor shall conform to the requirements as described in num cfr part num appendix to subpart f. the fluorescence luminance factor yf shall conform to the following minimum values .
color yf initial requirement yf minimum requirement fluorescent orange num num traffic signals .
electrical conduit pull boxes and junction boxes shall conform to the requirements of section num and subsection num and to the details shown on the plans .
conductors shall be nineteen strand or seven stranded tinned copper wire rated at num volts and individually insulated with heat stabilized polyethylene .
conductors and cables shall be copper and conform to specification num of the imsa .
directburial cable shall be copper and conform to specification num of the imsa except that conductors shall be seven wire stranded .
pull rope shall be  inch nylon .
messenger cable span wire shall be  inch diameter minimum seven wire num num stranded common galvanized utilities grade rated at num pounds in accordance with astm a num .
grounding and bonding wires straps and electrodes shall be copper and conform to nec article num .
adjustable face vehicle traffic control signal heads and associated equipment shall conform to the general specifications and definitions contained in the latest issue of technical report no .
num prepared by the ite and as shown on the plans .
adjustable face pedestrian signal heads and associated equipment shall conform to the general specifications and definitions contained in the latest issue of technical report no .
num prepared by the institute of traffic engineers and as shown on the plans .
traffic signal lamps shall conform to the general specifications and definitions contained in the latest issue of technical report no .
num prepared by the institute of traffic engineers .
lamps shall be rated for operation at num volts ac .
lamp wattages shall be num watts for all num inch traffic signals num watts for all num inch traffic signals num watts for all num inch pedestrian signals or as otherwise specified by the manufacturer .
led traffic signal section optical units shall meet or exceed ite adjustable face vehicular traffic control and pedestrian signal head standards .
in addition to this led optical units shall conform to the following requirements num wattage max .
num watts num watts for num inch ball max .
num watts num watts for num inch ball max .
num watts num watts for num inch arrow max .
num watts num watts for ped hand symbol maximum total harmonic current distortion thd shall be num percent .
power factor shall be num percent .
load balance requirement load in one phase shall not exceed the load in any other phase by num percent .
note thd and power factor requirements shall be waived for products designed to operate at less than num watts .
num voltage operating shall be between num and num vac .
electronic circuitry shall assure proper operation of the load switch and monitor in the control cabinet .
num circuit configuration the leds shall be connected to form multiple series circuits .
all series circuits shall be interconnected at intervals forming subcircuits not exceeding num leds for the ball and arrow signals and num leds for the pedestrian hand symbol .
in the event of an led failure these subcircuits shall limit the number of num num extinguished leds to no more than num percent of the total on the ball and pedestrian hand signal lamps and num percent of the total on the arrow lamp .
num enclosure shall be dust and water resistant num operating temperature between num f and num f num lens shall be replaceable polycarbonate uv stabilized lexan convex lens meet ite color standards minimum of  inch thickness and minimum light transmittance of num percent free from bubbles flaws and other imperfections .
nonpolycarbonate tinted lenses will be accepted provided that these meet ite color standards .
chromacity shall be measured uniform across the face of the lens .
nonpolycarbonate lenses shall also meet num foot drop tests .
the outside face of the lens shall be smooth .
grooves ridges or both that may be used to enhance optical characteristics of the led optical unit shall be located on the inside face of the lens .
num candlepower distribution shall meet minimum ite specifications .
intensity shall be measured uniform across the face of the lens .
brightness shall be maintained in the event of voltage fluctuations or voltage drops .
num beam spread num degrees both horizontally and vertically .
num manufacturers warranty repair or replacement guarantee of five years covering all but accidental damage .
foundations for poles pedestals posts and cabinets shall conform to the requirements of section num .
bonding and grounding jumpers shall be copper wire or copper strap of the same cross sectional area the wire size shall be no .
num awg for all systems except the ground terminal of controllers which shall be no .
num awg .
all exterior parts of the signal heads requiring paint shall be painted federal yellow numb no .
num unless otherwise specified .
traffic signal faces which are rigidly supported on the top and bottom may be of an approved polycarbonate type unless otherwise shown on the plans .
thermoplastic marking material .
thermoplastic marking material shall conform to aashto m num except for the following num num num in paragraph num of the aashto specifications delete the first two sentences and replace with the following the material manufacturer shall have the option of formulating the material according to its own specifications .
however the binder shall be composed of alkyd resins wherein a minimum of num percent by weight of the binder shall be maleic modified glycerol ester of rosin .
the physical and chemical properties contained in this specification shall apply regardless of the type of formulation used .
num in paragraph num of the aashto specifications add the following physical characteristics the infrared spectra of the extracted binder will be compared to the characteristic absorption bands of maleic modified glycerol ester of rosin .
num in paragraph num of the aashto specifications delete the second sentence and replace with the following the containers of thermoplastic material shall weigh approximately num pounds .
preformed plastic material .
preformed plastic pavement marking material shall conform to astm dnum for one of the following requirements num class num tape will not be permitted .
num class num for lane lines crosswalks stop lines and edge lines .
num class num for legends and symbols .
preformed plastic pavement marking color shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
preformed plastic pavement markings shall meet the dimensional requirements of astm dnum .
skid resistance will not be considered a factor for acceptance .
the edges of the preformed plastic pavement marking shall be straight and uniform and consistently adhere to the pavement .
unless otherwise stated in the contract preformed plastic pavement marking shall conform to the following material requirements for the type shown on the plans num num table num preformed plastic pavement marking property type i type iinum type iii minimum thickness mils num num num minimum width in num num num initial retroreflectivity retroreflectivity level i in accordance to astm dnum retroreflectivity level i in accordance to astm dnum retroreflectivity level ii in accordance to astm dnum adhesion fnum roadway surface temperature range of num f num fnum in accordance with astm test method num roadway surface temperature range of num f num fnum in accordance with astm test method num roadway surface temperature range of num f num f in accordance with astm test method num beads ceramic or combination of glass and ceramic ceramic or combination of glass and ceramic glass minimum refractive index num num num surface pattern minimum of num mils and in accordance with astm dnum minimum of num mils and in accordance with astm dnum na num contrast pavement marking to be used for skip lines lane lines and gore markings .
num the adhesion temperature is identical to both the application and test temperatures .
num application at a lower temperature may be permitted as approved by the engineer .
num num preformed thermoplastic material .
a general .
preformed thermoplastic markings shall be composed of aggregates pigments binders and glass beads and shall conform to aashto designation m num with the exception of the relevant differences due to the fact that the material is supplied in a preformed state .
the material shall be either alkyd or hydrocarbon based .
only preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material listed on the departments approved products list may be used .
b physical requirements .
num .
graded glass beads .
the material shall contain a minimum of num percent graded glass beads by weight .
the beads shall be clear and transparent .
twenty percent or less shall consist of irregular fused spheroids or silica .
the refractive index shall be at least num .
num .
pigments .
white sufficient titanium dioxide pigment shall be used to insure a color similar to federal highway white color number num conforming to federal standard num .
yellow sufficient yellow pigment shall be used to insure a color similar to federal highway yellow color number num conforming to federal standard num .
the yellow pigment shall be organic and contain no lead chromate .
num .
skid resistance .
the surface of the preformed thermoplastic markings shall provide a minimum resistance value of num bpn when tested according to astm e num .
num .
thickness .
the material shall be supplied at a minimum thickness of num mils .
num .
environmental resistance .
the preformed thermoplastic material shall be resistant to deterioration due to exposure to sunlight water oil gasoline salt and adverse weather conditions .
pavement marking tape .
a description .
the marking tape shall consist of weather and traffic resistant yellow or white colored reflective material .
the material shall consist of conformable metal foil backing with a pressure sensitive adhesive designed for adhesion to asphalt or concrete surfaces .
b requirements .
num .
color .
the color of the visible or outer surface shall closely match the white or yellow traffic marking paint specified for highway delineation .
glass beads shall be strongly adhered to the tape .
num .
reflectance .
the white and yellow tapes shall have the following initial minimum reflectance values at num and num observation angles and num entrance angle as measured in accordance with the testing num num procedures of federal test method standard num .
the photometric quantity measured is specific luminance sl and is expressed as millicandelas per square meter per lux .
color white yellow observation angle num num num num specific luminance num num num num num .
adhesive .
the striping tape shall be supplied in rolls ready for application and have a precoated pressure sensitive adhesive which shall not have a protective liner or require a solvent activator .
num .
adhesion .
the material shall adhere to asphalt and concrete surfaces when applied at surface temperatures of num f and above .
once applied the tape shall adhere to the pavement at subfreezing temperatures .
num .
conformability .
the material shall be thin flexible conformable and show no cracking flaking or bead loss .
following application the tape shall remain conformed to the texture of the pavement surface .
the thickness of the material shall not be less than num mils .
num .
removability .
the tape shall be removable by following manufacturers recommendations so long as the material is substantially intact .
removal shall not require sandblast solvents or grinding methods .
num .
durability .
the striping material applied in accordance with manufacturers recommended procedures shall be weather resistant and show no appreciable fading lifting or shrinkage during the useful life of the line .
num .
packaging and delivery .
the striping material as supplied shall be of good appearance and free from cracks .
the edges shall be true straight and unbroken .
the material shall be supplied in rolls with no more than one splice per num yards of length .
the striping material shall be packaged in accordance with accepted commercial standards to prevent damage during shipment and storage .
the tape as supplied shall be suitable for use for a period of at least one year following delivery when stored at temperatures of num f or below .
pavement marking tape removable .
pavement marking tape designated in the pay item as removable shall conform to astm d num type i and shall be num num inches wide .
modified epoxy pavement marking material .
only modified epoxy pavement marking material that is on the departments approved products list may be used .
batches or lots of approved products will be accepted on the project by certificate of compliance coc in accordance with subsection num .
the num num coc shall confirm that the material meets all cdot requirements and is the same material that was preapproved in the product evaluation process .
a formulation .
modified epoxy pavement marking material shall be a two component num percent solids material formulated to provide simple volumetric mixing ratio of two volumes of component a and one volume of component b unless otherwise recommended by the material manufacturer .
b composition .
the component a of both white and yellow shall be within the following limits resin pigment components by weight pigment white yellow tionum astm dnum type ii num num organic yellow num epoxy resin num num the pigment for yellow modified epoxy shall contain no lead or other material such that the cured epoxy could be considered a hazardous waste under epa or cdphe regulations .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a manufacturers certification of compliance with this requirement .
c epoxide number .
the epoxide number of the modified epoxys resin shall be the manufacturers target value num as determined by astm d num for white and yellow component a on pigment free basis .
d amine number .
the amine number on the curing agent component b shall be the manufacturers target value num per astm d num. e toxicity .
upon heating to application temperature the material shall not produce fumes which are toxic or injurious to persons or property .
f color .
the modified epoxy material without dropon beads shall correspond following requirements white federal standard no .
numbnum .
the yellowness index yi of white shall not exceed num per astm enum initially .
after num quv exposure per astm gnum with a uvanum lamp at an irradiance of num wmnumnm with alternating cycles of num hours u.v num f and num hours humidity num f the yi shall not exceed num when measured per astm enum .
the yi after numhour quv testing as above shall not exceed num .
yellow materials for pavement markings shall meet the initial daytime chromaticity that fall within the box created by the following corner points num num initial daytime chromaticity coordinates corner points num num num num x num num num num y num num num num after numhour quv exposure per astm gnum with a uvanum lamp at an irradiance of num wmnumnm with alternating cycles of num hours u.v num f and num hours humidity num f the yellow shall fall within the initial chromaticity coordinates stated above .
g drying time .
the modified epoxy pavement marking material shall have a setting time to a notracking condition of not more than num minutes at a temperature of num f and above .
h curing .
the modified epoxy material shall be capable of fully curing under the constant surface temperature condition of num f and above .
i adhesion to concrete .
the catalyzed modified epoxy pavement marking material when tested according to aci method num shall have such a high degree of adhesion to the specified num psi minimum concrete surface that there shall be a num percent concrete failure in the performance of this test j hardness .
the modified epoxy pavement marking materials when tested according to astm dnum shall have a minimum shore d hardness value of num .
samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated test .
k abrasion resistance .
the abrasion resistance shall be evaluated on a taber abrader with a num gram load and csnum wheels .
the duration of the test shall be num cycles .
the wear index shall be calculated based on astm test method cnum and the wear index for the catalyzed material shall not be more than num .
the tests shall be run on cured samples of material which have been applied at film thickness of num  mils to code snum stainless steel plates .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at num num f for a minimum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
l tensile strength .
when tested according to astm dnum the modified epoxy pavement marking materials shall have a tensile strength of at least num psi .
the type iv specimens shall be cast in a suitable mold and pulled at the rate of  inch per minute by a suitable dynamic testing machine .
the samples shall be allowed to cure at room temperature num num f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the indicated tests .
m compressive strength .
when tested according to astm dnum the catalyzed modified epoxy pavement marking materials shall have a compressive strength of at least num psi .
the cast sample shall be conditioned at room num num temperature num num f for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours prior to performing the tests .
the rate of compression of these samples shall be no more than  inch per minute .
raised pavement marker .
raised pavement marker shall not be less than num inches or more than num inches in the major dimension and not more than num inch in height .
the marker shall contain a retroreflective element at least num square inch in area .
the color of the marker and the retroreflective element shall match the color of the pavement marking line .
the reflective quality requirements shall be at least equal to the following minimum values observation angle degrees entrance angle degrees specific intensity candela per lux white yellow num num num num num num num num the marker shall be ceramic or plastic and shall be secured to old or new pavement using an adhesive approved by the marker manufacturer .
methyl methacrylate pavement marking .
the methyl methacrylate material shall be preapproved by the department .
num num section num prestressed unit materials prestressing steel .
prestressing reinforcement shall be manufactured from high tensile strength steel or alloyed steel .
reinforcement size and grade shall be designated in the contract .
prestressing steel materials shall meet the appropriate following requirements num seven wire steel strand shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
all furnished strand shall be weldless in accordance with aashto m num subsection num .
the contractor shall furnish one test specimen per coil .
each test specimen shall be num to num feet long .
num high tensile alloy bars shall meet the requirements of aashto m num .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the contractor shall furnish two test bars per diameter size per heat number .
each test bar shall be num feet in length .
all testing specimens shall be furnished free of cost .
if test specimens are not delivered in time for tests to be performed prior to time of use the contractor may elect to incorporate materials into the work at the contractors own risk .
all test specimens shall be representative of the furnished material lot .
if ordered by the engineer selection of test samples shall be witnessed by the engineers representative at any location chosen by the engineer .
all prestressing unit materials shall be subject to interim inspection and testing before during and after incorporation into the work as ordered by the engineer .
anchorage assemblies .
if the anchorage assemblies are not attached to the reinforcement samples the contractor shall furnish two anchorage assemblies complete with distribution plates for each size or type to be used when requested by the engineer .
posttensioning products .
the following lengths of materials shall be furnished by the contractor num for strand to be furnished with fittings num feet between near ends of fittings .
num for bars to be furnished with threaded ends and nuts num feet threads at ends .
num num section num lighting and electrical materials general .
materials shall be of a standard line from a name brand manufacturer .
electrical material shall be listed by the underwriters laboratories inc. and shall conform to the national electrical code .
material shall be the same as or compatible with that used and accepted by the agency responsible for maintenance .
the engineer may inspect all lighting materials and all electrical materials and accept or reject them at the project site .
samples may be taken or manufacturers certifications may be accepted in lieu of samples .
light standard foundations and concrete foundation pads .
concrete shall be class b conforming to section num .
anchor bolts shall be designed by the contractors engineer and shown on the working drawings .
the threaded ends of the anchor bolts the nuts and the washers shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
galvanizing on anchor bolts shall extend num to num inches beyond the threads .
reinforcing steel shall conform to section num .
light standards .
a general .
all structural components of light standards bases couplers anchor bolts luminaires and other attachments to be used for lighting shall be designed for a minimum of num mph wind velocity in accordance with aashtos standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
all breakaway bases and couplers shall meet the breakaway requirements specified in aashtos standard specification for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals section num .
conformance shall be verified by crash tests reviewed and accepted by fhwa .
a certificate of compliance shall be provided .
b metal light standards .
metal light standards shall be fabricated of either steel or aluminum unless otherwise specified .
whenever light standard metal is specified the contractor may furnish either steel or aluminum .
material type and shape of light standards shall be the same throughout the project unless otherwise shown in the contract .
all standards shall have cableentrance holes located in conformity with the type of arm mounting used .
metal surfaces shall be free of imperfections marring the appearance and of burrs or sharp edges that might damage the cable .
all metal poles shall be tapered and shall be supplied with pole caps .
num num aluminum alloys shall have a minimum yield strength of num psi .
aluminum poles arms and fittings shall be made of aluminum alloy conforming to the following for the material form required astm standard alloy number b num numtnum b num numtnum b num numtnum numtnum numtnum b num numtnum numtnum aluminum poles may also be made of aluminum alloy numhnum conforming to astm bnum excluding pressure and burst tests .
aluminum mast arms shall be tapered unless otherwise shown on the plans .
steel mast arms shall be made of schedule num standard steel pipe conforming to astm anum .
all steel poles mast arms and base flanges shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
units on which the spelter coating has been damaged shall be repaired as provided in aashto m num or other approved method .
base flanges for both aluminum and steel poles shall have continuous welds both inside and outside unless otherwise permitted .
base flanges inserted into the pole and bonded shall meet the requirements for materials and strength stated herein .
base flanges for aluminum poles and transformer bases shall be aluminum castings of alloy ansi numtnum or uns anum tnum conforming to astm bnum or an acceptable equivalent .
each metal light standard shall be wired with a breakaway fused connector of proper capacity rating .
the fused connector shall be located in the transformer base .
if the light standard has no transformer base the fused connector shall be located in the pole at the hand hole .
all transformer bases shall have vandal resistant removable access doors .
the transformer base shall be a frangible breakaway type as shown on the plans and shall accommodate the anchorage and base flange of the light pole supplied .
each transformer base shall have a  inch bolt or lug fastened inside the base for grounding the lug or bolt shall be visible from the door opening .
the transformer base shall have a wire hole for outside grounding if required .
num num c hardware .
hardware used with steel standards shall be either cadmium plated steel hot dip galvanized steel or stainless steel .
all hardware used with aluminum standards shall be anodized aluminum or stainless steel .
bolts to be inserted in aluminum threads shall be stainless steel .
luminaires and lamps .
luminaires shall be ul or etl listed for use in wet locations and ipnum rated .
luminaires shall be adaptable to the type of power distribution system to be used .
a general .
luminaires shall conform to the following requirements num .
housing .
the luminaire enclosure shall be an injectionmolded or diecast opaque housing .
the housing shall have a powdercoated corrosion resistant finish .
the color shall be as specified on the plans .
the mounting shall be as shown on the plans .
the housing shall have a door that provides access to all internal components .
the door shall be equipped with a safety catch and a latch .
the housing shall have an inner rolled flange to support the door frame .
the door frame shall be an aluminum casting hinged to the housing .
the door frame shall be sealed to the housing with a molded silicone gasket and shall be secured with a minimum of four captive screws .
num .
optical chamber .
the luminaire distribution shall be equal to or less than an illuminating engineering society of north america ies tmnum backlight uplight and glare bug ratings listed below in table num based on initial lumens or light loss factor llf num .
roadway luminaires with a u value greater than unum shall not be accepted .
the optical chamber shall be completely sealed from the housing or the housing shall be completely sealed .
a seamless one piece memory retentive gasket shall seal the optical chamber or housing against the luminaire lens door .
all wires entering the optical chamber shall be gasketed at their point of entry .
socket mountings rivets used in the construction or support of the reflector system and all other penetrations into the optical chamber shall be completely sealed .
the optical chamber shall be water tight when the luminaire door is closed .
num num table num backlight uplight and glare bug values luminaire mounting location minimum initial luminaire lumen range backlight b rating maximum uplight u rating maximum glare g rating maximum non median mounted less than num bnum unum gnum num num bnum unum gnum above num bnum unum gnum median mounted less than num bnum unum gnum num num bnum unum gnum above num bnum unum gnum by special application only .
num .
lens and lens door .
the lens shall be constructed of clear flat for lamps over num lumens tempered glass .
the glass shall be thermalresistant and impactresistant .
the lens shall be sealed to the door frame with continuous silicone gasketing .
the door shall have an easyaccess quick release safety latch .
the door shall have aluminum or stainless steel quickrelease hinge pins for toolless or onehand easy and secure opening .
when the door is closed the electrical component compartment and the optical chamber shall be completely sealed .
num .
electrical components .
all components shall be listed for wet locations by underwriters laboratory ul or by an occupational safety health administration nationally recognized testing laboratory osha nrtl .
luminaires shall operate from num to num vac as specified on the plans or be adaptable to the type of power distribution system to be used .
all internal wiring and quick disconnects shall be rated for at least num vac and insulated for numf .
the dimmable driver shall be easily removable from the luminaire housing without the use of tools .
the following components shall be in accordance with corresponding sections of ansi cnum num .
wiring and grounding .
num .
terminal blocks for incoming ac lines .
num .
photocontrol receptacle .
num .
latching and hinging .
num num b roadway luminaires .
roadway luminaires shall be led type with integral driver flat lens aluminum housing and be ul listed for wet locations .
all luminaires for the project shall be the same type and design unless the plans specify otherwise .
num the luminaire and all components shall be ul or intertek testing services etl listed for wet location and shall have minimum ingress protection rating of ipnum .
num the light source shall be composed of led modules connected to a nonintegrated driver and be ready for connection to a production line luminaire .
luminaires utilizing integrated driver led light sources screwbased products or panel retrofit products shall not be used .
num the luminaire shall have a type ii or iii distribution for nonmedian mounted luminaires and type ii iii iv or v distribution for median mounted luminaires .
num transmissive optical components shall be applied in accordance with led manufacturers original equipment manufacturer oem design guidelines to ensure suitability for the environment in which the luminaire is installed .
num luminaires shall utilize an adjustable slipfittertype mounting system for installation on numinch numinch o.d .
to numinch numinch o.d .
diameter pipe tenons .
slipfitter shall consist of a twopiece clamp and four num inch hex bolts .
slipfitter shall allow for a vertical tilt adjustment of num percent in order to mount luminaire plumb for a unum rating .
luminaires shall be equipped with integrated leveling bubble .
num access to all internal parts requiring replacement shall not require tools i.e .
toolless entry .
num the luminaire housing shall be constructed of aluminum alloy .
num the power supplydriver shall be provided in compliance with subsection num .
the driver must be internal and thermally separated from the led compartment .
num the dimming photocell receptacle shall conform to subsection numd below .
num the luminaire finish shall be corrosion resistant super triglycidyl isocyanurate tgic polyester powdercoat .
the color shall be gray .
i powder coat super tgic polyester powder coat num mil nominal thickness .
ii finish shall exceed a rating of num per astm dnum after numhrs of testing per astm bnum .
num num iii the coating shall exhibit no greater than num reduction of gloss per astm dnum after num hours of quv testing at astm gnum cycle num .
num the effective projected area epa for windloading calculations shall be no greater than num square feet .
num the luminaire weight shall not exceed num pounds .
num the luminaire shall be tested in accordance with ies lmnum and tmnum certifying photometric performance and rated life respectively .
lmnum performance and tmnum predicted life at numoc testing shall both be for the same luminaires operating drive current as specified .
num the luminaire shall have a maximum backlight rating as shown in table num an uplight rating of unum and a maximum glare rating as shown in table num .
num the luminaire system efficacy shall not be less than num luminaire lumens per input watt .
num the luminaire shall have an external label per ansi cnum and internal label per ansi cnum .
c light sources .
led luminaires shall not be retrofit to existing luminaire housing the contractor shall replace the housing along with the luminaire as a single unit .
light sources shall be compatible with dimmable drivers supplied with the luminaires in which they are to be installed .
all light sources of a similar type shall be provided by the same manufacturer .
led light sources shall meet or exceed the following requirements num cct cri and flux i correlated color temperature cct all led light sources shall emit white light and have a cct no greater than numk nominal in accordance with ansi cnum .
ii color rendering index cri all led light sources shall have a minimum color rendering index cri of num in accordance with the lmnum test results .
iii luminous flux led light sources shall not exceed the junction temperature recommended by the led manufacturer .
luminous flux differences between leds shall not exceed num percent .
num leds shall have a minimum rated life of num hours per ies tmnum at num c at the normal operating driver current for the specific luminaire .
the lumen output shall be maintained at num percent of initial rated lumens lnum or greater at the rated life of the luminaire .
num num num leds shall be temperature rated for operation and storage within the range of num c to num c and shall withstand low and high frequency vibration ansi cnum vibration level numg over the rated life of the light source .
num cooling system i mechanical design of protruding external surfaces e.g .
heat sink fins shall facilitate hosedown cleaning and discourage debris accumulation .
ii the cooling system must be passive utilizing heat sinks convection or conduction .
iii fans diaphragms pumps or liquids shall not be used .
d photocontrol receptacle .
each roadway luminaire shall be furnished with a multicontact twistlock outdoor lighting dimming receptacle per ansi cnum .
led drivers .
led drivers shall conform to the following num dimming signal protocols are numvdc or digital addressable lighting interface dali .
num the operating voltage shall be numvolt at num hz and the driver shall operate normally with input voltage fluctuations of num percent consistent with nema sslnum electronic drivers for led devices arrays or systems .
num the minimum power factor pf shall be num at full input power and across specified voltage range .
num the maximum total harmonic distortion thd shall be num percent at full input power and across specified voltage range .
num the factoryset drive current shall be numma or less unless approved by engineer .
if higher drive currents are proposed the submittal must be accompanied with ies lmnum and tmnum test results for higher operating drive current .
num drivers shall be restriction of hazardous substances rohs compliant .
num the rated case temperature shall conform to subsection num c num .
num all electronics of the power supply and the leds shall be protected from all electrical surges with an elevated electrical immunity rating including but not limited to lightning strikes and stray current in rebar and concrete .
surge protection shall be integral to the led power supply .
num the luminaire including driver shall consume no more than num watts in the off state power .
num num num electrical immunity including surge protection the luminaire shall meet the elevated requirements per ieee cnum num .
the manufacturer shall indicate whether failure of the electrical immunity system can possibly result in disconnection of power from the luminaire .
num electromagnetic interference the driver shall comply with federal communications commission fcc num code of federal regulations cfr part num nonconsumer radio frequency interference rfi andor electromagnetic interference emi standards .
conduit .
unless otherwise specified conduit shall be rigid metallic or semirigid plastic electrical conduit .
metallic conduit shall be clean free of burrs and galvanized .
plastic conduit shall be a semirigid type currently recommended and approved by underwriters laboratories inc. for the proposed use .
underground plastic conduit for street lighting shall conform to astmfnum schedule num .
fittings shall be the type used outside the conduit .
fittings shall connect the conduit in a manner that makes the joints watertight .
junction boxes used in structures shall be galvanized steel num inches square by num inches deep with weatherproof covers .
pull boxes and splice boxes shall be a minimum of num inches by num inches and num inches deep unless otherwise shown on the plans .
pull and splice boxes shall have heavy duty weatherproof covers rated for roadway applications .
the housing shall be resistant to sunlight exposure weathering and chemicals it shall be unaffected by freezethaw cycles .
covers shall fit flush to the sidewalk turf area or roadway surface .
hardware and inserts shall be stainless steel .
the cover for street lighting circuits shall be marked electrical or street lighting .
the cover shall list the minimum hs load rating of num psi .
lighting circuitry and wiring .
lighting systems shall be photoelectric controlled .
photoelectric controls shall be the hermetically sealed cadmium sulfide twistlock type with high impact polypropylene cover with clear uv stabilized window .
photoelectric controls shall have a turnon setting of num footcandles num footcandles .
the maximum ratio of the turnoff to turnon setting shall be num .
all electrical apparatus used in the lighting system shall be rated to adequately handle the necessary loads and shall conform to power source requirements .
bonding and grounding shall conform to the requirements of subsection num c. secondary service pedestals and lighting control centers .
secondary service pedestals and lighting control centers shall be metal conforming to ansi cnum pad mounted enclosure integrity standard and shall be the nominal size and dimensions shown in the contract .
the cabinets shall be constructed of num gauge corrosionresistant steel with hoods and covers constructed of num gauge corrosionresistant steel .
cabinets shall be num num nema num construction and shall be ul listed as enclosed industrial control equipment ulnum .
cabinets shall be vandal resistant deadfront enclosures .
the cabinets external finish shall be polyurethane industrial grade powder paint of num mil minimum thickness .
the cabinets internal finish shall be polyurethane industrial grade powder paint of num mil minimum thickness or bare aluminum .
all external fasteners rivets screws and bolts shall be stainless steel .
fasteners except sealing screws shall not be removable by external access .
hinges shall be stainless steel continuous piano hinge type hinges .
external nameplates shall be permanently attached to the cabinet .
a stainless steel handle shall be provided on the front exterior of each cabinet door or hood .
cabinet shall be equipped with a three point catch and lock .
these locks shall be furnished with two keys for each cabinet and all locks shall be master keyed type i police lock .
when final acceptance of the project is made the engineer will distribute the keys to the agencies responsible for maintenance of the system .
the cabinet shall have separate isolated sections for metering equipment if required utility termination and cdot equipment .
all sections must be sealed and pad lockable .
the metering section shall have a hinged swing back hood with an integral hinged polycarbonate sealable window for visual access to meters .
the utility termination section shall be sealed and securable with a padlock .
the section shall have a lift off cover with a stainless steel handle .
sufficient clearance shall be provided for a num inch diameter conduit for utility cables .
utility landing lugs shall be ul listed and shall accommodate num num kcmil conductors .
the cdot compartment door shall be sealed and securable with a padlock .
the compartment door shall be anchorable in an open position .
there shall be a print pocket on the inside of the door .
the print pocket shall hold all wiring schematics and instructions in a clear weatherproof sleeve with a side opening .
required ul labeling shall be located on the inside of the cdot door .
distribution and control equipment shall be behind an internal deadfront door with a quarterturn securing latch and be hinged to open more than num degrees .
the deadfront door shall be hinged on the same side as the cdot section door .
pedestal mounting bolts shall not be visible or accessible externally .
pedestal mounting shall include pedestal mounting base and hardware .
pad mounting shall include concrete pad mounting base anchor bolt kit and hardware .
secondary service pedestals and lighting control centers shall be rated for num vac installed with protection against damage from greater currents .
the pedestals and centers shall be grounded with grounding rods in conformance with the national electric code .
the following equipment is for a typical installation and may or may not be required as shown on the plans num num num meter sockets num amp minimum .
num main circuit breaker that is installed in a circuit load center as sized on the plans .
num circuit load center with an allcopper bus for cdot loads as shown on the plans .
num circuit breakers .
num ground fault interrupter receptacle num amp num vac .
num multiple pole light contactors .
num test switch .
num photoelectronic control relay .
num mounting pans or false backs for circuit breakers contactors relays switches transformers and other types of electrical equipment mounted inside the cabinet .
the internal wiring of cabinets shall be assembled by a ul listed facility .
cabinets shall conform to one or more of the following standards where appropriate ul num cabinets and boxes ul num panel boards and ul numa service equipment .
circuit breakers and equipment shall be labeled with an engraved permanent label on the deadfront panel to indicate the circuit controlled .
multiple pole light contactors shall be lighting type specifically rated for the type of lighting load specified .
the contactors shall have a num volt rating .
all multiple pole light contactors shall be unenclosed single phase with the number of poles specified on plans they shall be open type lighting contactors with the rating shown or specified .
contactors shall be constructed for surface mounting on a false back or bracket within a weatherproof cabinet .
the contactor coil shall operate on num volt for num volt circuits and num volt num volt and num volt for num volt circuits .
contact material shall be designed for lighting ballast loads and require no maintenance such as filing burnishing or dressing at any time the contactor is in service .
a num vac rated test switch shall be installed in the control cabinets if shown .
the test switch shall be a heavyduty single pole switch or circuit breaker rated at num amps and shall be installed in the control cabinet as a roadway lighting test switch .
the switch shall be wired to shunt the photoelectric control relay power contactor and energize the lighting circuit contactors .
all components of the photoelectric control relays shall be housed in a weatherproof locking nonrusting container .
the photoelectric control relay shall attach to a three pole locking receptacle by a twisting motion .
the photoelectronic control shall have a built in surge protective device for protection from induced high voltage and overcurrents .
the photoelectric control relay shall meet or exceed the requirements of ansi cnum .
the photoelectric control shall be factory set to turn on lights when ambient light falls to num footcandle plus or minus num footcandle when operated at num vac .
when operated at num vac turn on shall not change more than plus or minus num num num footcandle from the num vac value .
the maximum off to on ratio shall be num .
the photoelectric control shall be a cadmium sulfide photoelectric control encapsulated for humidity protection or a silicon junction type photo transistor .
the photoelectric control shall be designed for normal operation at a dual voltage of num v and num v. power consumption shall be less than num watt .
at the designated voltage the photoelectric control shall be capable of controlling a minimum load of num watts .
minimum operating temperature range shall be from num f to num f. a time delay control circuit shall prevent false turn offs by transient lighting conditions .
the unit shall include a failsafe circuit for the lighting load such that the lighting systems remain energized if any functional failure of the photoelectric control circuit occurs .
num num section num water line materials cast iron pipe .
cast iron pipe shall conform to the requirements of federal specification wwpnum class num with type iii mechanical joints .
welded steel pipe .
welded steel pipe shall be of the length diameter and metal thickness shown on the plans and shall conform to the following num pipe shall conform to the applicable requirements of awwa standard c num section num manufactured from steel sheets conforming to astm anum grade num or num plates conforming to astm anum grade c or d or astm anum grade num or it shall be manufactured to meet the requirements of astm a num grade b or astm anum grade b or c. num surface preparation and coating .
inside and outside surfaces shall be blast cleaned with sand steel grit steel shot or a combination of steel grit and steel shot to remove mill scale and rust in accordance with subsection numb .
pipe that is cement mortar lined in accordance with awwa standard cnum shall not be blast cleaned .
paint and coating schedule for pipe larger than num inch shall conform to table num .
table num for pipes carrying potable water pipes to be disinfected after installation in accordance with awwa standards buried pipe exposed pipe interior exterior interior exterior lined with cement mortar in accordance with awwa standard c num num mil thickness tape coating systems for the exterior of steel water pipelines in accordance with awwa standard c num lined with cement mortar in accordance with awwa standard c num or coal tar epoxy in accordance with corps of engineers c num subsections num and num for pipes carrying nonpotable water and for sewers buried pipe exposed pipe interior exterior interior exterior lined with cement mortar in accordance with awwa standard c num or coal tar epoxy in accordance with corps of engineers c num num mil thickness tape coating systems for the exterior of steel water pipelines in accordance with awwa standard c num lined with cement mortar in accordance with awwa standard c num or coal tar epoxy in accordance with corps of engineers c num subsections num and num num num type of pipe and its coating for pipe num inch and smaller shall be as shown on the plans .
bell and spigot ends with rubber gaskets flanges mechanical couplings or field welded joints may be used as conditions require to join the pipe .
all field welds shall conform to section num and shall have linings and coatings replaced equal to the original coating .
wire brushing shall be used where necessary to clean the pipe .
where cement mortar lining is used with welded joints or bell and spigot ends with rubber gaskets the joint cut back shall be mortared after the pipe has been laid .
this cement mortar lining and application shall conform to awwa standard c num .
on buried pipe coated with a tape coating system conforming to awwa standard c num the field joints shall be cleaned primed and wrapped with two thicknesses of num mil cold applied elastomeric joint tape conforming to awwa standard c num type num .
damage to the pipe lining or coating due to the contractors operation shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
galvanized pipe .
galvanized pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
copper pipe .
copper pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum type k and shall be annealed .
pipe shall be supplied with solder type fittings .
plastic pipe .
polyethylene pipe pe shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum when size type and schedule or series are designated or astm dnum when size and pressure ratings are designated .
polyvinyl chloride pipe pvc shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum when size and schedule are designated or astm dnum when size and pressure ratings are designated .
all plastic pipe used as water pipe must bear the national sanitation foundation nsf seal of approval .
unused valves and valve boxes .
valves shall be designed to exceed the required working pressure of the water line but shall not be less than the values herein .
a gate valves .
num .
general .
valves shall have nonrising stems unless otherwise specified with inside screw and shall open to the left or counterclockwise .
valves shall be equipped with double oring stem seals conforming to awwa cnum .
all valves shall have the manufacturers names catalog number and working pressure molded or stamped thereon .
valves shall be painted as specified in awwa cnum section num and shall be furnished complete with all accessories .
ends of valve shall fit the pipe or fitting to which attached pushon mechanical bellandspigot or flanged .
num num gate valves shall be for buried service however they shall be protected against freezing above the frost line .
num .
valves smaller than num inch .
valves shall be of the wedgedisc type with nonrising stem screw ends and bronze body .
metal composition of the body centerpiece and other cast parts shall be cast bronze meeting the requirements of astm b num .
all packing shall have each ring cut to fit with staggered joints .
continuous spiralled packing shall not be used .
valves shall be provided with handwheels and stuffing box glands .
unless otherwise specified valves shall be for num pound water service .
num .
valves num inch and larger .
valves num inch and larger shall conform to awwa cnum except that they may be furnished with num inch square operating nuts or handwheels .
bypasses when required shall conform to the details shown on the plans or established .
the intended position of the valve in the water line either horizontal or vertical shall be as shown on the plans .
b other valves .
butterfly valves globe valves air relief valves check valves tapping valve and sleeve and other appurtenances shall be as shown on the plans .
c valve boxes .
unless otherwise specified or shown on the plans valve boxes shall be of the adjustable screw type complete with drop cover .
num num section num rest area and building materials general .
all materials and equipment shall be new and shall be of recognized standard quality .
masonry and masonry wall reinforcement .
a masonry .
concrete blocks or concrete ornamental blocks shall be light weight aggregate concrete blocks conforming to astm cnum type num .
corner block shall be installed at all wall openings .
all block shall be uniform in color and be smooth textured .
ornamental block shall be of the type as scheduled on the plans .
structural glazed tile shall be of the types color and sizes shown on the plans .
face brick shall be num inch x num  inch x num inch nominal num inch modular size brick .
brick required at ends of rowlock shall be solid brick no holes .
all face brick shall conform to astm cnum grade sw type fbs rough .
the style of brick to be used shall be as scheduled on the plans .
b masonry wall reinforcement .
masonry wall reinforcement for curtain walls shelter wall panels and information center wall panels shall be ladder type for num inch wall num gauge galvanized with deformed side rods .
z ties for cavity walls of building shall be num inch x num inch galvanized rod .
corrugated wall ties shall be  inch x num inch x num gauge galvanized steel .
mortar for masonry and structural glazed tile .
mortar shall conform to subsection num .
coloring shall be added to the mortar for the face brick to yield a mortar compatible with or approximating the color of the face brick .
remixing or retempering of mortar will not be permitted .
waterproofing compound shall be used in all mortar .
mixing waterproofing compound with mortar shall be in strict accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
metal specialties .
a metal toilet stalls .
metal compartments for toilet rooms shall be of the type and style as scheduled on the plans .
each toilet compartment shall be furnished with a cast alloy chrome plated combination coat hook and bumper and a chrome plated singlefold type toilet paper dispenser .
b mirrors .
mirrors shall have clear anodized aluminum or stainless steel vandal proof frames with finish similar to num satin stainless steel .
corners shall be mitered and reinforced .
mirror glass shall be  inch thick num quality polished plate num inch wide x num inch high of the type and style as scheduled on the plans .
num num sanitary napkin disposal .
sanitary napkin disposal shall be of the type and style as scheduled on the plans .
doors frames and windows .
general .
all steel doors door frames and windows shall be as scheduled on the plans .
all doors shall be full flush type with no exposed seams .
a frame and window construction .
all frames shall be no .
num gauge steel with num inch face  inch or  inch integral stops and num  inch or num  inch depth .
window frames and door frames shall be shipped as set up when welded units are used with all comers and intersections welded and ground smooth .
frames may be knockeddown when units with steel tabs are furnished .
window frames shall have bottom panels of heights shown on the plans .
hinge jambs shall be mortised for num  inches x num  inches template hinges and prepared for the ansi universal lock strike or approved equal .
b door hardware .
hardware shall be reinforced and completely prepared for field attachment into drilled and tapped holes .
all hardware whether specifically mentioned or not required to fully complete the work as shown on the plans and in the specifications shall be included and of the same type and quality as that specified herein .
all hardware shall be as scheduled on the plans .
lockset shall conform to federal specification ffhnumb series numcnum where applicable and shall be mortise type .
finish of all hardware shall be u.s. num as identified in fed .
spec .
ffhnumb sec .
num table ii .
c hardware sets .
for hardware locations refer to the door schedule on the plans .
d keying .
all doors shall be keyed alike .
three keys shall be furnished per building .
ceramic tile .
unless otherwise specified all tile shall conform to astm cnum .
all floor tile shall be delivered to the job in unopened sealed containers .
they shall be accompanied with a certificate of grade signed by the manufacturer and the contractor together with adequate identification of the containers .
ceramic floor tile shall be of unglazed tile of the style and pattern as scheduled on the plans .
ceramic tile for the mosaic shall be num inch x num inch squares and part squares .
the colors and placement shall be as shown on the plans .
the contractor shall submit samples to the engineer for approval in duplicate of each kind of tile proposed for use .
when approved one sample shall be retained for comparison with the finished work .
num num roofing flashing and roof insulation .
general .
all roofing materials shall bear the manufacturers label on sealed packages .
all insulation shall be marked for proper identification .
asphalt for applying roofing shall conform to astm dnum types i and iii .
felt for roofing shall be type ii num pound type not perforated for the base sheet and type i num pound type perforated for additional layers .
felt shall conform to astm dnum .
roofing aggregate shall meet the quality requirements of subsection num and shall be graded uniformly with num percent passing the num mm  inch screen and num percent retained on the num mm no .
num screen .
lumber shall be construction grade or better douglas fir larch or hemlock .
shingles shall be good grade no .
num cedar shingles with a weight of at least num pounds per bundle .
all membrane roofing shall be num ply .
lumber roofing shall be as shown on the plans .
all joints shall be sealed with a two component type polysulfidebase synthetic rubber sealant or an approved equal .
sealant shall meet the requirements of ansi anum class b. primer shall conform to the requirements of the manufacturer of the sealant used .
joint filler used as back up for sealant shall be plastic foam joint filler .
care shall be taken to ensure that backup material shall not contain any asphalt .
asphalt is incompatible with this type sealant .
carpentry .
ceiling panels adhesive for panels moldings to conceal joints corners and intersections of panels and walls color and style of panels shall be as scheduled on the plans .
interior insulation .
all insulation except that required for roof or in frame walls shall be expanded polystyrene having a k factor of num average at a mean temperature of num f and a perm rating of num or less with thicknesses as shown on the plans .
adhesive for bonding the insulation to the masonry walls shall be an asphalt emulsion material that is acceptable to the manufacturer of the insulation .
insulation required for underside of roof or in frame walls shall be blankettype fiber glass thickness as shown on the plans with a density of  pound per cubic foot and shall have a vapor barrier of the embossed vinyl scrim reinforced aluminum foil type .
glass and glazing .
all glass shall be obscure type  thick rough one side and polished one side or as called for on the plans .
all glass shall bear the identifying label of the manufacturer .
num num trash receptacles .
the trash receptacles shall be of the type and style as scheduled on the plans .
each receptacle shall be furnished with num disposable polyethylene liners .
receptacles shall be painted with baked enamel finish metallic gray bottom and sea mist top .
paint and special coating .
the special makes of prepared paints sealant or special coatings that may be specified or otherwise required must be delivered in the original package with the seals unbroken and labels attached .
plumbing .
the sanitary drainage system within the building and to the septic tank or sanitary hookup shall be made of standard weight cast iron soil pipe .
the pipe shall be furnished in standard lengths with inner and outer surfaces concentric smooth inside and free from defects .
any pipe cracked in cutting shall be removed .
cast iron pipe including bell shall weigh at least the following average weights per num foot of length num inches num pounds num inches num pounds num inches num pounds num inches num pounds fittings for cast iron pipe shall be standard design fittings of the same inside diameter as the pipe with which they are used and of equal quality and weight in all parts .
cast iron pipe and fittings shall conform to commercial standard cs num for standard weight cast iron soil pipe and fittings .
lead for caulking joints in cast iron pipe shall be soft pig .
all oakum shall be pitched .
use num ounces of lead for each num inch diameter of pipe used .
all hot and cold water piping and supply lines above grade shall be type l copper pipe with sweated and brazed fittings .
pipe valves and fittings shall be of bridgeport case or mueller or an approved equal .
connections involving different metals shall require a dielectric union .
solder shall be num tin and antimony and shall be applied as per manufacturers instructions .
underground water lines under concrete slab of the building shall be astm bnum type k hard drawn copper pipe with brazed fittings .
brazing material shall be silver solder .
pipe for sewage vent lines shall conform to the colorado plumbing code .
a suitable vent screen shall be provided for each vent line .
underground water line to building sanitary station and trailer pad shall be num psi pressure rated virgin polyethylene pipe .
num num fittings shall be of polyethylene or nylon with stainless steel clamps .
all pipe and fittings shall be approved by the national sanitation foundation and shall bear that mark .
heating and ventilating .
a heaters .
the wall heaters shall be of the make and model scheduled on the plans .
the forced air furnace shall be of the make and model scheduled on the plans with adjustable pulley type belt drive blower .
motor shall be num vnum cycle single phase .
furnace shall be complete with cabinet electric heating section blower filters motor belt drive adjustable pulley on motor safety controls relays and all other items as may be incidentally required for a complete and ready to operate installation .
capacity shall be as indicated on the plans .
b grills .
grill location model style and sizes shall be as shown on the plans .
c thermostat .
thermostats shall be as specified under electrical work in subsection num. d exhaust fan and curb .
exhaust fan shall be of the make and model scheduled on the plans .
fan shall be mounted on a prefabricated curb equipped with automatic back draft damper .
fan shall be operated by a timer .
fasten curb directly on top of sheathing .
e duct work .
duct work shall be fabricated from galvanized steel sheets in accordance with recommended practice as outlined in the current edition of the american society of heating refrigeration and air conditioning engineering guide .
aluminum may be used at the contractors option and shall conform to gauge shown in the table below .
all duct work shall be fabricated from the one material selected by the contractor .
the following sheet gauges and thicknesses shall be used throughout maximum side inch steel u.s .
gauge aluminum thickness inch type of transverse joint bracing up to num num .num s drive pocket or bar slips on num centers none num to num num .num none num to num num .num num x num x  at num other joint connections of equivalent mechanical strength and air tightness may be used .
the flat side of all ducts shall be cross broken .
num num all horizontal ducts are to be supported with angle iron hangers secured to the construction above at intervals not to exceed num .
all vertical riser ducts shall be supported at floor and ceiling with angle iron rests secured to the ducts .
f outlets inlets and vents .
all outlets inlets and vents shall be of the type and style called for on the plans or an approved equal .
electrical .
a conduit .
conduit below grade finish floor elevation or embedded in concrete shall be rigid steel hot dipped sherardized or galvanized unless otherwise specified .
each length of conduit shall be stamped with the name or trade mark of the manufacturer and shall bear the underwriters laboratories inc. label .
thin wall electrical metallic tubing conduit will be permitted above grade unless otherwise noted on the plans .
b conduit fittings .
conduit fittings shall be compatible with the conduit furnished with cast covers and where installed exposed to the elements shall have vellum or fiber gaskets .
c conductors .
all num and num volt wire and cable shall be single conductor soft drawn copper wire with num volt insulation .
type tw shall be used for overhead runs .
type thw shall be used in runs under floor slab inside building .
cable serving water wells may be one cable of num conductor type use three single conductors type use placed in the same trench or num conductor type uf with ground wire .
the wire size shall be as shown on the plans with no splices below ground .
cable serving outdoor lighting may be one cable of num conductors type use or two single conductors type use placed in the same trench .
the wire size shall be as shown on the plans with no splices below ground .
main service cables shall be type use .
wire size shall be as shown on the plans for direct burial type .
cable sheathing and insulation shall conform to astm dnum .
splices will not be allowed between the utility pole and the main circuit breakers at building .
all wire smaller than num awg shall be solid copper and all wire num awg and larger shall be stranded copper wire .
aluminum wire will not be allowed .
wire size not shown on the plans shall be sized according to the requirements of the national electric code .
d thermostat .
thermostat for controlling furnace or wall heaters shall be of the low voltage type .
thermostat for operating emergency light shall be num f range heavy duty line voltage type to make contact on temperature drop .
num num e emergency light .
the emergency light shall be weatherproof with guard red glass globe gasket and num volt num watt medium base extended service lamp .
f device plates .
device plates in utility room shall be pressed steel to suit the device to be covered .
device plate in men and womens rooms shall be stainless steel type num. g emergency battery charger .
the charger shall be num volt num amp hour rated operating on num volt ac num cycle without lights mounted on a bracket supplied by the manufacturer complete with fast charge ammeter trickle charge milliammeter test switch and pilot lights .
the battery shall be num volt plastic or glass jar lead acid type .
all shall be mounted in a num gage minimum steel cabinet adequately ventilated by louvers .
h disconnect switches .
all safety switches shall be sn fused and type nd construction as prescribed by the national electrical code .
weatherproof housing for exterior switches shall be provided .
i timer .
timer for exhaust fan shall be num ampere spdt num v for intermittent operation .
a num hour dial with num tabs to permit num minute switching changes shall be provided .
j miscellaneous .
lighting switches receptacles hand dryers photoelectric cells contactors switches panels lighting fixtures area luminaires and poles shall be the style type and color as scheduled on the plans .
note the contractor shall furnish the engineer three portfolios bound copies containing names of manufacturers cuts and curves of all lighting fixtures to be used on the project within num days after approval of all materials has been made .
the portfolios shall be made on num  inch x num inch sheets with cuts glued on and fixtures identified by number as per specifications .
these portfolios will not be returned and will become the property of the department .
sewer septic tank leaching field sanitary station and sewer lift station .
concrete reinforcing steel concrete pipe and sewer piping vitrified clay plastic and cast iron and associated construction methods shall be as specified under the appropriate subsections of section num or num .
cast iron manholes and waterstops for septic tanks and water tower and hatch for trailer sanitary station shall be the type and size as scheduled on the plans .
the gravel material used for leaching fields shall be crushed stone or crushed or natural gravel meeting the following grading requirements passing num mm num inch sieve num passing num mm  inch sieve num passing num mm no .
num sieve num num index page a abbreviations num acceptance num final num partial num acceptance and final payment num act of god clause num adjust structures num advertisement definition num affected area definition num aggregate base course .. num aggregate num commercial mineral fillers num mixing num placing num shaping and compaction num aggregates num aggregate for bases num classification table for aggregate base course num aggregate for cover coat material num gradation table num aggregate for hot mix asphalt num master range table num aggregate for median cover num bed course material num coarse aggregate for concrete num concrete aggregate table num filter material num gradation table num fine aggregate for concrete num mineral filler num structure backfill material num air quality control num airentraining admixtures num altered quantities compensation for num anticollusion affidavit num page archaeological and paleontological discoveries num aramid fiber bonded corrugated steel pipe num num asphalt cements num asphalt materials num num chip seal num prime coat num tack coat num asphalt pavers num authority and duties of project engineer num authority of the engineer num award definition num award of contract num award and execution of contract num b barricades num num barricades and signs num num base course definition num bases types aggregate base course num lime treated subgrade num basis of payment definition num bearing device num certification num packaging num testing and acceptance num type i num type ii num type iii num bearing materials num bed course material num best management practices bmps definition num bids invitation for definition num bidder definition num prequalification of num num page bidding requirements and conditions num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe num num bituminous materials num asphalt cements num emulsified asphalts num hot poured joint and crack sealant num recycling agents num num rejuvenating agent num blading num blotter material num bolts nuts and washers for steel structures num num bonds contract num requirements of num num borrow num num brick clay or shale num concrete num concrete masonry bricks num bridge decks curing num placing consolidating finishing num bridge definition num brush layer cuttings num buy america requirements num c caissons drilled num calcium chloride num calendar day definition num cast iron pipe num cattle guards num cement see hydraulic cement certificate of compliance num definition num certified invoice definition num certified test report num definition num chain link fabric num page changes force account work compensation for num character of workers methods and equipment num check dam rock num chemical admixtures concrete num chip seal num application of cover coat material num applying asphalt emulsion num asphalt emulsion num cover coat material num equipment num preparation of surface num weather limitations num claims for unresolved disputes num cleaning surfaces to be painted num num cleaning up final num clearing and grubbing .. num cold asphalt pavement recycle num compacting and finishing num compactors num milling num mixing num paver num recycling train num smoothness num spreading num weather limitations num combination or conditional proposals num compensation for altered quantities num compensation for compensable delays num concrete barrier num concrete structural num acceptance and pay factors num admixtures num aggregate gradation table num air content adjustment num num page batching num bridge decks num num classification num curing bridge decks num curing other than bridge decks num epoxy bonding agent num falsework num fiberreinforced concrete num finishing bridge decks .. num num finishing other than bridge decks num forms num forms permanent steel bridge deck num forms precast panel deck num maturity meters num num num num mixing num placing bridge decks num num placing other than bridge decks num prestressed num proportioning num structural concrete coating num sulfate resistance num table of classes num num weather limitations num num concrete pavement see portland cement concrete pavement concrete and clay pipe .. num coated concrete pipe num drain tile num nonreinforced concrete pipe num perforated concrete pipe num porous concrete pipe num reinforced concrete pipe num vitrified clay pipe num concrete curing materials and admixtures num airentraining admixtures num chemical admixtures num curing materials num page conduit electrical num num conformity definition num conformity to the contract num conformity to the contract of hot mix asphalt num conformity to the contract of portland cement concrete pavement num conformity to the contract of superpave performance graded binders num conformity to roadway smoothness criteria num num consideration of proposals num construction drawing num num definition num construction over and adjacent to navigable waters num construction requirements definition num construction stakes lines and grades num contractor surveying num department surveying num construction surveying num accuracy and tolerances num changes num contractor surveying num pay quantities measurements num reset monuments and stakes .. num responsibility and inspection num survey records num construction zone traffic control num advance warning signs electronic num channelizing device fixed num concrete barrier temporary .. num emergency pulloff area num flagging and pilot car operation num flashing beacon portable num signs and barricades num num page temporary channelizing devices num temporary masking signs num temporary portable rumble strip num temporary traffic signals num traffic cones num traffic control management num transportation management plan num public information num traffic control plan num transportation operations plan num contents of proposal forms num contract award of num bonds requirements of num num contract definition num default of num execution and approval of num intent of num item pay item definition num payment bond definition num performance bond definition num modification order definition num subletting of num termination of num time definition num time determination and extension of num contract modification order num num contract time see determination and extension of contract time contractor definition num cooperation by num contractor submittals table num contractors cooperation between num cooperation with utilities num responsibility for work num contractors engineer definition num control of material num page control of work num cooperation by contractor num cooperation between contractors .. num cooperation with utilities num coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions num copper pipe num corrosion resistant culverts see drainage pipe num corrugated aluminum pipe .. num num corrugated steel pipe num num county definition num cover coat material num culvert definition num culverts corrosion resistant num culverts and sewers type of materials specified num backfilling num bedding for concrete or clay conduit num deflection testing of metal and plastic pipe num excavation num elongation num jacking num joining conduit num placing conduit num repair num curb and gutter num bed course material num bituminous num castinplace concrete num fog coat num ramps num tack coat num d damage claims responsibility for num dampproofing num asphalt num day definition num default of contract num num page delay see determination and extension of contract time definitions and terms num delineators and reflectors num steel posts num flexible posts num reflector strip num reflectors num num num department definition num department furnished materials .. num determination and extension of contract time num detours approved num detours maintenance of num differing site conditions suspensions of work and significant changes in the character of work num direct burial cable num num dispute resolution num dispute review board num ditches roadway excavation num dowel bars num num dozing num drain gates num drain tile num drain valves and valve boxes num drainage pipe num materials allowed for class of pipe table num resistivity requirements for metal pipes num drilled caissons num cleaning and inspection num concrete num drilled holes num price adjustments num reinforcing steel num steel casing num driving piles num dust palliative num duties of the inspector num e page earthwork num elastometric bearing pads num electrical conduit num num electrical materials see lighting and electrical materials electronic advance warning signs num eliminated items num embankment embankment material num embankment placement and compaction num general embankment construction num embankment protector num emulsified asphalt num engineer authority of num definition num environmental health and safety management num asbestos containing material management num health and safety officer hso num health and safety plan hasp num heavy metal based paint management num material handling num methamphetamine lab sites num monitoring technician mt num sample delivery num epoxy for bonding concrete num equipment definition num erosion bales num erosion control num aggregate bag num num best management practices for stormwater num num check dam rock num num concrete washout structure num num num page construction of bmps num erosion bales num num erosion control management num erosion logs num num failure to perform erosion control num items to be accomplished prior to final acceptance num limits of disturbance num materials handling and spill prevention num project review schedule and erosion control management num riprap outlet protection num sediment trap num num seeding mulching sodding soil retention blanket num silt dike num num silt fence num num silt berm num num stabilization num stockpile management num storm drain inlet protection num num surface roughening num temporary berms num num temporary diversion num temporary slope drains num num vehicle tracking pad num num vertical tracking num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work num excavation and embankment num blading num borrow num num dozing num embankment material num embankment placement and compaction requirements num excavation num num general embankment page construction requirements num potholing num num rock embankment num num rock excavation num num rock fill num num soil embankment num num stripping num num unclassified excavation num num unsuitable material num num excavation and backfill for structures num bed course material num num filter material num num structure backfill num num structure backfill flowfill num num structure backfill imported num structure excavation num execution and approval of contract num explosives use of num extra work num extra work definition num f failure to complete work on time num failure to maintain roadway or structure num falsework num federal aid provisions num fences num reset fences num fence and guardrail materials num barbed wire num chain link fabric num fence posts num guardrail hardware num guardrail posts num w beam rail num snow fence num timber for wood sound barrier num woven wire num num page fertilizer num field cleaning and painting of steel num field facilities num commercial plant laboratory num field laboratories num field offices num maintenance service and utilities num sanitary facilities num filter material num num final acceptance of work num num cleaning up num estimate num payment num flagging and pilot car operation num flume see parshall measuring flume num fly ash num portland cement concrete pavement num structural concrete num force account work definition num force account work changes compensation for num forest protection num forms num permanent steel bridge decks num foundation pads and light standards num frames grates covers and steps num num french drain num furnishing right of way num g gabions num gabions and slope mattresses materials num galvanizing see specific material page gaskets pipe num gates fence num geosynthetics num erosion control and drainage .. num geotextile materials num geotextile separator num impervious lining num landscaping weed barrier num materials num paving num glass beads num grubbing clearing and num guardrail num concrete barrier type num num concrete barrier type num temporary num end anchorages num post and rail elements num reset num thrie beam type num num w beam type num num gutter see curb and gutter h hammers pile driving num handling materials num headgates num heating and scarifying treatment num herbicide treatment num highway definition num holidays definition num hot mix asphalt num hydrated lime num hydraulic cement num fly ash num portland cement num silica fume num highreactivity pozzolans num i inlets num inspection and testing of work num inspector duties of num inspector definition num insurance num num page intent of contract num interpretation of plans and specifications num interpretation of quantities in proposal form num invitation for bids definition num irregular proposals num irrigation system num automatic controllers num backflow preventer num cleanup num control wiring num drip emitters num drip systems num excavation and backfill num final landscape acceptance num flow sensor num inspections num keys and components num kick blocks num maintenance manuals and training num pipe installation num plastic pipe and fittings num pressure and coverage test and adjustments num remote control num site review num sprinkler heads num strainer num system flushing num valve box num num valves num warranty num wiring num irrigation water interruption of flow num items eliminated num j job mix formula plant mix pavements num joint and crack sealant num page joint waterproofing and bearing materials num bearing materials num compression ring num gaskets num joint fillers num pipe joint sealing compound num protective covering for bridge deck etc .
num prefabricated reinforced membrane etc .
num single component etc .
num waterstop num watertight joint systems num joints asphalt num construction concrete pavement num expansion concrete pavement num sawed concrete pavement num weakened plane concrete pavement num l laboratory definition num laboratory field num lamps num landscape border num laws to be observed num legal relations and responsibility to public num licenses and taxes permits num lighting num conduit num num foundation num num led luminaires num light standard num num lighting control center num num luminaires and lamps num num secondary service pedestal num num technical support num testing num wiring num num num page lighting and electrical materials num concrete foundation pads num conduit num led drivers num led luminaires num lighting circuitry and wiring .. num light standards num light standard foundations and concrete foundation pads num luminaires and lamps num secondary service pedestals and lighting control centers num lime treated subgrade num compaction num construction joints num finishing and curing num lime num preparation of subgrade num processing materials num thickness acceptance num limitation of operations num liquidated damages schedule of num liquid membraneforming compounds num load restrictions num longitudinal joints concrete pavement num plant mix pavement num num lumber see timber luminaires num m maintaining traffic also see construction zone traffic control num approved detours num during suspension of work num during free time num directed by the engineer num maintenance during construction num manholes inlets and meter vaults num page backfilling num excavation num masonry units materials .. num clay or shale brick num concrete brick num concrete masonry blocks num masonry mortar num material department furnished .. num material sources num available num contractor num material found on work rights in and use of num material guaranty num material inspection at plant num material on hand payment for num material control of num alternative num definition num department furnished num guaranty num samples tests and cited specifications num source of supply and quality of num storage of num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities num median barrier reflector num median cover material .
num messages sign num metal pipe materials num aluminized corrugated steel pipe type num num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe for underdrains num corrugated aluminum pipe num corrugated aluminum pipe for underdrains num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches num num page corrugated steel pipe for underdrains num coupling bands num num num ductile iron pipe num extensions num polymer precoated corrugated steel pipe num repair of damaged coating num semicircular num method of measurement definition .
num mineral filler num miscellaneous materials .. num calcium chloride num epoxy for bonding concrete .
num frames grates covers and steps num gabions and slope mattresses num geocomposite drains num geosynthetics num geomembrane num geotextiles num hydrated lime num plastic pipe num plastic pipe for underdrain num precast concrete units num water num mixing temperature plant mix pavement num mobilization num mortar masonry num slope and ditch paving num mulching num n nestable steel pipe num nonreinforced concrete pipe num notice to proceed num definition num no waiver of legal rights num o offices field num opening sections of project to traffic num operations limitation of num page order of precedence num original contract amount definition num outlet protection num p paints num aluminum paint num inspection and testing num pavement marking materials num pavement primers num list of paints num materials specifications num structural concrete coating num structural steel bridge paint num parking of vehicles equipment .. num parshall measuring flume num partial payments num standard amount retained num patching hma num patented devices material and processes num pavement marking num high build acrylic paint .. num num low temperature acrylic paint num num modified epoxy pavement marking num num methylmethacrylate num num pavement marking tape num num preformed plastic pavement marking num num preformed thermoplastic pavement marking num num raised pavement markers num num removal num temporary num thermoplastic pavement marking num num pavement structure definition num payment acceptance and final num altered quantities num num page asphalt cement cost adjustment num changes and force account num for material on hand stockpiled material num fuel cost adjustment num partial num pay item definition num scope of num schedule num pedestrian and bikeway railing num combination num pipe num steel tube num timber num permits licenses and taxes num personal liability of public employees num piling num approval of pile driving equipment num capping piles num cut offs payment num defective piling num drilling holes to facilitate pile driving num driving piles num extensions and splices num painting steel piles num pile driving equipment num pile tips num steel piling num water jetting num welding num pilot car operation flagging num pins and rollers steel structures num pipe see type planned force account definition num plans shop drawings working drawings and construction drawings num page definition num examination of num plant mix pavements general num aggregates num asphalt cements num asphalt mixing plant num asphalt pavers num compaction num compaction test section num composition of mixtures jobmix formula num hauling equipment num hydrated lime num joints num mineral filler num mixing num mixing temperature num moisture susceptibility num pavement samples num preparation of aggregates num dry lime num lime slurry num preparation of asphalt cement .
num safety edge num segregation num spreading and finishing num surface conditioning num surface smoothness num tack coat num weather limitations num planting num brush layer cuttings num landscape establishment num wetland perennial plants num plastic pipe num plastic pipe for underdrain num plug structures num portland cement num portland cement concrete pavement num batching num classification num construction by form method .. num num page construction by slip form method num curing num curing in cold weather num determining pavement thickness num equipment num finishing num joints num limitations of placing concrete num maturity meter num num mixing num opening to traffic num placing concrete num preparation of subgrade num price adjustment num proportioning num repair of defective concrete pavement num sealing joints num surface smoothness num test specimens num texturing num posts fence num guardrail num sign num precast concrete units num preconstruction conference definition num preparation of proposal num prequalification of bidders num preservative treatment timber num prestressed concrete num bonding and grouting num curing num equipment num fabrication num prestressed members num pretensioned and combination tensioned members num concrete num inspection num page notification of fabrication num other fabrication requirements num posttensioning anchorages and distribution num product shipping strength num repairs num shop drawings num prestressed unit materials num anchorage assemblies num posttensioning products num prestressing steel num prewetting num price reduction factors table of .. num prime coat tack coat and rejuvenating agent num application of asphalt material num application of blotter material .
num asphalt material num blotter material num equipment num preparation of surface num weather limitations num profile grade definition num project definition num project engineer authority and duties of num definition num project schedule num baseline schedule num definitions num general num methods statements num payment num preliminary schedule num project schedule update num schedule revision num schedule submittals num weekly planning schedule num project special provisions definition num project termini definition num prompt payment num num page good cause exception num retainage by the contractor num proof rolling num property and landscape protection num proposal combination or conditional num definition num form definition num form contents of proposal num guaranty definition num irregular num preparation of num prosecution and progress num character of workers methods and equipment num default of contract num determination and extension of contract time num failure to complete work on time num limitation of operations num notice to proceed num payment schedule num project schedule num subletting of contract num termination of contract num workplace violence num public convenience and safety num q qualification of testing personnel and laboratories num quantities changes in num compensation for altered num measurement of num r railroadhighway provisions num reconditioning num record set definition num recycling agents num reflector median barrier num num reflectors num page region transportation director definition num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforcing steel num bar list num bending num epoxy coated num placing and fastening num protection of materials num reinforcing steel and wire rope num rejuvenating agent num relay pipe num removal of structures and obstructions num asphalt mat planing num clean culvert num detours num general num pavement markings num pavements sidewalk curbs num portions of structures num salvable material num signs and traffic signals num removal of unacceptable work and unauthorized work num requirement of contract bonds num reset structures num responsibility for damage claims insurance types and coverage limits num rest areas and buildings num barricades num carpentry num ceramic tile num comfort and sanitary station signs num construction material num descriptive brochures num doors frames and windows num electrical work num factory representative num flagpole num num page glass and glazing num heating and ventilation num interior insulation num leaching field num maintenance manuals num masonry work num metal specialties num painting etc num plumbing and drainage num roofing etc .
num sanitary napkin disposal num sanitary sewer etc .
num septic tank num sewage facilities num shop drawings and descriptive brochures num temporary heat num temporary utilities num trash receptacles num rest area and building materials num carpentry num ceramic tile num doors frames and windows num electrical num glass and glazing num heating and ventilating num interior insulation num leaching field num masonry num masonry wall reinforcement num metal specialties num mortar for masonry num mortar for structural glazed tile num paint etc num plumbing num roofing etc .
num sanitary napkin disposal num sanitary station num septic tank num sewer num sewer lift station num trash receptacles num page restoration of surfaces opened by permit num retainage see partial payments right of way definition num right of way furnishing num rights in and use of materials found on the work num riprap num riprap gabions and slope mattress num road definition num roadbed definition num roadside definition num roadside development definition num roadway definition num roadway prism definition num rock excavation num rock fill num num rumble strips num s safety critical work definition num safety health and sanitation provisions num contractor responsibilities num project safety and health requirements num project safety management plan num project safety manager num safety standdown num salvable material definition num samples tests cited specifications num sampling and testing hma num portland cement concrete paving num sanitary facilities num safety health and sanitary provisions num sawing concrete for removal num scales vehicle num schedule see project schedule .. num scope of payment num num page scope of work num seal coat see chip seal .. num sediment trap num seeding fertilizer soil conditioner and sodding num lawn grass seeding num native seeding num seed soil conditioner fertilizer and sod num seeding seasons num sodding num sewage lift station num sheet lead num sheet piling steel num shop drawings num definition num shop painting steel num shoring num shotcrete num acceptance num curing shotcrete num general num submittals num shoulder definition num sidewalk definition num sidewalks and bikeways num bed course material num bituminous sidewalks and bikeways num concrete sidewalks and bikeways num curb ramps num joints num signing see traffic control devices or materials sign posts num silica fume num silt fence num siphons num concrete pipe num drain pipe num drain valves and valve boxes .
num trash guards num page site of work examination of num slide headgate num slope and ditch paving num asphalt num num concrete num num dry rubble num num grouted riprap num num grouted rubble num num mortar num slope mattress num sodding num soil conditioners and fertilizer .. num soil retention covering num soil retention blanket excelsior num soil retention blanket coconut num soil retention blanket strawcoconut num turf reinforcement mat num source of supply and quality requirements num special provisions definition num specifications coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions num definition of num examination of num standard definition num supplemental definition num specified completion date definition of num splicing piles steel num steel sheet num stakes lines and grade for construction num standard special provisions definition num state definition num state waters definition num steel piling num num page steel sheet piling num steel structures num materials num anchor bolts num bolts num galvanized and metallized steel num high strength bolts num highstrength lowalloy structural steel num mill test reports num pins and rollers num self weathering tubing num structural carbon steel num structural tubing num welded stud shear connectors num shop fabrication and inspection requirements num galvanizing num general fabrication requirements num inspection num marking num nondestructive testing num notice of fabrication num plans and shop drawings num shop assembly num shop cleaning and painting of steel num shop connections using high strength bolts num shop facilities for fabrication num welding num field construction requirements num connections using high strength bolts num erection of steel structures num field welding and inspection num fracture control plan num structure number num storage of materials num page storm water management plan definition num street definition num stripping num num structural concrete see concrete structural structural concrete coating .
num num structural plate structures num backfilling num elongation num excavation num erection num fabrication num structure backfill num structure backfill material num structure excavation num structure number steel num structure number timber num structures definition num stud shear connectors num subbase definition num subcontractor definition num subgrade definition num subletting of contract num substructure num subsurface investigations num subsurface drains num french drain num geocomposite drains num pipe underdrain and pipe edge drain num subsurface drain outlet num superintendent definition num superpave performance graded binders num superstructure definition num supplemental specification definition num surety definition num surface course definition num survey monumentation .
num installing monuments num locating monuments num num page monument box num preserving and referencing monuments num t tack coat num taxes permits licenses and num termination of contract num test piles num third party beneficiary num tie bars num timber posts guardrail num timber sign posts num timber structures num hardware num holes and bolts num inspection num painting num structure number num treated timber num time count num topsoil num topsoil stockpile num topsoil wetland num traffic control devices num barricades num num flashing beacon num highway signs and traffic signals num overpass mounted sign bracket num rumble strips num sign illumination and illuminated signs num sign panels num sign posts and sign structures .. num traffic signal materials num traffic signal systems construction num traffic control materials num modified epoxy pavement marking material num page glass beads for traffic markings num hardware num methyl methacrylate pavement marking num pavement marking tape num pavement marking tape removable num preformed plastic material num preformed thermoplastic material num quality requirements of reflective materials num raised pavement marker num reflectors num sampling and inspection num sign message materials num signs general num table of aluminum and steel sign materials num thermoplastic marking material num traffic signals num traffic control plan tcp definition num traffic maintenance during suspension of work num traffic maintaining num approved detours num directed by the engineer num during free time num traffic signal materials num backplates num controller cabinets num controllers general num electrical conductors and control cable num magnetic detectors num micro loop detectors num pedestrian push buttons num programmed visibility vehicle signal faces num traffic signal faces num traffic signal poles num num page vehicle detector amplifier num traffic signal systems construction num bonding and grounding num electrical conductors and control cable num excavation and backfilling num field tests and turn on num foundations num loop detector installation num magnetic detector installation .
num maintaining existing and temporary electrical system num painting num transplanting num ball sizes for collected plants num num trash guards num traveled way definition num u unauthorized work num unclassified excavation num num underdrains see subsurface drains use of explosives num utilities cooperation with num v value engineering change proposal num definition num valves num valve boxes num vibrating concrete num w walls num approval and qualifications of mse wall installer num backfill num certifications calculations and testing reports num concrete panel facing mechanically stabilized earth page mse wall system num facial panel process control placing plan and daily placement logs num excavation and backfill num geomembrane and joint num fill under leveling pad num hybrid mse wall systems num leveling pad num num panel facing num precast concrete panel facing unit and panel joint material num reinforcement num shop drawings num technical representative of wall product supplier num wall with curved alignments tight curved corners and sections adjacent to bridge abutment .. num wall test segment num wooden wedges num water num water landscaping num water control devices .. num drainage automatic num embankment protector num parshall measuring flume num slide headgate num water line materials num cast iron pipe num copper pipe num galvanized pipe num plastic pipe num valves and valve boxes num welded steel pipe num water lines num jacked pipe num watering and dust palliatives num dust palliative num landscaping num meters num moisture and density control num num page prewetting num sprinkling equipment num water measuring devices meters num parshall measuring flume num water quality control see also erosion control num construction requirements num definitions num measurement and payment num stormwater construction permit num waterproofing num waterproofing materials see joint waterproofing and bearing materials waterproofing membrane num concrete sealer num num waterstops and expansion joints num asphaltic expansion devices num num elastomeric concrete end dams num num elastomeric expansion devices num num modular expansion devices num num waterstops num num welded steel pipe num welding see steel structures wire rope num wiring num work contractors responsibility for .
num definition num extra num extra and force account num failure to complete work on time num inspection and testing of num page removal of unacceptable and unauthorized num working day definition num working drawing num definition num workers methods and equipment character of num working time limitation num workplace violence num definition num num notes notes notes notes
